
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  Biologically inactive clindamycin phosphate is rapidly converted 
to active clindamycin.
                  By the end of short-term intravenous infusion, peak serum levels of active 
clindamycin are reached. Biologically inactive clindamycin phosphate disappears 
rapidly from the serum; the average elimination half-life is 6 minutes; however, 
the serum elimination half-life of active clindamycin is about 3 hours in adults 
and 2½ hours in pediatric patients.
                  After intramuscular injection of clindamycin phosphate, peak levels of active 
clindamycin are reached within 3 hours in adults and 1 hour in pediatric 
patients. Serum level curves may be constructed from I.V. peak serum levels as 
given in Table 1 by application of elimination half-lives listed above.
                  Serum levels of clindamycin can be maintained above the in vitro minimum inhibitory concentrations for most 
indicated organisms by administration of clindamycin phosphate every 8 to 12 
hours in adults and every 6 to 8 hours in pediatric patients, or by continuous 
intravenous infusion. An equilibrium state is reached by the third dose.
                  The elimination half-life of clindamycin is increased slightly in patients 
with markedly reduced renal or hepatic function. Hemodialysis and peritoneal 
dialysis are not effective in removing clindamycin from the serum. Dosage 
schedules need not be modified in the presence of mild or moderate renal or 
hepatic disease.
                  No significant levels of clindamycin are attained in the cerebrospinal fluid, 
even in the presence of inflamed meninges.
                  Pharmacokinetic studies in elderly volunteers (61 to 79 years) and younger 
adults (18 to 39 years) indicate that age alone does not alter clindamycin 
pharmacokinetics (clearance, elimination half-life, volume of distribution, and 
area under the serum concentration-time curve) after I.V. administration of 
clindamycin phosphate. After oral administration of clindamycin hydrochloride, 
elimination half-life is increased to approximately 4 hours (range 3.4 to 5.1 h) 
in the elderly compared to 3.2 hours (range 2.1 to 4.2 h) in younger adults. The 
extent of absorption, however, is not different between the age groups and no 
dosage alteration is necessary for the elderly with normal hepatic function and 
normal (age-adjusted) renal function1.
                  Serum assays for active clindamycin require an inhibitor to prevent in vitro hydrolysis of clindamycin phosphate.
                  


                  


*Data in this group from patients being treated for infection.
                  

                  
                     Microbiology: Although clindamycin phosphate is 
inactive in vitro, rapid in 
vivo hydrolysis converts this compound to the antibacterially active 
clindamycin.
                  Clindamycin has been shown to have in vitro 
activity against isolates of the following organisms:
                  
                     Aerobic gram positive cocci,including:
                  
                       Staphylococcus aureus           (penicillinase and non-penicillinase producing strains). When tested by in 
vitro methods, some staphylococcal strains 

                  
                                                                       originally resistant to 
erythromycin rapidly develop resistance to clindamycin.
                  
                       Staphylococcus epidermidis  (penicillinase and non-penicillinase producing strains). When tested by in 
vitro methods, some staphylococcal strains 

                  
                                                                       originally resistant to 
erythromycin rapidly develop resistance to clindamycin.
                  

                    Streptococci (exceptEnterococcus faecalis)

                     
                  
                    Pneumococci
                  
                     Anaerobic gram negative bacilli,including:
                    Bacteroides 
                     species (including Bacteroides 
fragilis group and Bacteroides melaninogenicus 
group)
                    Fusobacterium species
                  
                     Anaerobic gram positive nonsporeforming 
bacilli, including:
                    Propionibacterium
                  
                  
                       
                     Eubacterium
                     

                  
                    Actinomyces species
                  
                     Anaerobic and microaerophilic gram positive cocci, 
including:
                    Peptococcus species
                    Peptostreptococcus species
                  Microaerophilic streptococci
                    Clostridia: Clostridia are more resistant than most anaerobes to 
clindamycin. Most Clostridium perfringens are 
susceptible, but other species, e.g., 
                  
                  
                     Clostridium sporogenes and Clostridium tertium are frequently resistant to 
clindamycin. Susceptibility testing should be done.
                  Cross resistance has been demonstrated between clindamycin and 
lincomycin.
                  Antagonism has been demonstrated betweeen clindamycin and erythromycin.
                  

                  In vitro
                   Susceptibility 
Testing:
                  
                  Disk diffusion technique-Quantitative methods that require measurement of 
zone diameters give the most precise estimates of antibiotic susceptibility. One 
such procedure2 has been recommended for use with disks 
to test susceptibility to clindamycin.
                  Reports from a laboratory using the standardized single-disk susceptibility 
test1 with a 2 mcg clindamycin disk should be interpreted 
according to the following criteria:
                  Susceptible organisms produce zones of 17 mm or greater, indicating that the 
tested organism is likely to respond to therapy.
                  Organisms of intermediate susceptibility produce zones of 15-16 mm, 
indicating that the tested organism would be susceptible if a high dosage is 
used or if the infection is confined to tissues and fluids (e.g., urine), in 
which high antibiotic levels are attained.
                  Resistant organisms produce zones of 14 mm or less, indicating that other 
therapy should be selected.
                  Standardized procedures require the use of control organisms. The 2 mcg 
clindamycin disk should give a zone diameter between 24 and 30 mm for S. aureus ATCC 25923.
                  Dilution techniques − A bacterial isolate may be considered susceptible if 
the minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) for clindamycin is not more than 1.6 
mcg/mL. Organisms are considered moderately susceptible if the MIC is greater 
than 1.6 mcg/mL and less than or equal to 4.8 mcg/mL. Organisms are considered 
resistant if the MIC is greater than 4.8 mcg per mL. The range of MIC’s for the 
control strains are as follows:
                  
                       S. aureus ATCC 29213, 0.06 to 0.25 mcg/mL.
                  
                       E. faecalis ATCC 29212, 4 to 16 mcg/mL.
                  For anaerobic bacteria the minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) of 
clindamycin can be determined by agar dilution and broth dilution (including 
microdilution) techniques.3 If MICs are not determined 
routinely, the disk broth method is recommended for routine use. The KIRBY-BAUER 
DISK DIFFUSION METHOD AND ITS INTERPRETIVE STANDARDS ARE NOT RECOMMENDED FOR 
ANAEROBES.
                  
                     

                     
                  
               
               
            
         