
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Taken orally, sodium iodide I-131 is rapidly absorbed and distributed within the extracellular fluid of the body.  The iodide is concentrated in the thyroid via the sodium/iodide symporter, and subsequently oxidized to iodine.  The destruction of thyroidal tissue is achieved by the beta emission of sodium iodide I-131.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        The therapeutic effects of sodium iodide I-131 are a result of the ionizing radiation absorbed by the thyroidal tissue.  Tissue damage is the result of direct insult to molecules by ionization and excitation and the consequent dissociation of those molecules.  About 90% of local irradiation from sodium iodide I-131 is the result of beta radiation and 10% is the result of gamma radiation.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        After oral administration, sodium iodide I-131 is absorbed rapidly from the upper gastrointestinal tract (90% in 60 minutes). The pharmacokinetics follow that of unlabelled iodide.  After entering the blood stream, the iodide is distributed into the extra thyroidal compartment.  From here it is predominantly taken up by the thyroid or excreted renally. In the thyroid, the trapped iodide is oxidized to iodine and organified.  The sodium/iodide symporter (NIS) is responsible for the concentration of iodide in the thyroid.  This active transport process concentrates iodide 20 to 40 times the plasma concentration under normal circumstances, and this may increase tenfold in the hyperthyroid state. NIS also mediates active iodide transport in other tissues, including salivary glands, nasolacrimal duct, lacrimal sac, gastric mucosa, lactating mammary gland, and the choroid plexus.  The non-thyroidal iodide transporting tissues do not have the ability to organify accumulated iodide.
                        Depending on renal and thyroid gland function, urinary excretion is 37 to 75% of the administered dose, fecal excretion is about 10%, and excretion in sweat is almost negligible.  
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         