


Clinical Pharmacology
Following IV administration of 1, 2, and 3 gram doses of Cefizox to normal volunteers, the following serum levels were obtained.




A serum half‐life of approximately 1.7 hours was observed after IV or IM administration.Cefizox is 30% protein bound.Cefizox is not metabolized, and is excreted virtually unchanged by the kidneys in 24 hours. This provides a high urinary concentration. Concentrations greater than 6000 μg/mL have been achieved in the urine by 2 hours after a 1 gram dose of Cefizox intravenously. Probenecid slows tubular secretion and produces even higher serum levels, increasing the duration of measurable serum concentrations.Cefizox achieves therapeutic levels in various body fluids, e.g., cerebrospinal fluid (in patients with inflamed meninges), bile, surgical wound fluid, pleural fluid, aqueous humor, ascitic fluid, peritoneal fluid, prostatic fluid and saliva, and in the following body tissues: heart, gallbladder, bone, biliary, peritoneal, prostatic, and uterine.In clinical experience to date, no disulfiram‐like reactions have been reported with Cefizox.





Microbiology
The bactericidal action of Ceftizoxime results from inhibition of cell‐wall synthesis. Ceftizoxime is highly resistant to a broad spectrum of beta‐lactamases (penicillinase and cephalosporinase), including Richmond types I, II, III, TEM, and IV, produced by both aerobic and anaerobic gram‐positive and gram‐negative organisms.  Ceftizoxime  has been shown to be active against most strains of the following microorganisms, both in vitro and in clinical infections as described in the INDICATIONS AND USAGE section:in vitro and in clinical infections as described in the 





Aerobic Gram-Positive Microorganisms
Staphylococcus aureus (including penicillinase producing strains)Staphylococcus aureus (including penicillinase producing strains)NOTE: Methicillin­resistant staphylococci are resistant to cephalosporins, including ceftizoxime.Staphylococcus epidermidis (including penicillinase producing strains)Staphylococcus epidermidis (including penicillinase producing strains)Streptococcus agalactiaeStreptococcus agalactiaeStreptococcus pneumoniaeStreptococcus pneumoniaeStreptococcus pyogenesStreptococcus pyogenesNOTE:  A streptococcal isolate that is susceptible to penicillin can be considered susceptible to ceftizoxime 4.4.  NOTE: Ceftizoxime is usually inactive against most strains of Enterococcus faecalis.Enterococcus faecalis.







Aerobic Gram-Negative Microorganisms
Enterobacter spp.Enterobacter spp.Escherichia coliEscherichia coliHaemophilus influenzae (including ampicillin­resistant strains)Haemophilus influenzae (including ampicillin­resistant strains)Klebsiella pneumoniaeKlebsiella pneumoniaeMorganella morganiiMorganella morganiiNeisseria gonorrhoeaeNeisseria gonorrhoeaeProteus mirabilisProteus mirabilisProteus vulgarisProteus vulgarisProvidencia rettgeriProvidencia rettgeriPseudomonas aeruginosaPseudomonas aeruginosaSerratia marcescensSerratia marcescens







Anaerobic Microorganisms
Bacteroides spp.Bacteroides spp.Peptococcus spp.Peptococcus spp.Peptostreptococcus spp.Peptostreptococcus spp. The following in vitro data are available, but their clinical significance is unknown. At least 90% of the following microorganisms exhibit an in vitro minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) less than or equal to the susceptible breakpoint for ceftizoxime. However, the safety and effectiveness of ceftizoxime  in treating clinical infections due to these microorganisms have not been established in adequate and well-controlled clinical trials.in vitro data are available, 







 Aerobic Gram-Negative Microorganisms
Aeromonas hydrophilaAeromonas hydrophilaCitrobacter spp.Citrobacter spp.MoraxellacatarrhalisMoraxellacatarrhalisNeisseria meningitidisNeisseria meningitidisProvidencia stuartiiProvidencia stuartii









Susceptibility Testing Methods:





Dilution techniques:
Quantitative methods are used to determine antimicrobial minimum inhibitory concentrations (MICs).  These MICs provide estimates of the susceptibility of bacteria to antimicrobial compounds.  The MICs should be determined using a standardized procedure.  Standardized procedures are based on a dilution method1 (broth or agar) or equivalent with standardized inoculum concentrations and standardized concentrations of ceftizoxime powder.  The MIC values should be interpreted according to the following criteria:1 (broth or agar) or equivalent with standardized inoculum concentrations and standardized concentrations of ceftizoxime powder.  The MIC values should be interpreted according to the following criteria:




 




A report of “Susceptible” indicates that the pathogen is likely to be inhibited if the antimicrobial compound in the blood reaches the concentrations usually achievable.  A report of “Intermediate” indicates that the result should be considered equivocal, and, if the microorganism is not fully susceptible to alternative, clinically feasible drugs, the test should be repeated.  This category implies possible clinical applicability in body sites where the drug is physiologically concentrated or in situations where high dosage of drug can be used.  This category also provides a buffer zone, which prevents small uncontrolled technical factors from causing major discrepancies in interpretation.  A report of “Resistant” indicates that the pathogen is not likely to be inhibited if the antimicrobial compound in the blood reaches the concentrations usually achievable, other therapy should be selected.Standardized susceptibility test procedures require the use of laboratory control microorganisms to control the technical aspects of the laboratory procedures.  Standard ceftizoxime powder should provide the following MIC values:




 







Diffusion Techniques:
Quantitative methods that require measurement of zone diameters also provide reproducible estimates of the susceptibility of bacteria to antimicrobial compounds. One such standardized procedure2 requires the use of standardized inoculum concentrations. This procedure uses paper disks impregnated with 30-μg ceftizoxime to test the susceptibility of microorganisms to ceftizoxime.2 requires the use of standardized inoculum concentrations. This procedure uses paper disks impregnated with 30-μg ceftizoxime to test the susceptibility of microorganisms to ceftizoxime.Reports from the laboratory providing results of the standard single-disk susceptibility test with a 30-μg ceftizoxime disk should be interpreted according to the following criteria:





Interpretation should be as stated above for results using dilution techniques.  Interpretation involves correlation of the diameter obtained in the disk test with the MIC for ceftizoxime.As with standardized dilution techniques, diffusion methods require the use of laboratory control microorganisms that are used to control the technical aspects of the laboratory procedures.  For the diffusion technique, the 30-μg ceftizoxime disk should provide the following zone diameters in these laboratory test quality control strains:












 Anaerobic Techniques:
For anaerobic bacteria, the susceptibility to ceftizoxime as MICs can be determined by standardized test methods.  Agar dilution results can vary widely when using ceftizoxime.  It is recommended that broth microdilution method be used when possible.3  The MIC values obtained should be interpreted according to the following criteria:3  The MIC values obtained should be interpreted according to the following criteria:




Interpretation is identical to that described in Susceptibility Testing: Dilution Techniques.As with other susceptibility techniques, the use of laboratory control microorganisms is required to control the technical aspects of the laboratory standardized procedures.  Standardized ceftizoxime powder should provide the following MIC values:














 Susceptibility Testing for Pseu domonas in Urinary Tract Infections
Most strains of Pseudomonas aeruginosa are moderately susceptible to ceftizoxime.  Pseudomonas aeruginosa are moderately susceptible to ceftizoxime.  Ceftizoxime achieves high levels in the urine (greater than 6000 mcg/mL at 2 hours with1 gram IV) and, therefore, the following zone sizes should be used when testing ceftizoxime for treatment of urinary tract infections caused by PseudomonasPseudomonasaeruginosa.aeruginosa.Susceptible organisms produce zones of 20 mm or greater, indicating that thetest organism is likely to respond to therapy.Organisms that produce zones of 11 to 19 mm are expected to be susceptiblewhen the infection is confined to the urinary tract (in which high antibiotic levelsare attained). Resistant organisms produce zones of 10 mm or less, indicating that other therapy should be selected.




