
                     
                     
                     Drug Interactions
                     
                        The formation of the active metabolite, M1, is mediated by CYP2D6. Approximately 7% of the population has reduced activity of the CYP2D6 isoenzyme of cytochrome P-450. Based on a population PK analysis of Phase I studies with immediate-release tablets in healthy subjects, concentrations of tramadol were approximately 20% higher in "poor metabolizers" versus "extensive metabolizers," while M1 concentrations were 40% lower. In vitro drug interaction studies in human liver microsomes indicate that inhibitors of CYP2D6 (fluoxetine, norfluoxetine, amitriptyline, and quinidine) inhibit the metabolism of tramadol to various degrees, suggesting that concomitant administration of these compounds could result in increases in tramadol concentrations and decreased concentrations of M1. The full pharmacological impact of these alterations in terms of either efficacy or safety is unknown.
                        Tramadol is also metabolized by CYP3A4. Administration of CYP3A4 inhibitors, such as ketoconazole and erythromycin, or inducers, such as rifampin and St. John’s Wort, with tramadol hydrochloride extended-release tablets may affect the metabolism of tramadol leading to altered tramadol exposure (see 
                              PRECAUTIONS, Drug Interactions
                           ).
                        
                           Quinidine
                        
                        Tramadol is metabolized to M1 by CYP2D6. A study was conducted to examine the effect of quinidine, a selective inhibitor of CYP2D6, on the pharmacokinetics of tramadol
by administering 200 mg quinidine two hours before the administration of tramadol hydrochloride extended-release tablets 100 mg. The results demonstrated that the exposure of tramadol increased 50 to 60% and the exposure of M1 decreased 50 to 60% (see 
                              PRECAUTIONS, Drug Interactions
                           ). In vitro drug interaction studies in human liver microsomes indicate that tramadol has no effect on quinidine metabolism.
                        
                           Carbamazepine
                        
                        Carbamazepine, a CYP3A4 inducer, increases tramadol metabolism. Patients taking carbamazepine may have a significantly reduced analgesic effect of tramadol. Because of the seizure risk associated with tramadol, concomitant administration of tramadol hydrochloride extended-release tablets and carbamazepine is not recommended (see 
                              PRECAUTIONS, Drug Interactions
                           ).
                        
                           Cimetidine
                        
                        Concomitant administration of tramadol immediate-release tablets with cimetidine does not result in clinically significant changes in tramadol pharmacokinetics. No alteration of the tramadol hydrochloride extended-release tablets dosage regimen with cimetidine is recommended.
                     
                     
                  
               