
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                         Fosamprenavir is an antiviral agent [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.4)].
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                         The pharmacokinetic properties of amprenavir after administration of LEXIVA, with or without ritonavir, have been evaluated in both healthy adult volunteers and in HIV-infected patients; no substantial differences in steady-state amprenavir concentrations were observed between the 2 populations. 
                         The pharmacokinetic parameters of amprenavir after administration of LEXIVA (with and without concomitant ritonavir) are shown in Table 7.
                        


                        


 The mean plasma amprenavir concentrations of the dosing regimens over the dosing intervals are displayed in Figure 1. 
                        
                           Figure 1. Mean (±SD) Steady-State Plasma Amprenavir Concentrations and Mean IC50 Values Against HIV from Protease Inhibitor-Naive Patients (in the Absence of Human Serum)
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           Absorption and Bioavailability
                        
                         After administration of a single dose of LEXIVA to HIV-1-infected patients, the time to peak amprenavir concentration (Tmax) occurred between 1.5 and 4 hours (median 2.5 hours). The absolute oral bioavailability of amprenavir after administration of LEXIVA in humans has not been established.
                         After administration of a single 1,400-mg dose in the fasted state, LEXIVA Oral Suspension (50 mg/mL) and LEXIVA Tablets (700 mg) provided similar amprenavir exposures (AUC), however, the Cmax of amprenavir after administration of the suspension formulation was 14.5% higher compared with the tablet.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           Effects of Food on Oral Absorption
                        
                        Administration of a single 1,400-mg dose of LEXIVA Tablets in the fed state (standardized high-fat meal: 967 kcal, 67 grams fat, 33 grams protein, 58 grams carbohydrate) compared with the fasted state was associated with no significant changes in amprenavir Cmax, Tmax, or AUC0-∞ [see Dosage and Administration (2)].
                         Administration of a single 1,400-mg dose of LEXIVA Oral Suspension in the fed state (standardized high-fat meal: 967 kcal, 67 grams fat, 33 grams protein, 58 grams carbohydrate) compared with the fasted state was associated with a 46% reduction in Cmax, a 0.72-hour delay in Tmax, and a 28% reduction in amprenavir AUC0-∞.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           Distribution
                        
                        In vitro, amprenavir is approximately 90% bound to plasma proteins, primarily to alpha1-acid glycoprotein. In vitro, concentration-dependent binding was observed over the concentration range of 1 to 10 mcg/mL, with decreased binding at higher concentrations. The partitioning of amprenavir into erythrocytes is low, but increases as amprenavir concentrations increase, reflecting the higher amount of unbound drug at higher concentrations. 
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           Metabolism
                        
                         After oral administration, fosamprenavir is rapidly and almost completely hydrolyzed to amprenavir and inorganic phosphate prior to reaching the systemic circulation. This occurs in the gut epithelium during absorption. Amprenavir is metabolized in the liver by the cytochrome P450 3A4 (CYP3A4) enzyme system. The 2 major metabolites result from oxidation of the tetrahydrofuran and aniline moieties. Glucuronide conjugates of oxidized metabolites have been identified as minor metabolites in urine and feces.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           Elimination
                        
                         Excretion of unchanged amprenavir in urine and feces is minimal. Unchanged amprenavir in urine accounts for approximately 1% of the dose; unchanged amprenavir was not detectable in feces. Approximately 14% and 75% of an administered single dose of 14C-amprenavir can be accounted for as metabolites in urine and feces, respectively. Two metabolites accounted for >90% of the radiocarbon in fecal samples. The plasma elimination half-life of amprenavir is approximately 7.7 hours.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           Special Populations
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           Hepatic Impairment
                        
                        The pharmacokinetics of amprenavir have been studied after the administration of LEXIVA in combination with ritonavir to adult HIV-1-infected patients with mild, moderate, and severe hepatic impairment. Following 2 weeks of dosing with LEXIVA plus ritonavir, the AUC of amprenavir was increased by approximately 22% in patients with mild hepatic impairment, by approximately 70% in patients with moderate hepatic impairment, and by approximately 80% in patients with severe hepatic impairment compared with HIV-1-infected patients with normal hepatic function. Protein binding of amprenavir was decreased in patients with hepatic impairment. The unbound fraction at 2 hours (approximate Cmax) ranged between a decrease of -7% to an increase of 57% while the unbound fraction at the end of the dosing interval (Cmin) increased from 50% to 102% [see Dosage and Administration (2.3)].
                        
                        The pharmacokinetics of amprenavir have been studied after administration of amprenavir given as AGENERASE® Capsules to adult patients with hepatic impairment. Following administration of a single 600-mg oral dose the AUC of amprenavir was increased by approximately 2.5-fold in patients with moderate cirrhosis and by approximately 4.5-fold in patients with severe cirrhosis compared with healthy volunteers [see Dosage and Administration (2.3)].
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           Renal Impairment
                        
                        The impact of renal impairment on amprenavir elimination in adult patients has not been studied. The renal elimination of unchanged amprenavir represents approximately 1% of the administered dose; therefore, renal impairment is not expected to significantly impact the elimination of amprenavir.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           Pediatric Patients
                        
                         The pharmacokinetics of amprenavir after administration of LEXIVA Oral Suspension and LEXIVA Tablets, with or without ritonavir, have been evaluated in 124 patients 2 to 18 years of age. Pharmacokinetic parameters for LEXIVA administered with food and with or without ritonavir in this patient population are provided in Tables 8 and 9 below. 
                        



                     



                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           Geriatric Patients
                        
                        The pharmacokinetics of amprenavir after administration of LEXIVA to patients over 65 years of age have not been studied [see Use in Specific Populations (8.5)].
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           Gender
                        
                         The pharmacokinetics of amprenavir after administration of LEXIVA do not differ between males and females. 
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           Race
                        
                         The pharmacokinetics of amprenavir after administration of LEXIVA do not differ between blacks and non-blacks. 
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           Drug Interactions
                        
                        
                           [See Contraindications (4), Warnings and Precautions (5.1), Drug Interactions (7).] 
                        
                         Amprenavir, the active metabolite of fosamprenavir, is metabolized in the liver by the cytochrome P450 enzyme system. Amprenavir inhibits CYP3A4. Data also suggest that amprenavir induces CYP3A4. Caution should be used when coadministering medications that are substrates, inhibitors, or inducers of CYP3A4, or potentially toxic medications that are metabolized by CYP3A4. Amprenavir does not inhibit CYP2D6, CYP1A2, CYP2C9, CYP2C19, CYP2E1, or uridine glucuronosyltransferase (UDPGT).
                         Drug interaction studies were performed with LEXIVA and other drugs likely to be coadministered or drugs commonly used as probes for pharmacokinetic interactions. The effects of coadministration on AUC, Cmax, and Cmin values are summarized in Table 10 (effect of other drugs on amprenavir) and Table 12 (effect of LEXIVA on other drugs). In addition, since LEXIVA delivers comparable amprenavir plasma concentrations as AGENERASE, drug interaction data derived from studies with AGENERASE are provided in Tables 11 and 13. For information regarding clinical recommendations, see Drug Interactions (7).
                        


                        



                           a Concomitant medication is also shown in this column where appropriate. 
                        
                           b Ritonavir Cmax, AUC, and Cmin increased by 63%, 45%, and 13%, respectively, compared with historical control. 
                        
                           c Compared with historical control.
                        
                           d Patients were receiving LEXIVA/ritonavir for 10 days prior to the 4-day treatment period with both ketoconazole and LEXIVA/ritonavir.
                        
                           e Compared with LEXIVA 700 mg/ritonavir 100 mg b.i.d. for 2 weeks.
                        
                           f Patients were receiving nevirapine for at least 12 weeks prior to study.
                        
                           g Compared with parallel control group.
                        ↑= Increase; ↓= Decrease; ↔ = No change (↑or ↓≤10%), NA = Not applicable.
                        


                        



                           a Compared with parallel control group.
                        
                           b Median percent change; confidence interval not reported.
                        
                           c Compared with historical data.
                        ↑ = Increase; ↓ = Decrease; ↔= No change (↑or ↓<10%); NA = Cmin not calculated for single-dose study.
                        


                        



                           a Concomitant medication is also shown in this column where appropriate.
                        
                           b Comparison arm of atazanavir 300 mg q.d. plus ritonavir 100 mg q.d. for 10 days.
                        
                           c Administered as a combination oral contraceptive tablet: ethinyl estradiol 0.035 mg/norethindrone 0.5 mg.
                        
                           d Patients were receiving LEXIVA/ritonavir for 10 days prior to the 4-day treatment period with both ketoconazole and LEXIVA/ritonavir.
                        
                           e Data represent lopinavir concentrations. 
                        
                           f Compared with lopinavir 400 mg/ritonavir 100 mg b.i.d. for 2 weeks.
                        
                           g Dose normalized to methadone 100 mg. The unbound concentration of the active moiety, R-methadone, was unchanged.
                        
                           h Patients were receiving nevirapine for at least 12 weeks prior to study.††Comparison arm of rifabutin 300 mg q.d. for 2 weeks. AUC is AUC(0-48 hr).
                        ↑= Increase; ↓= Decrease; ↔ = No change (↑or ↓<10%); ND = Interaction cannot be determined as Cmin was below the lower limit of quantitation. 
                        


                        



                           a Compared with historical data. 
                        
                           b Median percent change; confidence interval not reported.
                        ↑ = Increase; ↓ = Decrease; ↔= No change (↑or ↓<10%); NA = Cmin not calculated for single-dose study; ND = Interaction cannot be determined as Cmin was below the lower limit of quantitation.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        12.4 Microbiology
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           Mechanism of Action
                        
                         Fosamprenavir is a prodrug that is rapidly hydrolyzed to amprenavir by cellular phosphatases in the gut epithelium as it is absorbed. Amprenavir is an inhibitor of HIV-1 protease. Amprenavir binds to the active site of HIV-1 protease and thereby prevents the processing of viral Gag and Gag-Pol polyprotein precursors, resulting in the formation of immature non-infectious viral particles.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           Antiviral Activity
                        
                         Fosamprenavir has little or no antiviral activity in vitro. The in vitro antiviral activity of amprenavir was evaluated against HIV-1 IIIB in both acutely and chronically infected lymphoblastic cell lines (MT-4, CEM-CCRF, H9) and in peripheral blood lymphocytes. The 50% effective concentration (EC50) of amprenavir ranged from 0.012 to 0.08 μM in acutely infected cells and was 0.41 μM in chronically infected cells (1 μM = 0.50 mcg/mL). The median EC50 value of amprenavir against HIV-1 isolates from clades A to G was 0.00095 µM in peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs). Similarly, the EC50 values for amprenavir against monocytes/macrophage tropic HIV-1 isolates (clade B) ranged from 0.003 to 0.075 µM in monocyte/macrophage cultures. The EC50 values of amprenavir against HIV-2 isolates grown in PBMCs were higher than those for HIV-1 isolates, and ranged from 0.003 to 0.11 µM. Amprenavir exhibited synergistic anti–HIV-1 activity in combination with the nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors (NRTIs) abacavir, didanosine, lamivudine, stavudine, tenofovir, and zidovudine; the non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors (NNRTIs) delavirdine and efavirenz; and the protease inhibitors atazanavir and saquinavir. Amprenavir exhibited additive anti–HIV-1 activity in combination with the NNRTI nevirapine, the protease inhibitors indinavir, lopinavir, nelfinavir, and ritonavir; and the fusion inhibitor enfuvirtide. These drug combinations have not been adequately studied in humans. 
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           Resistance
                        
                         HIV-1 isolates with decreased susceptibility to amprenavir have been selected in vitro and obtained from patients treated with fosamprenavir. Genotypic analysis of isolates from treatment-naive patients failing amprenavir-containing regimens showed mutations in the HIV-1 protease gene resulting in amino acid substitutions primarily at positions V32I, M46I/L, I47V, I50V, I54L/M, and I84V, as well as mutations in the p7/p1 and p1/p6 Gag and Gag-Pol polyprotein precursor cleavage sites. Some of these amprenavir resistance-associated mutations have also been detected in HIV-1 isolates from antiretroviral-naive patients treated with LEXIVA. Of the 488 antiretroviral-naive patients treated with LEXIVA 1,400 mg twice daily or LEXIVA 1,400 mg plus ritonavir 200 mg once daily in studies APV30001 and APV30002, respectively, 61 patients (29 receiving LEXIVA and 32 receiving LEXIVA/ritonavir) with virologic failure (plasma HIV-1 RNA >1,000 copies/mL on 2 occasions on or after Week 12) were genotyped. Five of the 29 antiretroviral-naive patients (17%) receiving LEXIVA without ritonavir in study APV30001 had evidence of genotypic resistance to amprenavir: I54L/M (n = 2), I54L + L33F (n = 1), V32I + I47V (n = 1), and M46I + I47V (n = 1). No amprenavir resistance-associated mutations were detected in antiretroviral-naive patients treated with LEXIVA/ritonavir for 48 weeks in study APV30002. However, the M46I and I50V mutations were detected in isolates from 1 virologic failure patient receiving LEXIVA/ritonavir once daily at Week 160 (HIV-1 RNA >500 copies/mL). Upon retrospective analysis of stored samples using an ultrasensitive assay, these resistant mutants were traced back to Week 84 (76 weeks prior to clinical virologic failure).
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           Cross-Resistance
                        
                         Varying degrees of cross-resistance among HIV-1 protease inhibitors have been observed. An association between virologic response at 48 weeks (HIV-1 RNA level <400 copies/mL) and protease inhibitor-resistance mutations detected in baseline HIV-1 isolates from protease inhibitor-experienced patients receiving LEXIVA/ritonavir twice daily (n = 88), or lopinavir/ritonavir twice daily (n = 85) in study APV30003 is shown in Table 14. The majority of subjects had previously received either one (47%) or 2 protease inhibitors (36%), most commonly nelfinavir (57%) and indinavir (53%). Out of 102 subjects with baseline phenotypes receiving twice-daily LEXIVA/ritonavir, 54% (n = 55) had resistance to at least one protease inhibitor, with 98% (n = 54) of those having resistance to nelfinavir. Out of 97 subjects with baseline phenotypes in the lopinavir/ritonavir arm, 60% (n = 58) had resistance to at least one protease inhibitor, with 97% (n = 56) of those having resistance to nelfinavir.
                        


                        


 The virologic response based upon baseline phenotype was assessed. Baseline isolates from protease inhibitor-experienced patients responding to LEXIVA/ritonavir twice daily had a median shift in susceptibility to amprenavir relative to a standard wild-type reference strain of 0.7 (range: 0.1 to 5.4, n = 62), and baseline isolates from individuals failing therapy had a median shift in susceptibility of 1.9 (range: 0.2 to 14, n = 29). Because this was a select patient population, these data do not constitute definitive clinical susceptibility break points. Additional data are needed to determine clinically relevant break points for LEXIVA.
                         Isolates from 15 of the 20 patients receiving twice-daily LEXIVA/ritonavir up to Week 48 and experiencing virologic failure/ongoing replication were subjected to genotypic analysis. The following amprenavir resistance-associated mutations were found either alone or in combination: V32I, M46I/L, I47V, I50V, I54L/M, and I84V. Isolates from 4 of the 16 patients continuing to receive twice-daily LEXIVA/ritonavir up to Week 96 who experienced virologic failure underwent genotypic analysis. Isolates from 2 patients contained amprenavir resistance-associated mutations: V32I, M46I, and I47V in 1 isolate and I84V in the other. 
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     Figure 1. Mean (SD) Steady State Plasma Amprenavir Concentrations and Mean IC50 Values Against HIV from Protease Inhibitor Naive Patients (in the Absence of Human Serum)
                     
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         