
               
               
               7	DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
                  NUCYNTA® is mainly metabolized by glucuronidation. The following substances have been included in a set of interaction studies without any clinically significant finding: acetaminophen, acetylsalicylic acid, naproxen and probenecid [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                  The pharmacokinetics of tapentadol were not affected when gastric pH or gastrointestinal motility were increased by omeprazole and metoclopramide, respectively [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
               
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           CNS depressants: Increased risk of respiratory depression, hypotension, profound sedation, coma or death. When combined therapy with CNS depressant is contemplated, the dose of one or both agents should be reduced. (7.3)
                           Mixed agonist/antagonist opioids (i.e., pentazocine, nalbuphine, and butorphanol): May reduce analgesic effect and/or precipitate withdrawal symptoms. (7.5)
                           Monitor for signs of serotonin syndrome when NUCYNTA® is used concurrently with SSRIs, SNRIs, tricyclic antidepressants, or triptans. (7.4)
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1	Alcohol, Other Opioids, and Drugs of Abuse
                     
                        Due to its mu-opioid agonist activity, NUCYNTA® may be expected to have additive effects when used in conjunction with alcohol, other opioids, or illicit drugs that cause central nervous system depression, respiratory depression, hypotension, and profound sedation, coma or death. Instruct patients not to consume alcoholic beverages or use prescription or non-prescription products containing alcohol, other opioids, or drugs of abuse while on NUCYNTA® therapy [see Warnings and Precautions (5.4)].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2	Monoamine Oxidase Inhibitors
                     
                        NUCYNTA® is contraindicated in patients who are receiving monoamine oxidase (MAO) inhibitors or who have taken them within the last 14 days due to potential additive effects on norepinephrine levels which may result in adverse cardiovascular events [see Contraindications (4)].
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3	CNS Depressants
                     
                        Concurrent use of NUCYNTA® and other central nervous system (CNS) depressants including sedatives or hypnotics, general anesthetics, phenothiazines, tranquilizers, and alcohol can increase the risk of respiratory depression, hypotension, profound sedation or coma. Monitor patients receiving CNS depressants and NUCYNTA® for signs of respiratory depression and hypotension. When such combined therapy is contemplated, start NUCYNTA® at ⅓ to ½ of the usual dosage and consider using a lower dose of the concomitant CNS depressant [see Warnings and Precautions (5.7)].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4	Serotonergic Drugs
                     
                        There have been post-marketing reports of serotonin syndrome with the concomitant use of tapentadol and serotonergic drugs (e.g., SSRIs and SNRIs). Caution is advised when NUCYNTA® is co-administered with other drugs that may affect serotonergic neurotransmitter systems such as SSRIs, SNRIs, MAOIs, and triptans. If concomitant treatment of NUCYNTA® with a drug affecting the serotonergic neurotransmitter system is clinically warranted, careful observation of the patient is advised [see Warning and Precautions (5.11)].
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.5	Mixed Agonist/Antagonist Opioid Analgesics
                     
                        The concomitant use of NUCYNTA® with mixed agonist/antagonists (e.g., butorphanol, nalbuphine, and pentazocine) and partial agonists (e.g., buprenorphine) may precipitate withdrawal symptoms. Avoid the use of agonist/antagonists and partial agonists with NUCYNTA®.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.6	Anticholinergics
                     
                        The use of NUCYNTA® with anticholinergic products may increase the risk of urinary retention and/or severe constipation, which may lead to paralytic ileus.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         