
                     
                     
                     Drug Interactions 
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                    Gold:
                                   Nitritoid reactions (symptoms include facial flushing, nausea, vomiting and hypotension) have been reported rarely in patients on therapy with injectable gold (sodium aurothiomalate) and concomitant ACE inhibitor therapy including ramipril.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                    With nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory agents:
                                  Rarely, concomitant treatment with ACE inhibitors and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory agents have been associated with worsening of renal failure and an increase in serum potassium. 
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                    With diuretics:
                                  Patients on diuretics, especially those in whom diuretic therapy was recently instituted, may occasionally experience an excessive reduction of blood pressure after initiation of therapy with ramipril. The possibility of hypotensive effects with ramipril can be minimized by either discontinuing the diuretic or increasing the salt intake prior to initiation of treatment with ramipril. If this is not possible, the starting dose should be reduced. (See DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION.) 
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                    With potassium supplements and potassium-sparing diuretics:
                                  Ramipril can attenuate potassium loss caused by thiazide diuretics. Potassium-sparing diuretics (spironolactone, amiloride, triamterene, and others) or potassium supplements can increase the risk of hyperkalemia. Therefore, if concomitant use of such agents is indicated, they should be given with caution, and the patient's serum potassium should be monitored frequently. 
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                    With lithium:
                                  Increased serum lithium levels and symptoms of lithium toxicity have been reported in patients receiving ACE inhibitors during therapy with lithium. These drugs should be coadministered with caution, and frequent monitoring of serum lithium levels is recommended. If a diuretic is also used, the risk of lithium toxicity may be increased. 
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                    Other:
                                  Neither ramipril nor its metabolites have been found to interact with food, digoxin, antacid, furosemide, cimetidine, indomethacin, and simvastatin. The combination of ramipril and propranolol showed no adverse effects on dynamic parameters (blood pressure and heart rate). The co-administration of ramipril and warfarin did not adversely affect the anticoagulant effects of the latter drug. Additionally, co-administration of ramipril with phenprocoumon did not affect minimum phenprocoumon levels or interfere with the subjects' state of anti-coagulation. 
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               