
               
               
               12     CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1     Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Acyclovir is an antiviral drug [see Microbiology (12.4)].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3    Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        
                        
                           Absorption and Distribution
                        
                        
                           

                           Salivary
                        
                        Single dose application of SITAVIG containing 50 mg of acyclovir to the buccal mucosa in 12 healthy volunteers provided mean maximum
salivary concentrations of 440 μg/mL 8 hours after application of the tablet. The pharmacokinetic parameters of acyclovir in the saliva of
healthy volunteers are provided in Table 2.
                        
                        
                           Table 2: Pharmacokinetic (PK) Parameters of Acyclovir in Saliva Following Application of a Single SITAVIG 50 mg Tablet in Healthy Volunteers (N = 12)
                        
                        
                           
                              Salivary PK Parameters(N = 12)                Mean ±SD (Min - Max)      
                           
                        
                        AUC0-24h (mcg.h/mL)                                 2900 ± 2400 (849 - 9450)
Cmax (mcg/mL)                                            440 ± 241 (149 – 959)
Tmax (hour)                                              7.95 ± 4.08 (3.07 – 18.05)
                        In the Phase 3 study, the levels of acyclovir in saliva were measured within 24 hours of SITAVIG application in 56 patients with recurrent
herpes labialis (mean value 88.1 micrograms per mL) and were within the range of those observed in the PK study in healthy volunteers.
In healthy volunteers, the median duration of buccal adhesion was 14 hours following application of a single SITAVIG 50 mg tablet.
                        
                           
                        
                        
                           Plasma
                        
                        Plasma concentrations of acyclovir were measured in 12 healthy volunteers after a single-dose application of SITAVIG 50 mg buccal tablet. Acyclovir concentrations had a delayed appearance (undetectable at 5 hours) and were below the concentrations required for antiviral activity (range: 17.5 to 55.3 nanogram per mL).
                        
                           Metabolism and Excretion
                        
                        Acyclovir is metabolized to 9-[(carboxymethoxy)methyl]guanine (CMMG) and 8-hydroxy-acyclovir (8-OH-ACV) by oxidation and hydroxylation, and is primarily excreted unchanged by the kidneys.
                        
                            Food Effect
                        
                        There was no formal food effect study conducted with SITAVIG; however, in clinical studies patients were allowed to eat and drink while taking SITAVIG.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.4     Microbiology
                     
                        
                           Mechanism of Action
                        
                        
                           
Acyclovir is a synthetic purine nucleoside that is phosphorylated intracellularly by the viral encoded thymidine kinase (TK) of HSV into acyclovir monophosphate, a nucleotide analogue. The monophosphate is further converted into diphosphate by cellular guanylate kinase and into triphosphate by a number of cellular enzymes. In a biochemical reaction, acyclovir triphosphate inhibits replication of herpes viral DNA by competing with nucleotides for binding to the viral DNA polymerase and by incorporation into and termination of the growing viral DNA chain. The cellular thymidine kinase of normal, uninfected cells does not use acyclovir effectively as a substrate, hence toxicity to mammalian host cells is low.
                        
                           Antiviral activity
                        
                        
                           
The quantitative relationship between the cell culture susceptibility of herpes viruses to antivirals and the clinical response to therapy
has not been established in humans, and virus sensitivity testing has not been standardized. Sensitivity testing results, expressed as
the concentration of drug required to inhibit by 50% the growth of virus in cell culture (EC50), vary greatly depending upon a number
of factors. Using plaque-reduction assays on Vero cells, the median EC50 value of acyclovir against clinical herpes virus isolates (subjects
receiving placebo) was 1.3 μM (range: < 0.56 to 3.3 μM).
                        
                           

                           Drug Resistance
                        
                        
                           
Resistance of HSV to acyclovir can result from qualitative and quantitative changes in the viral TK and/or DNA polymerase. Clinical
isolates of HSV with reduced susceptibility to acyclovir have been recovered from immunocompromised subjects, especially with
advanced HIV infection. While most of the acyclovir-resistant mutant isolates from immunocompromised subjects thus far have been
found to be TK-deficient, other mutant isolates involving the viral TK gene (TK partial and TK altered) or DNA polymerase have been
identified. TK-negative mutants may cause severe disease in infants and immunocompromised adults. 
                        The possibility of viral resistance to acyclovir should be considered in immunocompromised subjects who show poor clinical response during therapy.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         