
               
               
               12  CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        
                           STIOLTO RESPIMAT
                           
STIOLTO
RESPIMAT contains both tiotropium and olodaterol. The properties described
below for the individual components apply to STIOLTO RESPIMAT. These
drugs represent 2 different classes of medication (an anticholinergic
and a beta-agonist) that have different effects on clinical and physiological
indices.
                        
                           Tiotropium
                           
Tiotropium is a long-acting, muscarinic
antagonist which is often referred to as an anticholinergic. It has
similar affinity to the subtypes of muscarinic receptors, M1 to M5. In the airways, it exhibits
pharmacological effects through inhibition of M3-receptors at the smooth muscle leading to bronchodilation. The competitive
and reversible nature of antagonism was shown with human and animal
origin receptors and isolated organ preparations. In preclinical in vitro as well as in vivo studies, prevention
of methacholine-induced bronchoconstriction effects was dose-dependent
and lasted longer than 24 hours. The bronchodilation following inhalation
of tiotropium is predominantly a site-specific effect. 
                        
                           Olodaterol
                           
Olodaterol is a long-acting beta2-adrenergic agonist (LABA). The compound exerts its pharmacological
effects by binding and activation of beta2-adrenoceptors
after topical administration by inhalation. Activation of these receptors
in the airways results in a stimulation of intracellular adenyl cyclase,
an enzyme that mediates the synthesis of cyclic-3’, 5’ adenosine monophosphate
(cAMP). Elevated levels of cAMP induce bronchodilation by relaxation
of airway smooth muscle cells. In vitro studies have
shown that olodaterol has 241-fold greater agonist activity at beta2-adrenoceptors compared to beta1-adrenoceptors and 2299-fold greater agonist activity compared to
beta3-adrenoceptors. The clinical significance
of these findings is unknown. 
                        Beta-adrenoceptors are divided into three
subtypes: beta1-adrenoceptors predominantly
expressed on cardiac muscle, beta2-adrenoceptors
predominantly expressed on airway smooth muscle, and beta3-adrenoceptors predominantly expressed on adipose tissue.
Beta2-agonists cause bronchodilation. Although
the beta2-adrenoceptor is the predominant adrenergic
receptor in the airway smooth muscle, it is also present on the surface
of a variety of other cells, including lung epithelial and endothelial
cells and in the heart. The precise function of beta2-receptors in the heart is not known, but their presence raises the
possibility that even highly selective beta2-agonists may have cardiac effects.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        
                           Cardiac Electrophysiology
                           

                           STIOLTO RESPIMAT
                           
In two 52-week randomized, double-blind
trials using STIOLTO RESPIMAT that enrolled 5162 patients with COPD,
ECG assessments were performed post-dose on days 1, 85, 169, and 365.
 In a pooled analysis the number of subjects with changes from baseline-corrected
QT interval of >30 msec using both the Bazett (QTcB) and Fredericia
(QTcF), corrections of QT for heart rate were not different for the
STIOLTO RESPIMAT group compared to olodaterol 5 mcg and tiotropium
5 mcg across the assessments conducted.
                        
                           Tiotropium
                           
The
effect of tiotropium dry powder for inhalation on QT interval was
also evaluated in a randomized, placebo- and positive-controlled crossover
study in 53 healthy volunteers. Subjects received tiotropium inhalation
powder 18 mcg, 54 mcg (3 times the recommended dose), or placebo for
12 days. ECG assessments were performed at baseline and throughout
the dosing interval following the first and last dose of study medication.
Relative to placebo, the maximum mean change from baseline in study-specific
QTc interval was 3.2 msec and 0.8 msec for tiotropium inhalation powder
18 mcg and 54 mcg, respectively. No subject showed a new onset of
QTc >500 msec or QTc changes from baseline of ≥60 msec.
                        In a multicenter, randomized,
double-blind trial using tiotropium dry powder for inhalation that
enrolled 198 patients with COPD, the number of subjects with changes
from baseline-corrected QT interval of 30–60 msec was higher in the
tiotropium group as compared with placebo. This difference was apparent
using both the Bazett (QTcB) [20 (20%) patients vs. 12 (12%) patients]
and Fredericia (QTcF) [16 (16%) patients vs. 1 (1%) patient] corrections
of QT for heart rate. No patients in either group had either QTcB
or QTcF of >500 msec. Other clinical trials with tiotropium did not
detect an effect of the drug on QTc intervals.
                        
                           Olodaterol
                           
The
effect of olodaterol on the QT/QTc interval of the ECG was investigated
in 24 healthy male and female volunteers in a double-blind, randomized,
placebo- and active (moxifloxacin)- controlled study at single doses
of 10, 20, 30, and 50 mcg. Dose-dependent QtcI (individual subject
corrected QT interval) prolongation was observed. The maximum mean
(one-sided 95% upper confidence bound) difference in QTcI from placebo
after baseline correction was 2.5 (5.6) ms, 6.1 (9.2) ms, 7.5 (10.7)
ms, and 8.5 (11.6) ms following doses of 10, 20, 30, and 50 mcg, respectively.
                        The effect of 5 mcg and 10 mcg
olodaterol on heart rate and rhythm was assessed using continuous
24-hour ECG recording (Holter monitoring) in a subset of 772 patients
in the 48-week, placebo-controlled phase 3 trials. There were no dose-
or time-related trends or patterns observed for the magnitudes of
mean changes in heart rate or premature beats. Shifts from baseline
to the end of treatment in premature beats did not indicate meaningful
differences between olodaterol 5 mcg, 10 mcg, and placebo.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        
                           STIOLTO RESPIMAT
                           
When STIOLTO
RESPIMAT was administered by the inhalation route, the pharmacokinetic
parameters for tiotropium and for olodaterol were similar to those
observed when each active substance was administered separately. 
                        
                           Tiotropium
                           
Tiotropium is administered as an inhalation spray. Some
of the pharmacokinetic data described below were obtained with higher
doses than recommended for therapy.
                        
                           Olodaterol
                           
Olodaterol showed linear pharmacokinetics. On repeated once-daily
inhalation, steady-state of olodaterol plasma concentrations was achieved
after 8 days, and the extent of exposure was increased up to 1.8-fold
as compared to a single dose.
                        
                           Absorption
                           

                           Tiotropium
                           
Following inhalation of the
solution by young healthy volunteers, urinary excretion data suggests
that approximately 33% of the inhaled dose reaches the systemic circulation.
Oral solutions of tiotropium have an absolute bioavailability of 2%
to 3%. Food is not expected to influence the absorption of tiotropium
for the same reason. Maximum tiotropium plasma concentrations were
observed 5 to 7 minutes after inhalation.
                        
                           Olodaterol
                           
Olodaterol
reaches maximum plasma concentrations generally within 10 to 20 minutes
following drug inhalation.  In healthy volunteers the absolute bioavailability
of olodaterol following inhalation was estimated to be approximately
30%, whereas the absolute bioavailability was below 1% when given
as an oral solution. Thus, the systemic availability of olodaterol
after inhalation is mainly determined by lung absorption, while any
swallowed portion of the dose only negligibly contributes to systemic
exposure.
                        
                           Distribution
                           

                           Tiotropium
                           
The drug has a plasma protein binding of 72% and shows a volume
of distribution of 32 L/kg. Local concentrations in the lung are not
known, but the mode of administration suggests substantially higher
concentrations in the lung. Studies in rats have shown that tiotropium
does not penetrate the blood-brain barrier.
                        
                           Olodaterol
                           
Olodaterol
exhibits multi-compartmental disposition kinetics after inhalation
as well as after intravenous administration. The volume of distribution
is high (1110 L), suggesting extensive distribution into tissue. In vitro binding of [14C] olodaterol
to human plasma proteins is independent of concentration and is approximately
60%. 
                        
                           Elimination
                           

                           Metabolism
                           

                           Tiotropium
                           
The extent of metabolism is small. This is evident from
a urinary excretion of 74% of unchanged substance after an intravenous
dose to young healthy volunteers. Tiotropium, an ester, is nonenzymatically
cleaved to the alcohol N-methylscopine and dithienylglycolic acid,
both not binding to muscarinic receptors.
                        
                           In vitro experiments with
human liver microsomes and human hepatocytes suggest that a fraction
of the administered dose (74% of an intravenous dose is excreted unchanged
in the urine, leaving 25% for metabolism) is metabolized by cytochrome
P450-dependent oxidation and subsequent glutathione conjugation to
a variety of Phase 2 metabolites. This enzymatic pathway can be inhibited
by CYP450 2D6 and 3A4 inhibitors, such as quinidine, ketoconazole,
and gestodene. Thus, CYP450 2D6 and 3A4 are involved in the metabolic
pathway that is responsible for the elimination of a small part of
the administered dose. In vitro studies using human
liver microsomes showed that tiotropium in supra-therapeutic concentrations
does not inhibit CYP450 1A1, 1A2, 2B6, 2C9, 2C19, 2D6, 2E1, or 3A4.
                        
                           Olodaterol
                           
Olodaterol is substantially metabolized by direct glucuronidation
and by O-demethylation at the methoxy moiety followed by conjugation.
Of the six metabolites identified, only the unconjugated demethylation
product binds to beta2-receptors. This metabolite,
however, is not detectable in plasma after chronic inhalation of the
recommended therapeutic dose.
                        Cytochrome P450 isozymes CYP2C9 and CYP2C8,
with negligible contribution of CYP3A4, are involved in the O-demethylation
of olodaterol, while uridine diphosphate glycosyl transferase isoforms
UGT2B7, UGT1A1, 1A7, and 1A9 were shown to be involved in the formation
of olodaterol glucuronides.
                        
                           Excretion
                           

                           Tiotropium
                           
The terminal half-life of tiotropium
in COPD patients following once daily inhalation of 5 mcg tiotropium
was approximately 25 hours. Total clearance was 880 mL/min after an
intravenous dose in young healthy volunteers. Intravenously administered
tiotropium bromide is mainly excreted unchanged in urine (74%). After
inhalation of the solution by patients with COPD, urinary excretion
is 18.6% (0.932 mcg) of the dose, the remainder being mainly non-absorbed
drug in the gut that is eliminated via the feces. The renal clearance
of tiotropium exceeds the creatinine clearance, indicating secretion
into the urine. After chronic once-daily inhalation by COPD patients,
pharmacokinetic steady state was reached by day 7 with no accumulation
thereafter.
                        
                           Olodaterol
                           
Total clearance of olodaterol in healthy
volunteers is 872 mL/min, and renal clearance is 173 mL/min. The terminal
half-life following intravenous administration is 22 hours. The terminal
half-life following inhalation in contrast is about 45 hours, indicating
that the latter is determined by absorption rather than by elimination
processes. However, the effective half-life at daily dose of 5 mcg
calculated from Cmax from COPD patients is
7.5 hours.
                        Following
intravenous administration of [14C]-labeled
olodaterol, 38% of the radioactive dose was recovered in the urine
and 53% was recovered in feces. The amount of unchanged olodaterol
recovered in the urine after intravenous administration was 19%. Following
oral administration, only 9% of olodaterol and/or its metabolites
was recovered in urine, while the major portion was recovered in feces
(84%). More than 90% of the dose was excreted within 6 and 5 days
following intravenous and oral administration, respectively. Following
inhalation, excretion of unchanged olodaterol in urine within the
dosing interval in healthy volunteers at steady state accounted for
5% to 7% of the dose. 
                        
                           Drug Interactions
                           

                           STIOLTO
RESPIMAT
                           
Pharmacokinetic drug interaction studies
with STIOLTO RESPIMAT have not been performed; however, such studies
have been conducted with individual components tiotropium and olodaterol.
                        When tiotropium and olodaterol
were administered in combination by the inhaled route, the pharmacokinetic
parameters for each component were similar to those observed when
each active substance was administered separately.
                        
                           Tiotropium
                           
An
interaction study with tiotropium (14.4 mcg intravenous infusion over
15 minutes) and cimetidine 400 mg three times daily or ranitidine
300 mg once-daily was conducted. Concomitant administration of cimetidine
with tiotropium resulted in a 20% increase in the AUC0-4h, a 28% decrease in the renal clearance of tiotropium and no significant
change in the Cmax and amount excreted in urine
over 96 hours. Co-administration of tiotropium with ranitidine did
not affect the pharmacokinetics of tiotropium.
                        Common concomitant medications (long-acting
beta2-adrenergic agonists (LABA), inhaled corticosterioids
(ICS)) used by patients with COPD were not found to alter the exposure
to tiotropium.
                        
                           Olodaterol
                           
Drug-drug interaction studies were
carried out using fluconazole as a model inhibitor of CYP 2C9 and
ketoconazole as a potent P-gp (and CYP3A4, 2C8, 2C9) inhibitor.
                        
                           Fluconazole: Co-administration of 400 mg fluconazole once a day for 14 days
had no relevant effect on systemic exposure to olodaterol.

                           Ketoconazole: Co-administration of 400 mg
ketoconazole once a day for 14 days increased olodaterol Cmax by 66% and AUC0-1 by 68%.

                           Tiotropium: Co-administration of tiotropium
bromide, delivered as a fixed-dose combination with olodaterol, for
21 days had no relevant effect on systemic exposure to olodaterol,
and vice versa.
                        
                           Specific Populations
                           

                           Olodaterol
                           
A pharmacokinetic meta-analysis showed that no dose adjustment
is necessary based on the effect of age, gender, and weight on systemic
exposure in COPD patients after inhalation of olodaterol.
                        
                           Geriatric Patients
                           

                           Tiotropium
                           
As expected for
all predominantly renally excreted drugs, advancing age was associated
with a decrease of tiotropium renal clearance (347 mL/min in COPD
patients <65 years to 275 mL/min in COPD patients ≥65 years). This
did not result in a corresponding increase in AUC0-6,ss and Cmax,ss values. 
                        
                           Renal Impairment
                           

                           Tiotropium
                           
Following inhaled administration
of therapeutic doses of tiotropium to steady-state to patients with
COPD, mild renal impairment (creatinine clearance 60-90 mL/min) resulted
in 23% higher AUC0-6,ss and 17% higher Cmax,ssvalues. Moderate renal impairment (creatinine clearance
30-60 mL/min) resulted in 57% higher AUC0-6,ss and 31% higher Cmax,ss values compared to
COPD patients with normal renal function (creatinine clearance >90
mL/min). In COPD patients with severe renal impairment (CLCR <30
mL/min), a single intravenous administration of tiotropium bromide
resulted in 94% higher AUC0-4 and 52% higher
Cmax compared to COPD patients with normal
renal function.
                        
                           Olodaterol
                           
Olodaterol levels were increased by
approximately 40% in subjects with severe renal impairment. A study
in subjects with mild and moderate renal impairment was not performed.
                        
                           Hepatic Impairment
                           

                           Tiotropium
                           
The effects of
hepatic impairment on the pharmacokinetics of tiotropium were not
studied.
                        
                           Olodaterol
                           
Subjects with mild and moderate hepatic impairment showed
no changes in Cmax or AUC, nor did protein
binding differ between mild and moderate hepatically impaired subjects
and their healthy controls. A study in subjects with severe hepatic
impairment was not performed. 
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         