
                     
                     
                     
                        CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY: Integra FTM is unique in that it utilizes two (2) different forms of iron, i.e., Ferrous Fumarate and Polysaccharide Iron Complex (as cell-contracted akaganèite), making available a total of 125 mg of elemental iron per capsule as follows:
Ferrous Fumarate (anhydrous)    191.1 mg Polysaccharide iron complex (PIC)    135.9 mg
Ferrous Fumarate: Provides about 62.5 mg of elemental iron per dose. Ferrous Fumarate is an anhydrous salt of a combination of ferrous iron and fumaric acid, containing 33% of iron per weight. The acute toxicity in experimental animals is low and Ferrous Fumarate is well tolerated clinically. As a ferrous salt, it is more efficiently absorbed in the duodenum. Ferrous Fumarate contrasts very favorably with the availability of the 20% of elemental iron of ferrous sulfate, and the 13% of elemental iron of ferrous gluconate.
Polysaccharide Iron Complex: Provides about 62.5 mg elemental iron, as a cell-contracted akaganèite. It is a product of ferric iron complexed to a low molecular weight polysaccharide. This polysaccharide is produced by the extensive hydrolysis of starch and is a dark brown powder that dissolves in water to form a very dark brown solution, which is virtually odorless and tasteless.
Folic Acid: Folic Acid is one of the important hematopoetic agents necessary for proper regeneration of the blood-forming elements and their function. Folic acid is a precursor of a large family of compounds which serve as coenzymes in carbon transfer reactions. These reactions are required for the synthesis of purine and pyrimidine bases, inter-conversion of glycine and serine, biosynthesis of methionine methyl groups and degradation of histidine. Additionally, folic acid increases jejunal glycolytic enzymes and is involved in the desaturation and hydroxylation of long-chain fatty acids in the brain. A deficiency in folic acid results in megaloblastic anemia.
All IntegraTM products include a unique patented source of iron, e.g. Ferrous Fumarate and Polysaccharide Iron Complex (U.S. Patent No: 11/243,043 Pending). "An increase in tolerability is observed with the (patented formulation) and is believed to occur as the result of distributing the total iron content in the composition among compounds that provide iron to the patient's blood stream via two different mechanisms. The ferrous salts are readily absorbed in the upper gut, by direct dissolution and absorption of the ferrous iron by the bloodstream. However, the iron available from PIC is absorbed in the lower gut, via an active protein transport mechanism".
                     
                  
               