
               
               
               DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
                  

                  
              In a pharmacokinetic study, systemic exposure of tizanidine (4 mg single dose)
              was significantly increased (Cmax 7-fold, AUC 10-fold)
              when the drug was given concomitantly with ciprofloxacin (500 mg bid for 3
              days). The hypotensive and sedative effects of tizanidine were also potentiated.
              Concomitant administration of tizanidine and ciprofloxacin is
              contraindicated.

                     
As with some other quinolones, concurrent administration
              of ciprofloxacin with theophylline may lead to elevated serum concentrations of
              theophylline and prolongation of its elimination half-life. This may result in
              increased risk of theophylline-related adverse reactions. (See 
                        WARNINGS
                     .) If
              concomitant use cannot be avoided, serum levels of theophylline should be
              monitored and dosage adjustments made as appropriate.
 
Some quinolones,
              including ciprofloxacin, have also been shown to interfere with the metabolism
              of caffeine. This may lead to reduced clearance of caffeine and a prolongation
              of its serum half-life.

                     
Concurrent administration of a quinolone,
              including ciprofloxacin, with multivalent cation-containing products such as
              magnesium/aluminum antacids, sucralfate,Videx®
              (didanosine) chewable/buffered tablets or pediatric powder, other highly
              buffered drugs, or products containing calcium, iron, or zinc may substantially
              decrease its absorption, resulting in serum and urine levels considerably lower
              than desired. (See 
                        
                  DOSAGE AND
                  ADMINISTRATION
                
                      for concurrent administration of these agents with
              ciprofloxacin.)

                     
Histamine H2-receptor antagonists
              appear to have no significant effect on the bioavailability of
              ciprofloxacin.

                     
Altered serum levels of phenytoin (increased and
              decreased) have been reported in patients receiving concomitant
              ciprofloxacin.

                     
The concomitant administration of ciprofloxacin with the
              sulfonylurea glyburide has, on rare occasions, resulted in severe
              hypoglycemia.

                     
Some quinolones, including ciprofloxacin, have been
              associated with transient elevations in serum creatinine in patients receiving
              cyclosporine concomitantly.

                     
Quinolones, including ciprofloxacin, have
              been reported to enhance the effects of the oral anticoagulant warfarin or its
              derivatives. When these products are administered concomitantly, prothrombin
              time or other suitable coagulation tests should be closely
              monitored.

                     
Probenecid interferes with renal tubular secretion of
              ciprofloxacin and produces an increase in the level of ciprofloxacin in the
              serum. This should be considered if patients are receiving both drugs
              concomi­tantly.

                     
Renal tubular transport of methotrexate may be inhibited
              by concomitant administration of ciprofloxacin potentially leading to increased
              plasma levels of methotrexate. This might increase the risk of methotrexate
              associated toxic reactions. Therefore, patients under methotrexate therapy
              should be carefully monitored when concomitant ciprofloxacin therapy is
              indicated.

                     
Metoclopramide significantly accelerates the absorption of
              oral ciprofloxacin resulting in shorter time to reach maximum plasma
              concentrations. No significant effect was observed on the bioavailability of
              ciprofloxacin.

                     
Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (but not acetyl
              salicylic acid) in combination of very high doses of quinolones have been shown
              to provoke convulsions in pre-clinical studies.
                     
                  
                  Carcinogenesis, Mutagenesis, Impairment of
            FertilityEight in vitro mutagenicity tests have
            been conducted with ciprofloxacin, and the test results are listed
            below:

                  
Salmonella/Microsome Test (Negative)

                  E. coli DNA Repair Assay (Negative)
Mouse Lymphoma Cell Forward Mutation
            Assay (Positive)
Chinese Hamster V79 Cell HGPRT Test
            (Negative)
Syrian Hamster Embryo Cell Transformation Assay
            (Negative)
Saccharomyces cerevisiaePoint Mutation
            Assay (Negative)
Saccharomyces cerevisiaeMitotic
            Crossover and Gene Conversion Assay (Negative)
Rat Hepatocyte DNA Repair
            Assay (Positive)

                  
Thus, 2 of the 8 tests were positive, but results of the
            following 3 in vivo test systems gave negative
            results:

                  
Rat Hepatocyte DNA Repair Assay
Micronucleus Test
            (Mice)
Dominant Lethal Test (Mice)

                  
Long-term carcinogenicity studies
            in rats and mice resulted in no carcinogenic or tumorigenic effects due to
            ciprofloxacin at daily oral dose levels up to 250 and 750 mg/kg to rats and
            mice, respectively (approximately 1.7- and 2.5-times the highest recommended
            therapeutic dose based upon mg/m2).

                  
Results from
            photo co-carcinogenicity testing indicate that ciprofloxacin does not reduce the
            time to appearance of UV-induced skin tumors as compared to vehicle control.
            Hairless (Skh-1) mice were exposed to UVA light for 3.5 hours five times every
            two weeks for up to 78 weeks while concurrently being administered
            ciprofloxacin. The time to development of the first skin tumors was 50 weeks in
            mice treated concomitantly with UVA and ciprofloxacin (mouse dose approximately
            equal to maxi­mum recommended human dose based upon mg/m2), as opposed to 34 weeks when animals were treated with both
            UVA and vehicle. The times to development of skin tumors ranged from 16 to 32
            weeks in mice treated concomitantly with UVA and other quinolones.4 

                  
In this model, mice treated with ciprofloxacin alone
            did not develop skin or systemic tumors. There are no data from similar models
            using pigmented mice and/or fully haired mice. The clinical significance of
            these findings to humans is unknown.

                  
Fertility studies performed in rats
            at oral doses of ciprofloxacin up to 100 mg/kg (approximately 0.7-times the
            highest recommended therapeutic dose based upon mg/m2)
            revealed no evidence of impairment.
                  
               
               
            
         