
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        COCs lower the risk of becoming pregnant primarily by suppressing ovulation. Other possible mechanisms may include cervical mucus changes that inhibit sperm penetration and endometrial changes that reduce the likelihood of implantation.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        The estrogen in Natazia is estradiol valerate, a synthetic prodrug of 17ß-estradiol. 
                        The progestin in Natazia is dienogest (DNG). DNG displays properties of 19-nortestosterone derivatives as well as properties associated with progesterone derivatives. [See Nonclinical Toxicology (13.2).]
                        
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Cardiac Electrophysiology
                           
                              The effect of Natazia on QT prolongation was evaluated in a randomized, double-blind, positive (moxifloxacin 400 mg) and negative (placebo) controlled crossover study in healthy subjects. A total of 53 subjects were administered Natazia (containing 3 mg dienogest and 2 mg estradiol valerate), dienogest 10 mg, and placebo as once daily doses for 4 days, and moxifloxacin 400 mg as a single oral dose. The upper bound of the 90% confidence interval for the largest placebo-adjusted, baseline-corrected QTc based on Fridericia’s correction method (QTcF) was below 10 msec, the threshold for regulatory concern. 
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Absorption
                           
                              After oral administration of estradiol valerate, cleavage to 17β-estradiol and valeric acid takes place during absorption by the intestinal mucosa or in the course of the first liver passage. This gives rise to estradiol and its metabolites, estrone and other metabolites. Maximum serum estradiol concentrations of 73.3 pg/mL are reached at a median of approximately 6 hours (range: 1.5–12 hours) and the area under the estradiol concentration curve [AUC(0–24h)] was 1301 pg·h/mL after single ingestion of a tablet containing 3 mg estradiol valerate under fasted condition on Day 1 of the 28-day sequential regimen. 
                              Bioavailability of dienogest is about 91%. Maximum serum dienogest concentrations of 91.7 ng/mL are reached at a median of approximately 1 hour (range: 0.5–1.5 hour) and the area under the dienogest concentration curve [AUC(0–24h)] was 964 ng/mL after single oral administration of Natazia tablet containing 2 mg estradiol valerate/3 mg dienogest under fasted condition. The pharmacokinetics of dienogest are dose-proportional within the dose range of 1–8 mg. Steady state is reached after 4 days of the same dosage of 2 mg dienogest. The mean accumulation ratio for AUC (0–24h) is approximately 1.24.
                              The mean plasma pharmacokinetic parameters at steady state following repeated oral doses of a 2 mg estradiol valerate/3 mg dienogest combination tablet in fertile women under fasted condition are reported in Table 1.
                              


                           



                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Food Effect
                           
                              Concomitant food intake in women resulted in a 28% decrease for dienogest Cmax and 23% increase of estradiol Cmax while the exposure (AUC) of both dienogest and estradiol did not change.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Distribution
                           
                              In serum, 38% of estradiol is bound to sex hormone-binding globulin (SHBG), 60% to albumin and 2–3% circulates in free form. An apparent volume of distribution of approximately 1.2 L/kg was determined after intravenous (IV) administration. 
                              A relatively high fraction (10%) of circulating dienogest is present in the free form, with approximately 90% being bound non-specifically to albumin. Dienogest does not bind to SHBG and corticosteroid-binding globulin (CBG). The volume of distribution at steady state (Vd,ss) of dienogest is 46 L after the IV administration of 85 mcg 3H-dienogest.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Metabolism
                           
                              After oral administration of estradiol valerate, approximately 3% of the dose is directly bioavailable as estradiol. Estradiol undergoes an extensive first-pass effect and a considerable part of the dose administered is already metabolized in the gastrointestinal mucosa. The CYP 3A family is known to play the most important role in human estradiol metabolism. Together with the pre-systemic metabolism in the liver, about 95% of the orally administered dose becomes metabolized before entering the systemic circulation. The main metabolites are estrone and its sulfate or glucuronide conjugates. 
                              Dienogest is extensively metabolized by the known pathways of steroid metabolism (hydroxylation, conjugation), with the formation of endocrinologically mostly inactive metabolites. CYP3A4 was identified as a predominant enzyme catalyzing the metabolism of dienogest.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Excretion
                           
                              Estradiol and its metabolites are mainly excreted in urine, with about 10% being excreted in the feces. The terminal half-life of estradiol is approximately 14 hours. 
                              Dienogest is mainly excreted renally in the form of metabolites and unchanged dienogest is the dominating fraction in plasma. The terminal half-life of dienogest is approximately 11 hours.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Use in Specific Populations
                           
                              Pediatric Use: Safety and efficacy of Natazia has been established in women of reproductive age. Efficacy is expected to be the same for postpubertal adolescents under the age of 18 and for users 18 years and older. Use of this product before menarche is not indicated. 
                              
                                 
                                    Geriatric Use
                                 : Natazia has not been studied in postmenopausal women and is not indicated in this population.
                              
                                 
                                    Renal Impairment
                                 : The pharmacokinetics of Natazia has not been studied in subjects with renal impairment. 
                              
                                 
                                    Hepatic Impairment
                                 : The pharmacokinetics of Natazia has not been studied in subjects with hepatic impairment. Steroid hormones may be poorly metabolized in patients with impaired liver function. Acute or chronic disturbances of liver function may necessitate the discontinuation of COC use until markers of liver function return to normal. [See Contraindications (4) and Warnings and Precautions (5.3).]
                              
                              
                                 
                                    Body Mass Index: The efficacy of Natazia in women with a BMI of > 30 kg/m2 has not been evaluated. 
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Drug Interactions
                           
                              Consult the labeling of all concurrently used drugs to obtain further information about interactions with oral contraceptives or the potential for enzyme alterations. 
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Effects of Other Drugs on Combined Oral Contraceptives
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                          Substances diminishing the efficacy of COCs:
                                        Dienogest is a substrate of CYP3A4. Drugs or herbal products that induce certain enzymes, including CYP3A4, may decrease the effectiveness of COCs or increase breakthrough bleeding. 
                                    The effect of the CYP3A4 inducer rifampin was studied in an open-label, non-randomized, single center study in 16 healthy postmenopausal women. All volunteers received a treatment regimen of 2 mg estradiol valerate and 3 mg dienogest combination tablets, dosed once daily over 17 days, and of rifampin, which was administered once daily in an oral dose of 600 mg on Days 12 to 16. Twenty-four-hour (24h) pharmacokinetics of estradiol and dienogest on Days 11 and 17 were compared. Co-administration of rifampin with estradiol valerate/dienogest tablets led to a 52 % and 83% decrease in the mean Cmax and AUC(0–24h), respectively, for dienogest and a 25% and 44% decrease in Cmax and AUC(0–24h), respectively, for estradiol at steady state. 
                                    
                                       
                                          Substances Increasing the Systemic Exposure of COCs (enzyme inhibitors):
                                        The effect of a strong CYP3A4 inhibitor, ketoconazole, on dienogest and estradiol exposure was studied in an open-label, one-sequence, one-way crossover study in healthy postmenopausal Caucasian women. One tablet of 2 mg estradiol valerate and 3 mg dienogest was administered orally once a day for 14 days. Twelve volunteers received an oral dose of 400 mg ketoconazole (that is, 2 tablets containing 200 mg ketoconazole) once daily for 7 days (Days 8–14). Twenty-four hour pharmacokinetics of estradiol and dienogest on Days 7 and 14 were compared. Co-administration with the strong inhibitor ketoconazole increased the AUC (0–24h) at steady state for dienogest and estradiol by 2.86 and 1.57-fold, respectively. There was also a 1.94 and 1.65-fold increase of Cmax at steady state for dienogest and estradiol when co-administered with ketoconazole. 
                                    The effect of a moderate CYP3A4 inhibitor, erythromycin, on dienogest and estradiol exposure was studied in an open-label, one-sequence, one-way crossover study in healthy postmenopausal Caucasian women. One tablet of 2 mg estradiol valerate and 3 mg dienogest was administered orally once a day for 14 days. Twelve volunteers received an oral dose of 500 mg erythromycin three times a day for 7 days (Days 8–14). Twenty-four hour pharmacokinetics of estradiol and dienogest on Days 7 and 14 were compared. When co-administered with the moderate inhibitor erythromycin, the AUC (0–24h) of dienogest and estradiol at steady state were increased by 1.62 and 1.33-fold, respectively. There was also a 1.33 and 1.51-fold increase of Cmax at steady state for dienogest and estradiol, respectively, when co-administered with erythromycin.
                                    
                                       
                                          HIV/HCV Protease Inhibitors and non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors:
                                        Significant changes (increase or decrease) in the plasma concentrations of the estrogen and progestin have been noted in some cases of co-administration of HIV/HCV protease inhibitors or with non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors. 
                                    Antibiotics: There have been reports of pregnancy while taking hormonal contraceptives and antibiotics, but clinical pharmacokinetic studies have not shown consistent effects of antibiotics on plasma concentrations of synthetic steroids. 
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Effects of Combined Oral Contraceptives on Other Drugs
                                 
                                 
                                    COCs containing ethinyl estradiol may inhibit the metabolism of other compounds. COCs have been shown to significantly decrease plasma concentrations of lamotrigine, likely due to induction of lamotrigine glucuronidation. This may reduce seizure control; therefore, dosage adjustments of lamotrigine may be necessary. Consult the labeling of the concurrently-used drug to obtain further information about interactions with COCs or the potential for enzyme alterations. 
                                    
                                       In vitro studies with human CYP enzymes did not indicate an inhibitory potential of dienogest at clinically relevant concentrations.
                                    Women on thyroid hormone replacement therapy may need increased doses of thyroid hormone because serum concentration of thyroid-binding globulin increases with use of COCs.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Effects of Combined Oral Contraceptives on Other Drugs
                                 
                                    COCs containing ethinyl estradiol may inhibit the metabolism of other compounds. COCs have been shown to significantly decrease plasma concentrations of lamotrigine, likely due to induction of lamotrigine glucuronidation. This may reduce seizure control; therefore, dosage adjustments of lamotrigine may be necessary. Consult the labeling of the concurrently-used drug to obtain further information about interactions with COCs or the potential for enzyme alterations. 
                                    In vitro studies with human CYP enzymes did not indicate an inhibitory potential of dienogest at clinically relevant concentrations.
                                    Women on thyroid hormone replacement therapy may need increased doses of thyroid hormone because serum concentration of thyroid-binding globulin increases with use of COCs.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         