
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
                  Consult the labeling of all concurrently-used drugs to obtain further information about interactions with hormonal contraceptives or the potential for enzyme alterations.
                  
               
               
               
                  
                     
                        Drugs or herbal products that induce certain enzymes (for example, CYP3A4) may decrease the effectiveness of COCs or increase breakthrough bleeding. Counsel patients to use a back-up or alternative method of contraception when enzyme inducers are used with COCs. (7.1)
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 Effects of Other Drugs on Combined Oral Contraceptives 
                     
                        
                           
                              Substances diminishing the efficacy of COCs:
                            Dienogest is a substrate of CYP3A4. Women who take medications that are strong CYP3A4 inducers should not choose Natazia as their oral contraceptive while using these inducers and for at least 28 days after discontinuation of these inducers due to the possibility of increased breakthrough bleeding and/or decreased contraceptive efficacy.
                        Drugs or herbal products that induce certain enzymes, including CYP3A4, may decrease the effectiveness of COCs or increase breakthrough bleeding. Some drugs or herbal products that may decrease the effectiveness of hormonal contraceptives include phenytoin, barbiturates, carbamazepine, bosentan, felbamate, griseofulvin, oxcarbazepine, rifampin, topiramate and products containing St. John’s wort. Interactions between oral contraceptives and other drugs may lead to breakthrough bleeding and/or contraceptive failure. Counsel women to use an alternative method of contraception or a back-up method when enzyme inducers are used with COCs, and to continue back-up contraception for 28 days after discontinuing the enzyme inducer to ensure contraceptive reliability. 
                        Multiple dose co-administration of the strong CYP3A4 inducer rifampin with estradiol valerate/dienogest tablets in healthy postmenopausal women led to a decrease in dienogest and estradiol systemic exposure at steady state. [See Clinical Pharmacology (12.3).]
                        
                        
                           
                              Substances Increasing the Systemic Exposure of COCs (enzyme inhibitors): 
                           Concomitant administration of moderate or strong CYP3A4 inhibitors like azole antifungals (for example, ketoconazole, itraconazole, voriconazole, fluconazole), verapamil, macrolides (for example, clarithromycin, erythromycin), diltiazem, and grapefruit increase the serum concentrations of both estradiol and dienogest.
                        In a multiple dose study investigating the effect of CYP3A4 inhibitors (ketoconazole and erythromycin) on Natazia, steady state estradiol and dienogest exposures were increased when co-administered with ketoconazole or erythromycin [see Clinical Pharmacology 12.3]. 
                        
                           
                              Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV)/Hepatitis C Virus (HCV) Protease Inhibitors and Non-Nucleoside Reverse Transcriptase Inhibitors
                           : Significant changes (increase and decrease) in plasma concentrations of estrogen and progestin have been noted in some cases of co-administration of HIV/HCV protease inhibitors or with non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors. 
                        
                           
                              Antibiotics
                           : There have been reports of pregnancy while taking hormonal contraceptives and antibiotics, but clinical pharmacokinetic studies have not shown consistent effects of antibiotics on plasma concentrations of synthetic steroids. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 Effects of Combined Oral Contraceptives on Other Drugs 
                     
                        COCs containing ethinyl estradiol may inhibit the metabolism of other compounds. COCs have been shown to significantly decrease plasma concentrations of lamotrigine, likely due to induction of lamotrigine glucuronidation. This may reduce seizure control; therefore, dosage adjustments of lamotrigine may be necessary. Consult the labeling of the concurrently-used drug to obtain further information about interactions with COCs or the potential for enzyme alterations. [See Clinical Pharmacology (12.3).]
                        
                        
                           In vitro studies with human CYP enzymes did not indicate an inhibitory potential of dienogest at clinically relevant concentrations.
                        Women on thyroid hormone replacement therapy may need increased doses of thyroid hormone because serum concentrations of thyroid-binding globulin increase with use of COCs.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3 Interference with Laboratory Tests
                     
                        The use of contraceptive steroids may influence the results of certain laboratory tests, such as coagulation factors, lipids, glucose tolerance, and binding proteins [see Warnings and Precautions (5.11) and Drug Interactions (7.2)]. 
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         