
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  Granisetron is a selective 5-hydroxytryptamine3 (5-HT3) receptor antagonist with little or no affinity for other serotonin receptors, including 5-HT1; 5-HT1A; 5-HT1B/C; 5-HT2; for alpha1-, alpha2-, or beta-adrenoreceptors; for dopamine-D2; or for histamine-H1; benzodiazepine; picrotoxin or opioid receptors.
                  Serotonin receptors of the 5-HT3 type are located peripherally on vagal nerve terminals and centrally in the chemoreceptor trigger zone of the area postrema. During chemotherapy that induces vomiting, mucosal enterochromaffin cells release serotonin, which stimulates 5-HT3 receptors. This evokes vagal afferent discharge, inducing vomiting. Animal studies demonstrate that, in binding to 5-HT3 receptors, granisetron blocks serotonin stimulation and subsequent vomiting after emetogenic stimuli such as cisplatin. In the ferret animal model, a single granisetron injection prevented vomiting due to high-dose cisplatin or arrested vomiting within 5 to 30 seconds.
                  In most human studies, granisetron has had little effect on blood pressure, heart rate or ECG. No evidence of an effect on plasma prolactin or aldosterone concentrations has been found in other studies.
                  Following single and multiple oral doses, granisetron hydrochloride tablets slowed colonic transit in normal volunteers. However, granisetron hydrochloride had no effect on oro-cecal transit time in normal volunteers when given as a single intravenous (IV) infusion of 50 mcg/kg or 200 mcg/kg.
               
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        In healthy volunteers and adult cancer patients undergoing chemotherapy, administration of granisetron hydrochloride tablets produced mean pharmacokinetic data shown in Table 1.
                        


                        


N.D. Not determined.
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Absorption
                           
                              When granisetron tablets were administered with food, AUC was decreased by 5% and Cmax increased by 30% in non-fasted healthy volunteers who received a single dose of 10 mg.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Distribution
                           
                              Plasma protein binding is approximately 65% and granisetron distributes freely between plasma and red blood cells.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Metabolism
                           
                              Granisetron metabolism involves N-demethylation and aromatic ring oxidation followed by conjugation. In vitro liver microsomal studies show that granisetron’s major route of metabolism is inhibited by ketoconazole, suggestive of metabolism mediated by the cytochrome P-450 3A subfamily. Animal studies suggest that some of the metabolites may also have 5-HT3 receptor antagonist activity.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Elimination
                           
                              Clearance is predominantly by hepatic metabolism. In normal volunteers, approximately 11% of the orally administered dose is eliminated unchanged in the urine in 48 hours. The remainder of the dose is excreted as metabolites, 48% in the urine and 38% in the feces.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Subpopulations
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Gender
                                 
                                    The effects of gender on the pharmacokinetics of granisetron hydrochloride tablets have not been studied. However, after intravenous infusion of granisetron hydrochloride, no difference in mean AUC was found between males and females, although males had a higher Cmax generally.
                                    In elderly and pediatric patients and in patients with renal failure or hepatic impairment, the pharmacokinetics of granisetron was determined following administration of intravenous granisetron.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Elderly
                                 
                                    The ranges of the pharmacokinetic parameters in elderly volunteers (mean age 71 years), given a single 40 mcg/kg intravenous dose of granisetron hydrochloride injection, were generally similar to those in younger healthy volunteers; mean values were lower for clearance and longer for half-life in the elderly.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Renal failure patients
                                 
                                    Total clearance of granisetron was not affected in patients with severe renal failure who received a single 40 mcg/kg intravenous dose of granisetron hydrochloride injection.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Hepatically impaired patients
                                 
                                    A pharmacokinetic study with intravenous granisetron hydrochloride in patients with hepatic impairment due to neoplastic liver involvement showed that total clearance was approximately halved compared to patients without hepatic impairment. Given the wide variability in pharmacokinetic parameters noted in patients, dosage adjustment in patients with hepatic functional impairment is not necessary.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Pediatric patients
                                 
                                    A pharmacokinetic study in pediatric cancer patients (2 to 16 years of age), given a single 40 mcg/kg intravenous dose of granisetron hydrochloride injection, showed that volume of distribution and total clearance increased with age. No relationship with age was observed for peak plasma concentration or terminal phase plasma half-life. When volume of distribution and total clearance are adjusted for body weight, the pharmacokinetics of granisetron are similar in pediatric and adult cancer patients.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         