
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
                  
                     [See Dosage and Administration (2), Contraindications (4)
                      and 
                        Clinical Pharmacology (12.3).]
                  
                  Rilpivirine is primarily metabolized by cytochrome P450 (CYP)3A, and drugs that induce or inhibit CYP3A may thus affect the clearance of rilpivirine. Co-administration of EDURANT and drugs that induce CYP3A may result in decreased plasma concentrations of rilpivirine and loss of virologic response and possible resistance to rilpivirine or to the class of NNRTIs. Co-administration of EDURANT and drugs that inhibit CYP3A may result in increased plasma concentrations of rilpivirine. Co-administration of EDURANT with drugs that increase gastric pH may result in decreased plasma concentrations of rilpivirine and loss of virologic response and possible resistance to rilpivirine or to the class of NNRTIs.
                  EDURANT at a dose of 25 mg once daily is not likely to have a clinically relevant effect on the exposure of drugs metabolized by CYP enzymes.
                  Table 4 shows the established and other potentially significant drug interactions based on which alterations in dose or regimen of EDURANT and/or co-administered drug may be recommended. Drugs that are not recommended for co-administration with EDURANT are also included in Table 4.
                  


                  


In addition to the drugs included in Table 4, the interaction between EDURANT and the following drugs was evaluated in clinical studies and no dose adjustment is needed for either drug [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)]: acetaminophen, atorvastatin, chlorzoxazone, ethinylestradiol, norethindrone, raltegravir, sildenafil, telaprevir and tenofovir disoproxil fumarate. Rilpivirine did not have a clinically significant effect on the pharmacokinetics of digoxin or metformin. No clinically relevant drug-drug interaction is expected when EDURANT is co-administered with maraviroc, ribavirin or the NRTIs abacavir, emtricitabine, lamivudine, stavudine and zidovudine.
               
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                            EDURANT should not be used in combination with NNRTIs. (7)
                            Co-administration of EDURANT with drugs that induce or inhibit CYP3A may affect the plasma concentrations of rilpivirine. (7)
                            Co-administration of EDURANT with drugs that increase gastric pH may decrease plasma concentrations of rilpivirine. (7)
                            Refer to the Full Prescribing Information for other drugs that should not be co-administered with EDURANT and for other drugs that may require a change in dose or regimen. (7)
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           QT Prolonging Drugs
                        
                        There is limited information available on the potential for a pharmacodynamic interaction between rilpivirine and drugs that prolong the QTc interval of the electrocardiogram. In a study of healthy subjects, supratherapeutic doses of rilpivirine (75 mg once daily and 300 mg once daily) have been shown to prolong the QTc interval of the electrocardiogram [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.2)]. EDURANT should be used with caution when co-administered with a drug with a known risk of Torsade de Pointes.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         