
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  Endogenous androgens are responsible for the normal growth and
                            development of the male sex organs and for maintenance of secondary sex
                            characteristics. These effects include the growth and maturation of
                            prostate, seminal vesicles, penis and scrotum; the development of male
                            hair distribution such as beard, pubic, chest and axillary hair,
                            laryngeal enlargements, vocal cord thickening, alterations in body
                            musculature and fat distribution. Drugs in this class can also cause
                            retention of nitrogen, sodium, potassium, phosphorus, and decreased
                            urinary excretion of calcium.
                  Androgens have been reported to increase protein anabolism and
                            decrease protein catabolism.
                  Nitrogen balance is improved only when there is sufficient intake
                            of calories and protein.
                  Androgens are responsible for the growth spurt of adolescence and
                            for the eventual termination of linear growth which is brought about by
                            the fusion of the epiphyseal growth centers. In children, exogenous
                            androgens accelerate linear growth rates, but may cause a
                            disproportionate advancement in bone maturation. Use over long periods
                            may result in fusion of the epiphyseal growth centers and termination of
                            growth process. Androgens have been reported to stimulate the production
                            of red blood cells by enhancing the production of erythropoietic
                            stimulating factor.
                  During exogenous administration of androgens, endogenous
                            testosterone release is inhibited through feedback inhibition of
                            pituitary luteinizing hormone (LH). At large doses of exogenous
                            androgens, spermatogenesis may also be suppressed through feedback
                            inhibition of pituitary follicle stimulating hormone (FSH).
                  There is a lack of substantial evidence that androgens are
                            effective in fractures, surgery, convalescence, and functional uterine
                            bleeding.
                  
                     PHARMACOKINETICS
                  
                  Testosterone in plasma is 98 percent bound to a specific
                            testosterone-estradiol binding globulin, and about 2 percent is free.
                            Generally, the amount of this sex-hormone binding globulin in the plasma
                            will determine the distribution of testosterone between the free and
                            bound forms, and the free testosterone concentration will determine its
                            half-life.
                  About 90 percent of a dose of testosterone is excreted as
                            glucuronic and sulfuric acid conjugates of testosterone and its
                            metabolites; about 6 percent of a dose is excreted in feces, mostly in
                            the unconjugated form. Inactivation of testosterone occurs primarily in
                            the liver. Testosterone is metabolized to various 17-keto steroids
                            through two different pathways. There are considerable variations of the
                            half-life as reported in the literature, ranging from 10-100 minutes.
                  In many tissues the activity of testosterone appears to depend on
                            reduction to dihydrotestosterone, which binds to cytosol receptor
                            proteins. The steroid-receptor complex is transported to the nucleus
                            where it initiates transcription events and cellular changes related to
                            androgen action.
               
               
            
         