
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  Endogenous estrogens are largely responsible for the development 
and maintenance of the female reproductive system and secondary sexual 
characteristics. Although circulating estrogens exist in a dynamic equilibrium 
of metabolic interconversions, estradiol is the principal intracellular human 
estrogen and is substantially more potent than its metabolites, estrone and 
estriol at the receptor level.
                  The primary source of estrogen in normally cycling adult women is the ovarian 
follicle, which secretes 70 to 500 mcg of estradiol daily, depending on the 
phase of the menstrual cycle. After menopause, most endogenous estrogen is 
produced by conversion of androstenedione, secreted by the adrenal cortex, to 
estrone by peripheral tissues. Thus, estrone and the sulfate conjugated form, 
estrone sulfate, are the most abundant circulating estrogens in postmenopausal 
women.
                  Estrogens act through binding to nuclear receptors in estrogen-responsive 
tissues. To date, two estrogen receptors have been identified. These vary in 
proportion from tissue to tissue.
                  Circulating estrogens modulate the pituitary secretion of the gonadotropins, 
luteinizing hormone (LH) and follicle stimulating hormone (FSH), through a 
negative feedback mechanism. Estrogens act to reduce the elevated levels of 
these hormones seen in postmenopausal women.
               
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        AbsorptionEstrogens are well absorbed through the skin and gastrointestinal 
tract. When applied for a local action, absorption is usually sufficient to 
cause systemic effects.
                        
                        DistributionThe distribution of exogenous estrogens is similar to that of 
endogenous estrogens. Estrogens are widely distributed in the body and are 
generally found in higher concentrations in the sex hormone target organs. 
Estrogens circulate in the blood largely bound to sex hormone binding globulin 
(SHBG) and albumin.
                        
                        MetabolismExogenous estrogens are metabolized in the same manner as 
endogenous estrogens. Circulating estrogens exist in a dynamic equilibrium of 
metabolic interconversions. These transformations take place mainly in the 
liver. Estradiol is converted reversibly to estrone, and both can be converted 
to estriol, which is the major urinary metabolite. Estrogens also undergo 
enterohepatic recirculation via sulfate and glucuronide conjugation in the 
liver, biliary secretion of conjugates into the intestine, and hydrolysis in the 
gut followed by reabsorption. In postmenopausal women, a significant proportion 
of the circulating estrogens exist as sulfate conjugates, especially estrone 
sulfate, which serves as a circulating reservoir for the formation of more 
active estrogens.
                        
                        ExcretionEstradiol, estrone, and estriol are excreted in the urine along 
with glucuronide and sulfate conjugates.
                        
                        Drug Interactions
                           In vitro and in 
vivo studies have shown that estrogens are metabolized partially by 
cytochrome P450 3A4 (CYP3A4). Therefore, inducers or inhibitors of CYP3A4 may 
affect estrogen drug metabolism. Inducers of CYP3A4 such as St. John’s Wort 
preparations (Hypericum perforatum), phenobarbital, carbamazepine, and rifampin 
may reduce plasma concentrations of estrogens, possibly resulting in a decrease 
in therapeutic effects and/or changes in the uterine bleeding profile. 
Inhibitors of CYP3A4 such as erythromycin, clarithromycin, ketoconazole
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Clinical Studies
                     
                        Women's Health Initiative StudiesThe Women's Health Initiative (WHI) enrolled a total of 27,000 
predominantly healthy postmenopausal women to assess the risks and benefits of 
either the use of 0.625 mg conjugated estrogens (CE) per day alone or the use of 
oral 0.625 mg conjugated estrogens plus 2.5 mg medroxyprogesterone acetate (MPA) 
per day compared to placebo in the prevention of certain chronic diseases. The 
primary endpoint was the incidence of coronary heart disease (CHD) (nonfatal 
myocardial infarction and CHD death), with invasive breast cancer as the primary 
adverse outcome studied. A "global index" included the earliest occurrence of 
CHD, invasive breast cancer, stroke, pulmonary embolism (PE), endometrial 
cancer, colorectal cancer, hip fracture, or death due to other cause. The study 
did not evaluate the effects of CE or CE/MPA on menopausal symptoms.
                        The CE/MPA substudy was stopped early because, according to the predefined 
stopping rule, the increased risk of breast cancer and cardiovascular events 
exceeded the specified benefits included in the "global index." Results of the 
CE/MPA substudy, which included 16,608 women (average age of 63 years, range 50 
to 79; 83.9% White, 6.5% Black, 5.5% Hispanic), after an average follow-up of 
5.2 years are presented in Table 1 below:
                        



                        


For those outcomes included in the "global index," the absolute excess risks 
per 10,000 person-years in the group treated with CE/MPA were 7 more CHD events, 
8 more strokes, 8 more PEs, and 8 more invasive breast cancers, while absolute 
risk reductions per 10,000 person-years were 6 fewer colorectal cancers and 5 
fewer hip fractures. The absolute excess risk of events included in the "global 
index" was 19 per 10,000 women-years. There was no difference between the groups 
in terms of all-cause mortality. (See
                               
BOXED WARNINGS
                           ,
                               
WARNINGS
                            and
                               
PRECAUTIONS
                           .)
                        
                        Women’s Health Initiative Memory StudyThe Women’s Health Initiative Memory Study (WHIMS), a substudy of 
WHI, enrolled 4,532 predominantly healthy postmenopausal women 65 years of age 
and older (47% were age 65 to 69 years, 35% were 70 to 74 years, and 18% were 75 
years of age and older) to evaluate the effects of CE/MPA (0.625mg conjugated 
estrogens plus 2.5 mg medroxyprogesterone acetate) on the incidence of probable 
dementia (primary outcome) compared with placebo.
                        After an average follow-up of 4 years, 40 women in the estrogen/progestin 
group (45 per 10,000 women-years) and 21 in the placebo group (22 per 10,000 
women-years) were diagnosed with probable dementia. The relative risk of 
probable dementia in the hormone therapy group was 2.05 (95% CI, 1.21 to 3.48) 
compared to placebo. Differences between groups became apparent in the first 
year of treatment. It is unknown whether these findings apply to younger 
postmenopausal women. (See
                               BOXED 
WARNINGS
                            and
                               WARNINGS, 
Dementia
                           .)
                        
                        OsteoporosisThe results of a double-blind, placebo-controlled two-year study 
have shown that treatment with one tablet of estropipate 0.625 daily for 25 days 
(of a 31-day cycle per month) prevents vertebral bone mass loss in 
postmenopausal women. When estrogen therapy is discontinued, bone mass declines 
at a rate comparable to that of the immediate postmenopausal period. There is no 
evidence that estrogen replacement therapy restores to premenopausal levels.
                     
                  
               
            
         