
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              •Anticoagulants: Monitor anticoagulant response (INR or prothrombin time) frequently in order to adjust the anticoagulant dose as needed. (5.2, 7.1) 
                           
                              •Phenytoin: Monitor phenytoin levels in patients taking capecitabine concomitantly with phenytoin. The phenytoin dose may need to be reduced. (7.1) 
                           
                              •Leucovorin: The concentration of 5-fluorouracil is increased and its toxicity may be enhanced by leucovorin. (7.1) 
                           
                              •CYP2C9 substrates: Care should be exercised when capecitabine is coadministered with CYP2C9 substrates. (7.1) 
                           
                              •Food reduced both the rate and extent of absorption of capecitabine. (2, 7.1, 12.3) 
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 Drug-Drug Interactions
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Anticoagulants
                              
                           
                           
                              Altered coagulation parameters and/or bleeding have been reported in patients taking capecitabine concomitantly with coumarin-derivative anticoagulants such as warfarin and phenprocoumon [see Boxed Warning]. These events occurred within several days and up to several months after initiating capecitabine therapy and, in a few cases, within one month after stopping capecitabine. These events occurred in patients with and without liver metastases. In a drug interaction study with single-dose warfarin administration, there was a significant increase in the mean AUC of S-warfarin [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)]. The maximum observed INR value increased by 91%. This interaction is probably due to an inhibition of cytochrome P450 2C9 by capecitabine and/or its metabolites. 
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Phenytoin
                              
                           
                           
                              The level of phenytoin should be carefully monitored in patients taking capecitabine and phenytoin dose may need to be reduced [see Dosage and Administration (2.2)]. Postmarketing reports indicate that some patients receiving capecitabine and phenytoin had toxicity associated with elevated phenytoin levels. Formal drug-drug interaction studies with phenytoin have not been conducted, but the mechanism of interaction is presumed to be inhibition of the CYP2C9 isoenzyme by capecitabine and/or its metabolites. 
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Leucovorin
                              
                           
                           
                              The concentration of 5-fluorouracil is increased and its toxicity may be enhanced by leucovorin. Deaths from severe enterocolitis, diarrhea, and dehydration have been reported in elderly patients receiving weekly leucovorin and fluorouracil. 
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 CYP2C9 substrates
                              
                           
                           
                              Other than warfarin, no formal drug-drug interaction studies between capecitabine and other CYP2C9 substrates have been conducted. Care should be exercised when capecitabine is coadministered with CYP2C9 substrates. 
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 Drug-Food Interaction
                     
                        Food was shown to reduce both the rate and extent of absorption of capecitabine [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)]. In all clinical trials, patients were instructed to administer capecitabine within 30 minutes after a meal. It is recommended that capecitabine be administered with food [see Dosage and Administration (2)]. 
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         