
               
               
               
                  CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        Mechanism of Action
                     
                     
                        Fludeoxyglucose F 18 is a glucose analog that concentrates in cells that rely upon glucose as an energy source, or in cells whose dependence on glucose increases under pathophysiological conditions. Fludeoxyglucose F 18 is transported through the cell membrane by facilitative glucose transporter proteins and is phosphorylated within the cell to [18F] FDG-6- phosphate by the enzyme hexokinase. Once phosphorylated it cannot exit until it is dephosphorylated by glucose-6-phosphatase. Therefore, within a given tissue or pathophysiological process, the retention and clearance of Fludeoxyglucose F 18 reflect a balance involving glucose transporter, hexokinase and glucose-6-phosphatase activities. When allowance is made for the kinetic differences between glucose and Fludeoxyglucose F 18 transport and phosphorylation (expressed as the “lumped constant” ratio), Fludeoxyglucose F 18 is used to assess glucose metabolism.
                        In comparison to background activity of the specific organ or tissue type, regions of decreased or absent uptake of Fludeoxyglucose F 18 reflect the decrease or absence of glucose metabolism. Regions of increased uptake of Fludeoxyglucose F 18 reflect greater than normal rates of glucose metabolism.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        Pharmacodynamics
                     
                     
                        Fludeoxyglucose F 18 Injection is rapidly distributed to all organs of the body after intravenous administration. After background clearance of Fludeoxyglucose F 18 Injection, optimal PET imaging is generally achieved between 30 to 40 minutes after administration.
                        In cancer, the cells are generally characterized by enhanced glucose metabolism partially due to (1) an increase in the activity of glucose transporters, (2) an increased rate of phosphorylation activity, (3) a reduction of phosphatase activity or, (4) a dynamic alteration in the balance among all these processes. However, glucose metabolism of cancer as reflected by Fludeoxyglucose F 18 accumulation shows considerable variability. Depending on tumor type, stage, and location, Fludeoxyglucose F 18 accumulation may be increased, normal, or decreased. Also, inflammatory cells can have the same variability of uptake of Fludeoxyglucose F 18.
                        In the heart, under normal aerobic conditions, the myocardium meets the bulk of its energy requirements by oxidizing free fatty acids. Most of the exogenous glucose taken up by the myocyte is converted into glycogen. However, under ischemic conditions, the oxidation of free fatty acids stimulated, and glucose taken up by the myocyte is metabolized immediately instead of being converted into glycogen. Under these conditions, phosphorylated Fludeoxyglucose F 18 accumulates in the myocyte and can be detected with PET imaging.
                        Normally, the brain relies on anaerobic metabolism. In epilepsy, the glucose metabolism varies. Generally, during a seizure, glucose metabolism increases. Interictally, the seizure focus tends to be hypometabolic.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        Pharm
                        a
                        c
                        okinetics
                     
                     
                        In four healthy male volunteers, receiving an intravenous administration of 30 seconds in duration, the arterial blood level profile for Fludeoxyglucose F 18 was described as a triexponential decay curve. The effective half-life ranges of the three phases were 0.2-0.3 minutes, 10-13 minutes with a mean and standard deviation (STD) of 11.6 ± 1.1 min, and 80-95 minutes with a mean and STD of 88 ±□ 4 min.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        Plasma Protein Binding
                     
                     
                        The extent of binding of Fludeoxyglucose F 18 to plasma proteins is not known.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        Metabolism
                     
                     
                        Fludeoxyglucose F 18 is transported into cells and phosphorylated to [18F]-FDG-6-phosphate at a rate proportional to the rate of glucose utilization within that tissue. [18F]-FDG-6-phosphate presumably is metabolized to 2-deoxy-2-[18F]fluoro-6-phospho-D-mannose ([18F]FDM-6-phosphate).
                        Fludeoxyglucose F 18 Injection may contain several impurities (e.g., 2-deoxy-2-chloro-D-glucose (ClDG)). Biodistribution and metabolism of C1DG are presumed to be similar to Fludeoxyglucose F 18 and would be expected to result in intracellular formation of 2-deoxy-2-chloro-6-phospho-D-glucose (C1DG-6-phosphate) and 2-deoxy-2-chloro-6-phospho-D-mannose (ClDM-6-phosphate). The phosphorylated deoxyglucose compounds are dephosphorylated and the resulting compounds (FDG, FDM, C1DG, and ClDM) presumably leave cells by passive diffusion.
                        Fludeoxyglucose F 18 and related compounds are cleared from non-cardiac tissues within 3 to 24 hours after administration. Clearance from the cardiac tissue may require more than 96 hours.
                        Fludeoxyglucose F 18 that is not involved in glucose metabolism in any tissue is then excreted in the urine.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        Excretion
                     
                     
                        Fludeoxyglucose F 18 is cleared from most tissues within 24 hours and can be eliminated from the body unchanged in the urine. Three elimination phases have been identified in the reviewed literature. Within 33 minutes, a mean of 3.9% of the administrated radioactive dose was measured in the urine. The amount of radiation exposure of the urinary bladder at two hours post-administration suggests that 20.6% (mean) of the radioactive dose was present in the bladder.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        Pharmacokinetics in Special Populations
                     
                     
                        Extensive dose range and dose adjustment studies with this drug product in normal and special populations have not been completed. In pediatric patients with epilepsy, doses given have been as low as 2.6 mCi.
                        The pharmacokinetics of Fludeoxyglucose F 18 Injection in renally-impaired patients have not been characterized. Fludeoxyglucose F 18 is eliminated through the renal system. Care should be taken to prevent excessive and unnecessary radiation exposure to this organ system and adjacent tissues. The effects of fasting, varying blood sugar levels, conditions of glucose intolerance, and diabetes mellitus on Fludeoxyglucose F 18 distribution in humans have not been ascertained. Diabetic patients may need stabilization of blood glucose levels on the day before and on the day of the Fludeoxyglucose F 18 Injection study.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        Drug-Drug Interactions
                     
                     
                        Drug-drug interactions with Fludeoxyglucose F 18 Injection have not been evaluated.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         