
               
               
               7     DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
               
                  
                     
                        Coadministration of efavirenz can alter the concentrations of
other drugs and other drugs may alter the concentrations of efavirenz.  The
potential for drug-drug interactions must be considered before and during
therapy.  (4.2,  7.1,  12.3)
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1     Drug-Drug Interactions
                     
                        Efavirenz has been shown  in
vivo to induce CYP3A and CYP2B6. Other compounds that are substrates of CYP3A or CYP2B6
may have decreased plasma concentrations when coadministered with SUSTIVA. In
vitro studies have demonstrated that efavirenz inhibits CYP2C9, 2C19,
and 3A4 isozymes in the range of observed efavirenz plasma concentrations.
Coadministration of efavirenz with drugs primarily metabolized by these isozymes
may result in altered plasma concentrations of the coadministered drug. Therefore,
appropriate dose adjustments may be necessary for these drugs.
                        Drugs that induce CYP3A activity (eg, phenobarbital, rifampin,
rifabutin) would be expected to increase the clearance of efavirenz resulting
in lowered plasma concentrations. Drug interactions with SUSTIVA are summarized
in Tables 2  and  7 [for
pharmacokinetics data see Clinical Pharmacology  (12.3,
  Tables 8 
                           and
                               9)
                           ].
The tables include potentially significant interactions, but are not all inclusive.
                        


                     



                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Other Drugs 
                           
                              Based on the results of drug interaction
studies [see Clinical Pharmacology  (12.3,
  Tables 8
                                  and 
                                     9)
                                 ],
no dosage adjustment is recommended when SUSTIVA (efavirenz) is given with
the following: aluminum/magnesium hydroxide antacids, azithromycin, cetirizine,
famotidine, fluconazole, lamivudine, lorazepam, nelfinavir, paroxetine, tenofovir
disoproxil fumarate, and zidovudine.   
                              Specific
drug interaction studies have not been performed with SUSTIVA and NRTIs other
than lamivudine and zidovudine. Clinically significant interactions would
not be expected since the NRTIs are metabolized via a different route than
efavirenz and would be unlikely to compete for the same metabolic enzymes
and elimination pathways.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2     Cannabinoid Test Interaction
                     
                        Efavirenz does not bind to cannabinoid
receptors. False-positive urine cannabinoid test results have been observed
in non-HIV-infected volunteers receiving SUSTIVA when the Microgenics CEDIA
DAU Multi-Level THC assay was used for screening. Negative results were obtained
when more specific confirmatory testing was performed with gas chromatography/mass
spectrometry.
                        Of the three assays analyzed (Microgenics
CEDIA DAU Multi-Level THC assay, Cannabinoid Enzyme Immunoassay [Diagnostic
Reagents, Inc], and AxSYM Cannabinoid Assay), only the Microgenics CEDIA DAU
Multi-Level THC assay showed false-positive results. The other two assays
provided true-negative results. The effects of SUSTIVA on cannabinoid screening
tests other than these three are unknown. The manufacturers of cannabinoid
assays should be contacted for additional information regarding the use of
their assays with patients receiving efavirenz.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         