
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        TIVORBEX is a NSAID with analgesic and antipyretic and analgesic properties.
                        The mechanism of action of TIVORBEX, like that of other NSAIDs, is not completely understood but involves inhibition of cyclooxygenase (COX-1 and COX-2).
                        Indomethacin is a potent inhibitor of prostaglandin synthesis in vitro. Indomethacin concentrations are reached during therapy which have been demonstrated to produce in vivo effects. Prostaglandins sensitize afferent nerves and potentiate the action of bradykinin in inducing pain in animal models. Prostaglandins are mediators of inflammation. Since indomethacin is an inhibitor of prostaglandin synthesis, its mode of action may be due to a decrease of prostaglandins in peripheral tissues.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        The relative bioavailability of TIVORBEX 40 mg capsules was compared to indomethacin immediate-release (IR) capsules 50 mg in 38 healthy subjects under fasted conditions in a single-dose crossover study.
                        TIVORBEX (indomethacin) 40 mg capsules do not result in an equivalent systemic exposure to 50 mg indomethacin IR capsules.
                        When taken under fasted conditions, a 20% lower dose of indomethacin in TIVORBEX 40 mg capsules resulted in a 21% lower mean systemic exposure (AUCinf) and an equivalent mean peak concentration (Cmax) compared to 50 mg indomethacin IR capsules. The median time to reach peak concentrations (Tmax) was 1.67 hours and 2.02 hours for TIVORBEX capsules and Indomethacin IR capsules, respectively.
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Absorption
                              
                              Similar to indomethacin IR capsules, following single oral doses of TIVORBEX capsules 20 mg or 40 mg, indomethacin is readily absorbed. TIVORBEX Capsules attained peak plasma concentrations of approximately 1.2 and 2.4 mcg/mL, respectively, at 1.67 hours. Indomethacin is virtually 100% bioavailable, with 90% of the dose absorbed within 4 hours following dosing.
                              Administration of TIVORBEX Capsules 20 mg and 40 mg was associated with dose proportional pharmacokinetics.
                              Taking TIVORBEX with food causes a significant decrease in the rate but not the overall extent of systemic absorption of indomethacin compared to taking TIVORBEX on an empty stomach. TIVORBEX capsules results in 46% lower Cmax, 9% lower AUCinf, and 1.33 hours delayed Tmax (1.67 hours during fasted versus 3.00 hours during fed) under the fed condition compared to the fasted condition. Based on the food effect evaluation on the indomethacin IR capsules, the effect of food on indomethacin pharmacokinetics is comparable between TIVORBEX capsules and indomethacin IR capsules.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Distribution
                              
                              Indomethacin is highly bound to protein in plasma (about 99%) over the expected range of therapeutic plasma concentrations. Indomethacin crosses the blood-brain barrier and the placenta, and appears in breast milk.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Metabolism
                              
                              Indomethacin exists in the plasma as the parent drug and its desmethyl, desbenzoyl, and desmethyldesbenzoyl metabolites, all in the unconjugated form. Appreciable formation of glucuronide conjugates of each metabolite and of indomethacin are formed.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Excretion
                              
                              Indomethacin is eliminated via metabolism and subsequent renal and biliary excretion. Indomethacin undergoes appreciable enterohepatic circulation. About 60% of an oral dose is recovered in urine as drug and metabolites (26% as indomethacin and its glucuronide), and 33% is recovered in feces (1.5% as indomethacin). The mean half-life of indomethacin from TIVORBEX capsules 40 mg is 7.6 hours and is comparable to indomethacin IR capsules 50 mg (7.2 hours).
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Special Populations
                              
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Pediatric: The pharmacokinetics of TIVORBEX has not been investigated in pediatric patients.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Race: Pharmacokinetic differences due to race have not been identified.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Hepatic Impairment: The pharmacokinetics of TIVORBEX has not been investigated in patients with hepatic impairment.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Renal Impairment: The pharmacokinetics of TIVORBEX has not been investigated in patients with renal impairment [see 
                                          Warnings and Precautions (5.6)].
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         