
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           Co-administration with indomethacin may reduce the effect of antihypertensive agents. Concomitant use in patients with compromised renal function may result in further deterioration of renal function. (7.1, 7.3)
                           Concomitant administration of indomethacin and anticoagulants and platelet inhibitors (e.g., aspirin) is not generally recommended because of the potential of increased adverse effects including increased GI bleeding. (7.2, 7.11)
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1	ACE-inhibitors and Angiotensin II Antagonists
                     
                        NSAIDs may diminish the antihypertensive effect of angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors and angiotensin II antagonists. Indomethacin can reduce the antihypertensive effects of captopril and losartan. These interactions should be given consideration in patients taking NSAIDs concomitantly with ACE-inhibitors or angiotensin II antagonists. In some patients with compromised renal function, the co-administration of an NSAID and an ACE-inhibitor or an angiotensin II antagonist may result in further deterioration of renal function, including possible acute renal failure, which is usually reversible [see Warnings and Precautions (5.6)].
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2	Aspirin
                     
                        When administered with aspirin, indomethacin's protein binding is reduced, although the clearance of free indomethacin is not altered. The clinical significance of this interaction is not known; however, as with other NSAIDs, concomitant administration of indomethacin and aspirin is not generally recommended because of the potential of increased adverse effects.
                        The use of indomethacin in conjunction with aspirin or other salicylates is not recommended. Controlled clinical studies have shown that the combined use of indomethacin and aspirin does not produce any greater therapeutic effect than the use of indomethacin alone. In a clinical study of the combined use of indomethacin and aspirin, the incidence of gastrointestinal side effects was significantly increased with combined therapy.
                        In a study in normal volunteers, it was found that chronic concurrent administration of 3.6 g of aspirin per day decreases indomethacin blood levels approximately 20%.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3	Beta-adrenoceptor Blocking Agents
                     
                        Blunting of the antihypertensive effect of beta-adrenoceptor blocking agents by NSAIDs including indomethacin has been reported. Therefore, when using these blocking agents to treat hypertension, patients should be observed carefully in order to confirm that the desired therapeutic effect has been obtained.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4	Cyclosporine
                     
                        Administration of NSAIDs concomitantly with cyclosporine has been associated with an increase in cyclosporine-induced toxicity, possibly due to decreased synthesis of renal prostacyclin. Use caution when NSAIDs are administered concomitantly with cyclosporine. Carefully monitor patients with impaired renal function.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.5	Diflunisal
                     
                        In normal volunteers receiving indomethacin, the administration of diflunisal decreased the renal clearance and significantly increased the plasma levels of indomethacin. In some patients, combined use of indomethacin and diflunisal has been associated with fatal gastrointestinal hemorrhage. Therefore, diflunisal and indomethacin should not be used concomitantly.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.6	Digoxin
                     
                        Indomethacin given concomitantly with digoxin has been reported to increase the serum concentration and prolong the half-life of digoxin. Therefore, when indomethacin and digoxin are used concomitantly, serum digoxin levels should be closely monitored.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.7	Diuretics
                     
                        Clinical studies, as well as post-marketing observations, have shown that NSAIDs can reduce the natriuretic effect of furosemide and thiazides in some patients. This response has been attributed to inhibition of renal prostaglandin synthesis.
                        Indomethacin reduces basal plasma renin activity (PRA), as well as those elevations of PRA induced by furosemide administration, or salt or volume depletion. These facts should be considered when evaluating plasma renin activity in hypertensive patients.
                        It has been reported that the addition of triamterene to a maintenance schedule of indomethacin resulted in reversible acute renal failure in two of four healthy volunteers. Indomethacin and triamterene should not be administered together.
                        Indomethacin and potassium-sparing diuretics each may be associated with increased serum potassium levels. The potential effects of indomethacin and potassium-sparing diuretics on potassium kinetics and renal function should be considered when these agents are administered concurrently.
                        Most of the above effects concerning diuretics have been attributed, at least in part, to mechanisms involving inhibition of prostaglandin synthesis by indomethacin.
                        During concomitant therapy with NSAIDs, observe patients closely for signs of renal failure, as well as to assure diuretic efficacy [see Warnings and Precautions (5.6)].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.8	Lithium
                     
                        NSAIDs, including indomethacin, have produced an elevation of plasma lithium levels and a reduction in renal lithium clearance. The mean minimum lithium concentration increased 15% and the renal clearance was decreased by approximately 20%. These effects have been attributed to inhibition of renal prostaglandin synthesis by the NSAID. Thus, when NSAIDs and lithium are administered concurrently, observe patients carefully for signs of lithium toxicity. See the Prescribing Information for lithium preparations before use of such concomitant therapy. In addition, the frequency of monitoring serum lithium concentration should be increased at the outset of such combination drug treatment.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.9	Methotrexate
                     
                        NSAIDs have been reported to competitively inhibit methotrexate accumulation in rabbit kidney slices. This may indicate that they could enhance the toxicity of methotrexate. Use caution when NSAIDs are administered concomitantly with methotrexate.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.10	NSAIDs
                     
                        The concomitant use of indomethacin with other NSAIDs is not recommended due to the increased possibility of gastrointestinal toxicity, with little or no increase in efficacy.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.11	Anticoagulants
                     
                        Caution should be exercised when NSAIDs, such as indomethacin, and anticoagulants are administered concomitantly. The effects of anticoagulants (such as warfarin) and NSAIDs on GI bleeding are synergistic, such that users of both drugs together have a risk of serious GI bleeding higher than that with use of either drug alone.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.12	Probenecid
                     
                        When indomethacin is given to patients receiving probenecid, the plasma levels of indomethacin are likely to be increased. Therefore, a lower total daily dosage of indomethacin may produce a satisfactory therapeutic effect. When increases in the dose of indomethacin are made, they should be made carefully and in small increments.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         