
               
               
               
12	CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
12.1	Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Moxifloxacin is a member of the fluoroquinolone class of anti-infective drugs [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.4)].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
12.3	Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        Moxifloxacin steady-state plasma pharmacokinetics were evaluated in healthy adult male and female subjects who were administered multiple, bilateral, topical ocular doses of MOXEZA™ solution two times daily for four days with a final dose on day 5. The average steady-state AUC0-12 was 8.17 ± 5.31 ng*h/mL. Moxifloxacin Cmax following twice-daily bilateral ophthalmic administration of moxifloxacin AF 0.5% for 5 days is approximately 0.02% of that achieved with the oral formulation of moxifloxacin hydrochloride (Cmax following oral dosing of 400 mg AVELOX*, 4.5 ± 0.5 mcg/mL). 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
12.4	Microbiology
                     
                        The antibacterial action of moxifloxacin results from inhibition of the topoisomerase II (DNA gyrase) and topoisomerase IV.  DNA gyrase is an essential enzyme that is involved in the replication, transcription and repair of bacterial DNA.  Topoisomerase IV is an enzyme known to play a key role in the partitioning of the chromosomal DNA during bacterial cell division.  
                        The mechanism of action for quinolones, including moxifloxacin, is different from that of macrolides, aminoglycosides, or tetracyclines.  Therefore, moxifloxacin may be active against pathogens that are resistant to these antibiotics and these antibiotics may be active against pathogens that are resistant to moxifloxacin.  There is no cross-resistance between moxifloxacin and the aforementioned classes of antibiotics.  Cross-resistance has been observed between systemic moxifloxacin and some other quinolones.
                        
                           In vitro resistance to moxifloxacin develops via multiple-step mutations.  Resistance to moxifloxacin occurs in vitro at a general frequency of between 1.8 x 10-9 to < 1 x 10-11 for Gram-positive bacteria.
                        Moxifloxacin has been shown to be active against most strains of the following microorganisms, both in vitro and in clinical infections as described in the INDICATIONS AND USAGE section:
                        
                           Aerococcus viridans*

                           
                           Corynebacterium macginleyi*

                           
                           Enterococcus faecalis*

                           
                           Micrococcus luteus*

                           
                           Staphylococcus arlettae*

                           
                           Staphylococcus aureus

                           
                           Staphylococcus capitis

                           
                           Staphylococcus epidermidis

                           
                           Staphylococcus haemolyticus

                           
                           Staphylococcus hominis

                           
                           Staphylococcus saprophyticus*

                           
                           Staphylococcus warneri*

                           
                           Streptococcus mitis*

                           
                           Streptococcus pneumoniae

                           
                           Streptococcus parasanguinis*

                           
                           Escherichia coli*

                           
                           Haemophilus influenzae

                           
                           Klebsiella pneumoniae*

                           
                           Propionibacterium acnes

                           
                           Chlamydia trachomatis*
                        *Efficacy for this organism was studied in fewer than 10 infections.
                        The following in vitro data are available, but their clinical significance in ophthalmic infections is unknown. The safety and effectiveness of MOXEZA™ solution in treating ophthalmic infections due to these organisms have not been established in adequate and well-controlled trials.
                        Moxifloxacin has been shown to be active in vitro against most strains of the microorganisms listed below.  These organisms are considered susceptible when evaluated using systemic breakpoints; however, a correlation between the in vitro systemic breakpoint and ophthalmologic efficacy has not been established.  The list of organisms is provided as guidance only in assessing the potential treatment of conjunctival infections.  Moxifloxacin exhibits in vitro minimal inhibitory concentrations (MICs) of 2 mcg/mL or less (systemic susceptible breakpoint) against most (≥ 90%) strains of the following ocular pathogens.
                        
                           Aerobic Gram-positive microorganisms:

                           
                           Staphylococcus caprae

                           
                           Staphylococcus cohnii

                           
                           Staphylococcus lugdunensis

                           
                           Staphylococcus pasteuri

                           
                           Streptococcus agalactiae

                           
                           Streptococcus milleri group

                           Streptococcus oralis

                           
                           Streptococcus pyogenes

                           
                           Streptococcus salivarius

                           
                           Streptococcus sanguis
                        
                        
                           Aerobic Gram-negative microorganisms:

                           
                           Acinetobacter baumannii

                           
                           Acinetobacter calcoaceticus

                           
                           Acinetobacter junii

                           
                           Enterobacter aerogenes

                           
                           Enterobacter cloacae

                           
                           Haemophilus parainfluenzae

                           
                           Klebsiella oxytoca

                           
                           Moraxella catarrhalis

                           
                           Moraxella osloensis

                           
                           Morganella morganii

                           
                           Neisseria gonorrhoeae

                           
                           Neisseria meningitidis

                           
                           Pantoea agglomerans

                           
                           Proteus vulgaris

                           
                           Pseudomonas stutzeri

                           
                           Serratia liquefaciens

                           
                           Serratia marcescens

                           
                           Stenotrophomonas maltophilia
                        
                        
                           Anaerobic microorganisms:

                           
                           Clostridium perfringens

                           
                           Peptostreptococcus anaerobius

                           
                           Peptostreptococcus magnus

                           
                           Peptostreptococcus micros

                           
                           Peptostreptococcus prevotii
                        
                        
                           Other microorganisms:

                           
                           Mycobacterium tuberculosis

                           
                           Mycobacterium avium

                           
                           Mycobacterium kansasii

                           
                           Mycobacterium marinum
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         