
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
                  Several in vivo drug interaction studies have shown that ella is predominantly metabolized by CYP3A4.
               
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           Drugs or herbal products that induce CYP3A4 decrease the effectiveness of ella. (7)
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 Changes in Emergency Contraceptive Effectiveness Associated with Co-Administration of Other Products
                     
                        Drugs or herbal products that induce CYP3A4 decrease the plasma concentrations of ella, and may decrease its effectiveness [see Warnings and Precautions (5.4​) and Pharmacokinetics (12.3)]. Avoid co-administration of ella and drugs or herbal products such as:
                        
                           barbiturates
                           bosentan
                           carbamazepine
                           felbamate
                           griseofulvin
                           oxcarbazepine
                           phenytoin
                           rifampin
                           St. John’s Wort
                           topiramate
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 Increase in Plasma Concentrations of ella Associated with Co-Administered Drugs
                     
                        CYP3A4 inhibitors such as itraconazole or ketoconazole increase plasma concentrations of ella 
                           [see Pharmacokinetics (12.3)].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3 Effects of ella on Co-Administered Drugs
                     
                        
                           In vitro studies demonstrated that ella does not induce or inhibit the activity of cytochrome P450 enzymes.
                        P-glycoprotein (P-gp) transporters: In vitro data indicate that ulipristal may be an inhibitor of P-gp at clinically relevant concentrations. Thus, co-administration of ulipristal acetate and P-gp substrates (e.g., dabigatran etexilate, digoxin) may increase the concentration of P-gp substrates. In vivo data suggest that ulipristal acetate 10 mg does not affect P-gp transporters. However, there was no in vivo drug interaction study between ulipristal acetate 30 mg and P-gp transporters [see Pharmacokinetics (12.3)].
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         