
               
               
               
                  12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                     
                        Endogenous androgens, including testosterone and dihydrotestosterone (DHT), are responsible for the normal growth and development of the male sex organs and for the maintenance of secondary sex characteristics. These effects include the growth and maturation of the prostate, seminal vesicles, penis and scrotum; the development of male hair distribution, such as facial, pubic, chest and axillary hair; laryngeal enlargement, vocal cord thickening, alterations in body musculature and fat distribution. Testosterone and DHT are necessary for the normal development of secondary sex characteristics. 
                        Male hypogonadism, a clinical syndrome resulting from insufficient secretion of testosterone, has two main etiologies.  Primary hypogonadism is caused by defects of the gonads, such as Klinefelter’s syndrome or Leydig cell aplasia, whereas secondary hypogonadism is the failure of the hypothalamus or pituitary to produce sufficient gonadotropins (FSH, LH).
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                     
                     
                        No specific pharmacodynamic studies were conducted using FORTESTA.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                     
                        
                           Absorption
                           
FORTESTA delivers physiologic amounts of testosterone, producing serum testosterone concentrations that approximate normal concentrations (> 300 ng/dL) seen in healthy men. 
                        FORTESTA provides continuous transdermal delivery of testosterone for 24 hours following a single application to clean, dry, intact skin of the front and inner thighs (Figure 1).
                        
                        
                           Figure 1: Mean (±SD) Serum Total Testosterone Concentrations on Day 7 in Patients Following FORTESTA Once-Daily Application of 40 mg of Testosterone (N=12)
                        
                        
                           Distribution
                           
Circulating testosterone is primarily bound in the serum to sex hormone-binding globulin (SHBG) and albumin. Approximately 40% of testosterone in plasma is bound to SHBG, 2% remains unbound (free) and the rest is loosely bound to albumin and other proteins.
                        
                           Metabolism
                           
Testosterone is metabolized to various 17-keto steroids through two different pathways. The major active metabolites of testosterone are estradiol and DHT. 
                        
                           Excretion
                           
There is considerable variation in the half-life of testosterone concentration as reported in the literature, ranging from 10 to 100 minutes. About 90% of a dose of testosterone given intramuscularly is excreted in the urine as glucuronic acid and sulfuric acid conjugates of testosterone and its metabolites. About 6% is excreted in the feces, mostly in the unconjugated form. Inactivation of testosterone occurs primarily in the liver.
                        
                           
                              Potential for testosterone transfer
                           
                           
The potential for testosterone transfer from healthy males dosed with FORTESTA to healthy females was evaluated in a placebo-controlled, three-way crossover study. The washout period was approximately 29 days. Six males were treated with either FORTESTA (30 mg testosterone) or placebo to one thigh only. At 2 hours after the application of FORTESTA to males, the females rubbed their forearms for 15 minutes on the thigh of the males. Serum concentrations of testosterone were monitored in females for 24 hours after the transfer procedure. When direct skin-to-skin transfer occurred with FORTESTA mean Cavg increased by 134% and mean Cmax increased by 191%, compared to direct skin-to-skin transfer with placebo. When transfer occurred with FORTESTA while covering a thigh with boxer shorts, mean Cavg decreased by 3% and mean Cmax increased by 2%, compared to direct skin-to-skin transfer with placebo [see Dosage and Administration (2.2)].
                        
                           
                              Effect of showering
                           
                           
In a two-way crossover study, the effects of showering on the pharmacokinetics of total testosterone following application of FORTESTA (30 mg testosterone to each thigh; total 60 mg testosterone) were assessed in 7 hypogonadal males. There were two 7-day treatment phases, with showering 2 hours post FORTESTA application, and without showering on Day 7 of each treatment phase. Showering decreased Cavg by 3% and it increased Cmax by 13% [see Dosage and Administration (2.2)].
                        
                           
                              Effect of hand washing and application site (inner thigh) washing

                              
                           In an open-label, single-dose study, the amount of residual testosterone on the application finger and application site after washing was evaluated in 12 healthy male subjects. Prior to application of FORTESTA, each index finger and each intended application site (left and right front and inner thighs) was wiped using dry sponges to assess baseline skin testosterone. Subjects then used each index finger to rub FORTESTA (40 mg testosterone) onto each inner thigh. On one side, the index finger was immediately wiped using dry sponges to collect residual testosterone. On the other side, each subject washed their hands with liquid soap and warm tap water immediately after drug application, then wiped the index finger using dry sponges to collect residual testosterone. A mean (SD) of 0.002 (0.006) mg of residual testosterone (i.e., 99.8% reduction compared to when hand was not washed) was recovered after washing hands with liquid soap and warm tap water.
                        Two hours after the application of FORTESTA onto each inner thigh, one thigh was wiped using dry sponges.  On the other thigh, the application site was washed with liquid soap and warm tap water, dried, and then wiped using dry sponges. The sponges were assayed for testosterone. A mean (SD) of 0.24 (0.009) mg of residual testosterone (i.e., 94.3% reduction compared to when application site was not washed) was recovered after application site washing.
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           Figure 1: Mean (±SD) Serum Total Testosterone Concentrations on Day 7 in Patients Following FORTESTA Once-Daily Application of 40 mg of Testosterone (N=12)
                           
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         