
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action 
                     
                        Metformin is an antihyperglycemic agent which improves glucose tolerance in patients with type 2 diabetes, lowering both basal and postprandial plasma glucose. Its pharmacologic mechanisms of action are different from other classes of oral antihyperglycemic agents. Metformin decreases hepatic glucose production, decreases intestinal absorption of glucose, and improves insulin sensitivity by increasing peripheral glucose uptake and utilization. Unlike sulfonylureas, metformin does not produce hypoglycemia in either patients with type 2 diabetes or normal subjects (except in special circumstances) and does not cause hyperinsulinemia. With metformin therapy, insulin secretion remains unchanged while fasting insulin levels and day-long plasma insulin response may actually decrease [see Warnings and Precautions (5.10)].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        
                           Absorption and Bioavailability
                        
                        Two pharmacokinetic studies have been performed in healthy volunteers to evaluate the bioavailability of Riomet in comparison with the commercially available metformin tablets under fasting and fed conditions (study 1 and study 2). A third pharmacokinetic study (study 3) assessed effects of food on absorption of Riomet .
                        
                        The rate and extent of absorption of Riomet was found to be comparable to that of Metformin tablets under fasting or fed conditions (see Table 2).
                        


                        


T-test product (Riomet)
                        R-reference product (metformin tablets)
                        The food-effect study (study 3) assessed the effects of a high fat/high calorie meal and a low fat/low calorie meal on the bioavailability of Riomet in comparison with administration in the fasted state, in healthy volunteers. The extent of absorption was increased by 21% and 17% with the low fat/low calorie meal and the high fat/high calorie meal, respectively, compared with the administration in the fasted state. The rate and extent of absorption with high fat/high calorie and low fat/ low calorie meal were similar. The mean t max was 2.5 hours under fasting conditions as compared to 3.9 hours with both low fat/ low calorie meal and high fat/high calorie meals (see Table 3).
                        


                        


Studies using single oral doses of metformin tablet formulations 500 mg to 1500 mg, and 850 mg to 2550 mg, indicate that there is a lack of dose proportionality with increasing doses, which is due to decreased absorption rather than an alteration in elimination.
                        
                           Distribution
                        
                        The apparent volume of distribution (V/F) of metformin following single oral doses of metformin 850 mg averaged 654 ± 358 L. Metformin is negligibly bound to plasma proteins, in contrast to sulfonylureas, which are more than 90% protein bound. Metformin partitions into erythrocytes, most likely as a function of time. At usual clinical doses and dosing schedules of metformin, steady state plasma concentrations of metformin are reached within 24 to 48 hours and are generally < 1 µg/mL. During controlled clinical trials of metformin, maximum metformin plasma levels did not exceed 5 µg/mL, even at maximum doses.
                        
                           Metabolism and Elimination
                        
                        Intravenous single-dose studies in normal subjects demonstrate that metformin is excreted unchanged in the urine and does not undergo hepatic metabolism (no metabolites have been identified in humans) nor biliary excretion. Renal clearance (see Table 4) is approximately 3.5 times greater than creatinine clearance, which indicates that tubular secretion is the major route of metformin elimination. Following oral administration, approximately 90% of the absorbed drug is eliminated via the renal route within the first 24 hours, with a plasma elimination half-life of approximately 6.2 hours. In blood, the elimination half-life is approximately 17.6 hours, suggesting that the erythrocyte mass may be a compartment of distribution.
                        
                           Special Populations
                        
                        
                           Patients with Type 2 Diabetes
                        
                        In the presence of normal renal function, there are no differences between single- or multiple-dose pharmacokinetics of metformin between patients with type 2 diabetes and normal subjects (see Table 4), nor is there any accumulation of metformin in either group at usual clinical doses.
                        
                           Renal Insufficiency
                        
                        In patients with decreased renal function (based on measured creatinine clearance), the plasma and blood half-life of metformin is prolonged and the renal clearance is decreased in proportion to the decrease in creatinine clearance (see Table 4) [see Warnings and Precautions (5.3)].
                        
                           Hepatic Insufficiency
                        
                        No pharmacokinetic studies of metformin have been conducted in patients with hepatic insufficiency.
                        
                           Geriatrics
                        
                        Limited data from controlled pharmacokinetic studies of metformin in healthy elderly subjects suggest that total plasma clearance of metformin is decreased, the half-life is prolonged, and C max is increased, compared to healthy young subjects. From these data, it appears that the change in metformin pharmacokinetics with aging is primarily accounted for by a change in renal function (see Table 4). Riomet (metformin hydrochloride oral solution) treatment should not be initiated in patients ≥ 80 years of age unless measurement of creatinine clearance demonstrates that renal function is not reduced [see Warnings and Precautions (5.3) and Dosage and Administration (2.1)]. 
                        


                        



                           a-All doses given fasting except the first 18 doses of the multiple dose studies
                        
                           b-Peak plasma concentration
                        
                           c-Time to peak plasma concentration
                        
                           d-Combined results (average means) of five studies: mean age 32 years (range 23 - 59 years)
                        
                           e-Kinetic study done following dose 19, given fasting
                        
                           f-Elderly subjects, mean age 71 years (range 65 - 81 years)
                        
                           g-CLcr = creatinine clearance normalized to body surface area of 1.73 m2
                        
                        
                           Pediatrics
                        
                        After administration of a single oral metformin 500 mg dose with food, geometric mean metformin C max and AUC differed less than 5% between pediatric type 2 diabetic patients (12 to 16 years of age) and gender- and weight-matched healthy adults (20 to 45 years of age), all with normal renal function.
                        
                           Gender
                        
                        Metformin pharmacokinetic parameters did not differ significantly between normal subjects and patients with type 2 diabetes when analyzed according to gender (males = 19, females = 16). Similarly, in controlled clinical studies in patients with type 2 diabetes, the antihyperglycemic effect of metformin was comparable in males and females.
                        
                           Race
                        
                        No studies of metformin pharmacokinetic parameters according to race have been performed. In controlled clinical studies of metformin in patients with type 2 diabetes, the antihyperglycemic effect was comparable in whites (n = 249), blacks (n = 51), and Hispanics (n = 24).
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         