
                     
                     
                     Drug Interactions
                     
                        Ceftriaxone – see CONTRAINDICATIONS
                        
                        Caution is advised when administering Potassium Chloride in Lactated Ringer’s and 5% Dextrose Injection, USP to patients treated with drugs that may increase the risk of sodium and fluid retention, such as corticosteroids.  
                        Caution is advised when administering Potassium Chloride in Lactated Ringer’s and 5% Dextrose Injection, USP to patients treated with drugs for which renal elimination is pH dependent.  Due to the alkalinizing action of lactate (formation of bicarbonate), Potassium Chloride in Lactated Ringer’s and 5% Dextrose Injection, USP may interfere with the elimination of such drugs.

                        
                        
                           Renal clearance of acidic drugs such as salicylates and barbiturates may be increased.
                           Renal clearance of alkaline drugs, such as sympathomimetics (e.g., ephedrine, pseudoephedrine) and dextroamphetamine (dexamphetamine) sulfate, may be decreased.
                           
                        
                        Renal clearance of lithium may also be increased.  Caution is advised when administering Potassium Chloride in Lactated Ringer’s and 5% Dextrose Injection, USP to patients treated with lithium.
                        Because of its potassium content, administration of Potassium Chloride in Lactated Ringer’s and 5% Dextrose Injection, USP should be avoided in patients treated with agents or products that can cause hyperkalemia or increase the risk of hyperkalemia, such as potassium sparing diuretics (amiloride, spironolactone, triamterene), with ACE inhibitors, angiotensin II receptor antagonists, or the immunosuppressants tacrolimus and cyclosporine.  Administration of potassium in patients treated with such medications can produce severe and potentially fatal hyperkalemia, particularly in patients with severe renal insufficiency.  
                        Caution is advised when administering Potassium Chloride in Lactated Ringer’s and 5% Dextrose Injection, USP to patients treated with thiazide diuretics or vitamin D, as these can increase the risk of hypercalcemia.
                     
                     
                  
               