
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
                  Data from a drug-drug interaction study involving 10 mg of amlodipine and 80 mg of atorvastatin in healthy subjects indicate that the pharmacokinetics of amlodipine are not altered when the drugs are co-administered. The effect of amlodipine on the pharmacokinetics of atorvastatin showed no effect on the Cmax: 91% (90% confidence interval: 80 to 103%), but the AUC of atorvastatin increased by 18% (90% confidence interval: 109 to 127%) in the presence of amlodipine, which is not clinically meaningful.
                  No drug interaction studies have been conducted with amlodipine besylate and atorvastatin calcium tablets and other drugs, although studies have been conducted in the individual amlodipine and atorvastatin components, as described below:
                  
                     Amlodipine
                  
               
               
               
                  
                     
                        


                        



                           Other Lipid-Lowering Medications: Increased risk of myopathy (7).
                           Rifampin: Take at same time as amlodipine besylate and atorvastatin calcium tablets (7.9).
                           Digoxin: Monitor digoxin levels (7.10).
                           Oral Contraceptives: Norethindrone and ethinyl estradiol may be increased (7.11).
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1  Impact of Other Drugs on Amlodipine
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 CYP3A Inhibitors
                              
                              Co-administration with CYP3A inhibitors (moderate and strong) results in increased systemic exposure to amlodipine and may require dose reduction. Monitor for symptoms of hypotension and edema when amlodipine is co-administered with CYP3A inhibitors to determine the need for dose adjustment [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 CYP3A Inducers
                              
                              No information is available on the quantitative effects of CYP3A inducers on amlodipine. Blood pressure should be closely monitored when amlodipine is co-administered with CYP3A inducers.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Sildenafil
                              
                              Monitor for hypotension when sildenafil is co-administered with amlodipine [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.2)].
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2  Impact of Amlodipine on Other Drugs
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Immunosuppressants
                              
                              Amlodipine may increase the systemic exposure of cyclosporine or tacrolimus when co-administered. Frequent monitoring of trough blood levels of cyclosporine and tacrolimus is recommended and adjust the dose when appropriate [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Atorvastatin
                                    
                                    The risk of myopathy during treatment with statins is increased with concurrent administration of fibric acid derivatives, lipid-modifying doses of niacin, cyclosporine, or strong CYP3A4 inhibitors (e.g., clarithromycin, HIV protease inhibitors, and itraconazole) [see Warnings and Precautions (5.1) and Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3  Strong Inhibitors of CYP3A4
                     
                        Atorvastatin is metabolized by CYP3A4. Concomitant administration of atorvastatin with strong inhibitors of CYP3A4 can lead to increases in plasma concentrations of atorvastatin. The extent of interaction and potentiation of effects depend on the variability of effect on CYP3A4.
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Clarithromycin: Atorvastatin AUC was significantly increased with concomitant administration of atorvastatin 80 mg with clarithromycin (500 mg twice daily) compared to that of atorvastatin alone [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)]. Therefore, in patients taking clarithromycin, avoid atorvastatin doses >20 mg [see Warnings and Precautions, Skeletal Muscle (5.1) and Dosage and Administration (2)].
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Combination of Protease Inhibitors: Atorvastatin AUC was significantly increased with concomitant administration of atorvastatin with several combinations of HIV protease inhibitors, as well as with the hepatitis C protease inhibitor telaprevir,  compared to that of atorvastatin alone [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)]. Therefore, in patients taking the HIV protease inhibitor tipranavir plus ritonavir, or the hepatitis C protease inhibitor telaprevir, concomitant use of atorvastatin should be avoided. In patients taking the HIV protease inhibitor lopinavir plus ritonavir, caution should be used when prescribing atorvastatin and the lowest dose necessary should be used. In patients taking the HIV protease inhibitors saquinavir plus ritonavir, darunavir plus ritonavir, fosamprenavir, or fosamprenavir plus ritonavir, the dose of atorvastatin should not exceed 20 mg [see Warnings and Precautions (5.1) and Dosage and Administration (2)]. In patients taking the HIV protease inhibitor nelfinavir or the hepatitis C protease inhibitor boceprevir, the dose of atorvastatin should not exceed 40 mg and close clinical monitoring is recommended.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Itraconazole
                                 : Atorvastatin AUC was significantly increased with concomitant administration of atorvastatin 40 mg and itraconazole 200 mg [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)]. Therefore, in patients taking itraconazole, avoid atorvastatin doses >20 mg [see Warnings and Precautions (5.1) and Dosage and Administration (2)]. 
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4  Grapefruit Juice
                     
                        Contains one or more components that inhibit CYP3A4 and can increase plasma concentrations of atorvastatin, especially with excessive grapefruit juice consumption (>1.2 liters per day).
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.5  Cyclosporine
                     
                        Atorvastatin and atorvastatin-metabolites are substrates of the OATP1B1 transporter. Inhibitors of the OATP1B1 (e.g., cyclosporine) can increase the bioavailability of atorvastatin. Atorvastatin AUC was significantly increased with concomitant administration of atorvastatin 10 mg and cyclosporine 5.2 mg/kg/day compared to that of atorvastatin alone [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)]. The co-administration of atorvastatin with cyclosporine should be avoided [see Warnings and Precautions (5.1)].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.6  Gemfibrozil
                     
                        Because of an increased risk of myopathy/rhabdomyolysis when HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors are co-administered with gemfibrozil, avoid concomitant administration of atorvastatin with gemfibrozil [see 
                              Warnings and Precautions (5.1)
                           ].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.7  Other Fibrates
                     
                        The risk of myopathy during treatment with HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors is increased with concurrent administration of other fibrates. [see 
                              Warnings and Precautions (5.1)
                           ].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.8  Niacin
                     
                        The risk of skeletal muscle effects may be enhanced when atorvastatin is used in combination with niacin; consider a reduction in atorvastatin dosage in this setting [see 
                              Warnings and Precautions (5.1)
                           ].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.9  Rifampin or other Inducers of CYP3A4
                     
                        Concomitant administration of atorvastatin with inducers of CYP3A4 (e.g., efavirenz, rifampin) can lead to variable reductions in plasma concentrations of atorvastatin. Because of the dual interaction mechanism of rifampin, simultaneous co-administration of atorvastatin with rifampin is recommended, as delayed administration of atorvastatin after administration of rifampin has been associated with a significant reduction in atorvastatin plasma concentrations.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.10  Digoxin
                     
                        When multiple doses of atorvastatin and digoxin were co-administered, steady-state plasma digoxin concentrations increased by approximately 20%. Monitor digoxin levels.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.11  Oral Contraceptives
                     
                        Co-administration of atorvastatin and an oral contraceptive increased AUC values for norethindrone and ethinyl estradiol) [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)]. Consider these increases when selecting an oral contraceptive for a woman taking amlodipine besylate and atorvastatin calcium tablets.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.12  Warfarin
                     
                        Atorvastatin had no clinically significant effect on prothrombin time when administered to patients receiving chronic warfarin treatment.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.13  Colchicine
                     
                        Cases of myopathy, including rhabdomyolysis, have been reported with atorvastatin co-administered with colchicine.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         