


Drug Interactions:
When NOLVADEX is used in combination with coumarin-type anticoagulants, a significant increase in anticoagulant effect may occur.  Where such coadministration exists, careful monitoring of the patient's prothrombin time is recommended. In the NSABP P-1 trial, women who required coumarin-type anticoagulants for any reason were ineligible for participation in the trial (See CONTRAINDICATIONS).CONTRAINDICATIONS).There is an increased risk of thromboembolic events occurring when cytotoxic agents are used in combination with NOLVADEX.Tamoxifen reduced letrozole plasma concentrations by 37%.  The effect of tamoxifen on metabolism and excretion of other antineoplastic drugs, such as cyclophosphamide and other drugs that require mixed function oxidases for activation, is not known.  Tamoxifen and N-desmethyl tamoxifen plasma concentrations have been shown to be reduced when coadministered with rifampin or aminoglutethimide.  Induction of CYP3A4-mediated metabolism is considered to be the mechanism by which these reductions occur; other CYP3A4 inducing agents have not been studied to confirm this effect.One patient receiving NOLVADEX with concomitant phenobarbital exhibited a steady state serum level of tamoxifen lower than that observed for other patients (ie, 26 ng/mL vs. mean value of 122 ng/mL).  However, the clinical significance of this finding is not known. Rifampin induced the metabolism of tamoxifen and significantly reduced the plasma concentrations of tamoxifen in 10 patients. Aminoglutethimide reduces tamoxifen and N-desmethyl tamoxifen plasma concentrations. Medroxyprogesterone reduces plasma concentrations of N-desmethyl, but not tamoxifen. Concomitant bromocriptine therapy has been shown to elevate serum tamoxifen and N-desmethyl tamoxifen.Based on clinical and pharmacokinetic results from the anastrozole adjuvant trial, NOLVADEX should not be administered with anastrozole (see CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY – Drug-Drug Interactions section).CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY – Drug-Drug Interactions section).


