
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Carvedilol is a racemic mixture in which nonselective β‑adrenoreceptor blocking activity is present in the S(-) enantiomer and α1‑adrenergic blocking activity is present in both R(+) and S(-) enantiomers at equal potency. Carvedilol has no intrinsic sympathomimetic activity.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Heart Failure and Left Ventricular Dysfunction Following Myocardial Infarction
                              
                           
                           
                              The basis for the beneficial effects of carvedilol in patients with heart failure and in patients with left ventricular dysfunction following an acute myocardial infarction is not known. The concentration-response relationship for β1‑blockade following administration of COREG CR is equivalent (±20%) to immediate-release carvedilol tablets.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Hypertension
                              
                           
                           
                              The mechanism by which β‑blockade produces an antihypertensive effect has not been established.
                              β‑adrenoreceptor blocking activity has been demonstrated in animal and human studies showing that carvedilol (1) reduces cardiac output in normal subjects; (2) reduces exercise- and/or isoproterenol-induced tachycardia; and (3) reduces reflex orthostatic tachycardia. Significant β‑adrenoreceptor blocking effect is usually seen within 1 hour of drug administration.
                              α1‑adrenoreceptor blocking activity has been demonstrated in human and animal studies, showing that carvedilol (1) attenuates the pressor effects of phenylephrine; (2) causes vasodilation; and (3) reduces peripheral vascular resistance. These effects contribute to the reduction of blood pressure and usually are seen within 30 minutes of drug administration.
                              Due to the α1‑receptor blocking activity of carvedilol, blood pressure is lowered more in the standing than in the supine position, and symptoms of postural hypotension (1.8%), including rare instances of syncope, can occur. Following oral administration, when postural hypotension has occurred, it has been transient and is uncommon when immediate-release carvedilol is administered with food at the recommended starting dose and titration increments are closely followed [see Dosage and Administration (2)].
                              In a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial, the β1‑blocking effect of COREG CR, as measured by heart rate response to submaximal bicycle ergometry, was shown to be equivalent to that observed with immediate-release carvedilol at steady state in adult subjects with essential hypertension.
                              In hypertensive subjects with normal renal function, therapeutic doses of carvedilol decreased renal vascular resistance with no change in glomerular filtration rate or renal plasma flow. Changes in excretion of sodium, potassium, uric acid, and phosphorus in hypertensive patients with normal renal function were similar after carvedilol and placebo.
                              Carvedilol has little effect on plasma catecholamines, plasma aldosterone, or electrolyte levels, but it does significantly reduce plasma renin activity when given for at least 4 weeks. It also increases levels of atrial natriuretic peptide.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Absorption
                              
                           
                           
                              Carvedilol is rapidly and extensively absorbed following oral administration of immediate-release carvedilol tablets, with an absolute bioavailability of approximately 25% to 35% due to a significant degree of first-pass metabolism. COREG CR extended-release capsules have approximately 85% of the bioavailability of immediate-release carvedilol tablets. For corresponding dosages [see Dosage and Administration (2)], the exposure (AUC, Cmax, trough concentration) of carvedilol as COREG CR extended-release capsules is equivalent to those of immediate-release carvedilol tablets when both are administered with food. The absorption of carvedilol from COREG CR is slower and more prolonged compared with the immediate-release carvedilol tablet with peak concentrations achieved approximately 5 hours after administration. Plasma concentrations of carvedilol increase in a dose-proportional manner over the dosage range of COREG CR 10 to 80 mg. Within-subject and between-subject variability for AUC and Cmax is similar for COREG CR and immediate-release carvedilol.
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    Effect of Food
                                 
                                 
                                    Administration of COREG CR with a high-fat meal resulted in increases (~20%) in AUC and Cmax compared with COREG CR administered with a standard meal. Decreases in AUC (27%) and Cmax (43%) were observed when COREG CR was administered in the fasted state compared with administration after a standard meal. COREG CR should be taken with food.
                                    In a trial with adult subjects, sprinkling the contents of the COREG CR capsule on applesauce did not appear to have a significant effect on overall exposure (AUC) compared with administration of the intact capsule following a standard meal but did result in a decrease in Cmax (18%).
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Distribution
                              
                           
                           
                              Carvedilol is more than 98% bound to plasma proteins, primarily with albumin. The plasma-protein binding is independent of concentration over the therapeutic range. Carvedilol is a basic, lipophilic compound with a steady-state volume of distribution of approximately 115 L, indicating substantial distribution into extravascular tissues.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Metabolism and Excretion
                              
                           
                           
                              Carvedilol is extensively metabolized. Following oral administration of radiolabelled carvedilol to healthy volunteers, carvedilol accounted for only about 7% of the total radioactivity in plasma as measured by AUC. Less than 2% of the dose was excreted unchanged in the urine. Carvedilol is metabolized primarily by aromatic ring oxidation and glucuronidation. The oxidative metabolites are further metabolized by conjugation via glucuronidation and sulfation. The metabolites of carvedilol are excreted primarily via the bile into the feces. Demethylation and hydroxylation at the phenol ring produce 3 active metabolites with β‑receptor blocking activity. Based on preclinical studies, the 4'-hydroxyphenyl metabolite is approximately 13 times more potent than carvedilol for β‑blockade.
                              Compared with carvedilol, the 3 active metabolites exhibit weak vasodilating activity. Plasma concentrations of the active metabolites are about one-tenth of those observed for carvedilol and have pharmacokinetics similar to the parent.
                              Carvedilol undergoes stereoselective first-pass metabolism with plasma levels of R(+)-carvedilol approximately 2 to 3 times higher than S(-)-carvedilol following oral administration of COREG CR in healthy subjects. Apparent clearance is 90 L/h and 213 L/h for R(+)- and S(-)-carvedilol, respectively.
                              The primary P450 enzymes responsible for the metabolism of both R(+) and S(-)-carvedilol in human liver microsomes were CYP2D6 and CYP2C9 and to a lesser extent CYP3A4, 2C19, 1A2, and 2E1. CYP2D6 is thought to be the major enzyme in the 4’- and 5’-hydroxylation of carvedilol, with a potential contribution from 3A4. CYP2C9 is thought to be of primary importance in the O-methylation pathway of S(-)-carvedilol.
                              Carvedilol is subject to the effects of genetic polymorphism with poor metabolizers of debrisoquin (a marker for cytochrome P450 2D6) exhibiting 2- to 3-fold higher plasma concentrations of R(+)-carvedilol compared with extensive metabolizers. In contrast, plasma levels of S(-)-carvedilol are increased only about 20% to 25% in poor metabolizers, indicating this enantiomer is metabolized to a lesser extent by cytochrome P450 2D6 than R(+)-carvedilol. The pharmacokinetics of carvedilol do not appear to be different in poor metabolizers of S-mephenytoin (patients deficient in cytochrome P450 2C19).
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.4 Specific Populations
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Heart Failure
                              
                           
                           
                              Following administration of immediate-release carvedilol tablets, steady‑state plasma concentrations of carvedilol and its enantiomers increased proportionally over the dose range in subjects with heart failure. Compared with healthy subjects, subjects with heart failure had increased mean AUC and Cmax values for carvedilol and its enantiomers, with up to 50% to 100% higher values observed in 6 subjects with NYHA class IV heart failure. The mean apparent terminal elimination half‑life for carvedilol was similar to that observed in healthy subjects.
                              For corresponding dose levels [see Dosage and Administration (2)], the steady-state pharmacokinetics of carvedilol (AUC, Cmax, trough concentrations) observed after administration of COREG CR to subjects with chronic heart failure (mild, moderate, and severe) were similar to those observed after administration of immediate-release carvedilol tablets.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Hypertension
                              
                           
                           
                              For corresponding dose levels [see Dosage and Administration (2)], the pharmacokinetics (AUC, Cmax, and trough concentrations) observed with administration of COREG CR were equivalent (±20%) to those observed with immediate-release carvedilol tablets following repeat dosing in subjects with essential hypertension.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Geriatric
                              
                           
                           
                              Plasma levels of carvedilol average about 50% higher in the elderly compared with young subjects after administration of immediate-release carvedilol.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Hepatic Impairment
                              
                           
                           
                              No trials have been performed with COREG CR in subjects with hepatic impairment. Compared with healthy subjects, subjects with severe liver impairment (cirrhosis) exhibit a 4- to 7-fold increase in carvedilol levels. Carvedilol is contraindicated in patients with severe liver impairment.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Renal Impairment
                              
                           
                           
                              No trials have been performed with COREG CR in subjects with renal impairment. Although carvedilol is metabolized primarily by the liver, plasma concentrations of carvedilol have been reported to be increased in patients with renal impairment after dosing with immediate-release carvedilol. Based on mean AUC data, approximately 40% to 50% higher plasma concentrations of carvedilol were observed in hypertensive subjects with moderate to severe renal impairment compared with a control group of hypertensive subjects with normal renal function. However, the ranges of AUC values were similar for both groups. Changes in mean peak plasma levels were less pronounced, approximately 12% to 26% higher in subjects with impaired renal function.
                              Consistent with its high degree of plasma protein binding, carvedilol does not appear to be cleared significantly by hemodialysis.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.5 Drug-Drug Interactions
                     
                        Since carvedilol undergoes substantial oxidative metabolism, the metabolism and pharmacokinetics of carvedilol may be affected by induction or inhibition of cytochrome P450 enzymes.
                        The following drug interaction trials were performed with immediate-release carvedilol tablets.
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Amiodarone
                              
                           
                           
                              In a pharmacokinetic trial conducted in 106 Japanese subjects with heart failure, coadministration of small loading and maintenance doses of amiodarone with carvedilol resulted in at least a 2-fold increase in the steady-state trough concentrations of S(-)-carvedilol [see Drug Interactions (7.6)].
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Cimetidine
                              
                           
                           
                              In a pharmacokinetic trial conducted in 10 healthy male subjects, cimetidine (1,000 mg/day) increased the steady-state AUC of carvedilol by 30% with no change in Cmax 
                                 [see Drug Interactions (7.5)].
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Digoxin
                              
                           
                           
                              Following concomitant administration of carvedilol (25 mg once daily) and digoxin (0.25 mg once daily) for 14 days, steady-state AUC and trough concentrations of digoxin were increased by 14% and 16%, respectively, in 12 hypertensive subjects [see Drug Interactions (7.4)].
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Glyburide
                              
                           
                           
                              In 12 healthy subjects, combined administration of carvedilol (25 mg once daily) and a single dose of glyburide did not result in a clinically relevant pharmacokinetic interaction for either compound.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Hydrochlorothiazide
                              
                           
                           
                              A single oral dose of carvedilol 25 mg did not alter the pharmacokinetics of a single oral dose of hydrochlorothiazide 25 mg in 12 subjects with hypertension. Likewise, hydrochlorothiazide had no effect on the pharmacokinetics of carvedilol.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Rifampin
                              
                           
                           
                              In a pharmacokinetic trial conducted in 8 healthy male subjects, rifampin (600 mg daily for 12 days) decreased the AUC and Cmax of carvedilol by about 70% [see Drug Interactions (7.5)].
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Torsemide
                              
                           
                           
                              In a trial of 12 healthy subjects, combined oral administration of carvedilol 25 mg once daily and torsemide 5 mg once daily for 5 days did not result in any significant differences in their pharmacokinetics compared with administration of the drugs alone.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Warfarin
                              
                           
                           
                              Carvedilol (12.5 mg twice daily) did not have an effect on the steady-state prothrombin time ratios and did not alter the pharmacokinetics of R(+)- and S(-)-warfarin following concomitant administration with warfarin in 9 healthy volunteers.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         