
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           Elevated carbamazepine levels have been reported in postmarketing experience when cefixime is administered concomitantly. (7.1)
                           
                           Increased prothrombin time, with or without clinical bleeding, has been reported when cefixime is administered concomitantly with warfarin and anticoagulants. (7.2)
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 Carbamazepine
                     
                        

                        Elevated carbamazepine levels have been reported in postmarketing experience when cefixime is administered concomitantly. Drug monitoring may be of assistance in detecting alterations in carbamazepine plasma concentrations.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 Warfarin and Anticoagulants
                     
                        

                        Increased prothrombin time, with or without clinical bleeding, has been reported when cefixime is administered concomitantly.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3 Drug/Laboratory Test Interactions
                     
                        

                        A false-positive reaction for ketones in the urine may occur with tests using nitroprusside but not with those using nitroferricyanide.

                           
The administration of cefixime may result in a false-positive reaction for glucose in the urine using Clinitest®**, Benedict’s solution, or Fehling’s solution. It is recommended that glucose tests based on enzymatic glucose oxidase reactions (such as Clinistix®** or TesTape®**) be used. A false-positive direct Coombs test has been reported during treatment with other cephalosporins; therefore, it should be recognized that a positive Coombs test may be due to the drug.

                           
** Clinitest® and Clinistix® are registered trademarks of Ames Division, Miles Laboratories, Inc. Tes-Tape® is a registered trademark of Eli Lilly and Company.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         