
               
               
               
                  
                     CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
                     
    As a consequence of the discovery of IgE and the development of methods to identify and quantify anti-allergen IgE levels, interest in recent years has centered around the utilization of in vivo and in vitro diagnostic procedures.3,5  
    The most clinically relevant mechanism of mast cell mediator release results from the cross-linking of plasma membrane receptor-bound IgE molecules by specific antigens.  In vitro this process is temperature dependent, requires the presence of divalent cations, and also requires activation of a cell membrane-associated serine esterase.  Another immunologic mechanism for mast cell degranulation is mediated by complement-derived anaphylatoxins C3a, C4a and C5a.  These low molecular weight peptides presumably stimulate degranulation of mast cells by binding to distinct plasma membrane receptor(s) and are active mast cell secretagogues in human skin in vivo.  Several naturally occurring and exogenous agents are also capable of degranulating and/or stimulating mast cells by nonimmunologic mechanisms that may differ from those initiated by antigen-IgE binding.
    Stimulation of mast cells leads to the release and generation of a variety of pharmacologically active soluble factors that produce immediate hypersensitivity reactions.  These factors include both preformed substances as well as unstored mediators that are produced upon stimulation of these cells.  Some mediators are rapidly liberated from mast cell granules (e.g., histamine), whereas others remain granule-associated after release from the cell (e.g., heparin).  Products of arachidonic acid metabolism are rapidly produced and released from mast cells following stimulation.  In addition to immediate reactions mediated by endogenous mast cell-derived pharmacologic agents, selected patients demonstrate later reactions (i.e., late-phase reactions) at sites of mast cell degranulation.  These reactions begin 2 to 8 hours after mediator release and are characterized by granulocyte-rich infiltrates that are followed by accumulations of mononuclear cells.  Clinically these late-phase reactions present as inflammatory, infiltrated plaques or nodules.17   
    Patients who react to a small quantity of antigen by skin testing, or have a high RAST score, can be classified as highly sensitive.  Those who react only to large quantities of antigen, or have a low RAST score, can be classified as less sensitive.  It would appear that there is at least a 50,000-fold range between the most and least sensitive individuals.  On the other hand, certain patients who do not appear to have elevated quantities of specific anti-allergen IgE, RAST negative, do have positive skin tests and have symptoms of allergic rhinitis.  These patients are considerably less sensitive than patients with detectable levels of specific IgE antibody.6
                     
    The mode of action of immunotherapy with allergenic extracts is still under investigation.  Increasing subcutaneous injection doses of allergenic extract into patients with allergic disease have been shown to result in both humoral and cellular changes including the production of allergen specific IgG antibodies, the suppression of histamine release from target cells, decrease in circulating levels of antigen specific IgE antibody over long periods of time and suppression of peripheral blood T-lymphocyte cell responses to antigen.10, 14, 15
                     
    Of ten patients with clinical symptoms from exposure to cats, the ID50EAL skin test results were as follows:  Mean sum puncture erythema – 70.4 mm; Range 51-105 mm; Mean sum puncture wheal – 15.6 mm; Range 10-22 mm.  Mean intradermal dose in BAU for 50 mm sum of erythema response BAU50 0.14 BAU/ml; Range 0.06-0.19 BAU/ml.  Using Histamine Phosphate, 2.75 mg/ml containing 1 mg histamine base: Mean sum puncture erythema – 48.5 mm; Range 29-70 mm.

                     

                  
               
               
            
         