
                     
                     
                     
                        Chromium: It has been noted that concomitant administration of antacids interferes with chromium absorption whereas aspirin and vitamin C administration potentiate absorption (Ref). However, the overall interference and potentiation of chromium absorption in these cases is minimal and not of clinically relevant concern.
Chromium may compete for one of the binding sites on the iron transport protein, transferrin (Lukaski et al., 1996). Serum iron concentrations and serum ferritin concentrations were unchanged by either resistive training or chromium picolinate supplementation. The high-dose chromium picolinate supplementation for 12 wk did not influence hematologic indexes or indexes of iron metabolism (Campbell, 1997).
Administration of 100 mg vitamin C with 1 mg of chromium resulted in higher plasma levels of chromium than with 1 mg of chromium alone (Food and Nutrition Board, 2001).
Diets high in simple sugars (e.g. sucrose), compared to diets high in complex carbohydrates (e.g. whole grains) increase urinary chromium excretion in adults. This effect may be related is a cofactor required of four enzymes that are involved in carboxylation reactions (acetyl-CoA carboxylase, pyruvate carboxylase, methylcrotonyl-CoA carboxylase, and propionyl- CoA carboxylase) (Dakshinamurti and Cheah-Tan 1968, Dakshinamurti et al., 1970) Biotin has been shown to stimulate hepatic glucokinase, increase pancreatic insulin production through glucokinase mRNA expression and enhance glucose uptake in muscle cells (Spence and Koudelka, 1984, Rodriguez et al., 2001, Trumble et al., 1991). It has been reported that biotin may also decrease expression of phosphoenolpryuvate carboxykinase, an enzyme necessary to down regulate hepatic gluconeogenisis (Dakshinamurti and Li, 1994). In animal and human clinical studies, biotin has been shown to enhance glucokinase activity and lower blood glucose (Romero-Navaro et al., 1999, Furukawa, 1999). Biotin appears to potentiate glucose-induced insulin release but does not appear to directly affect insulin release (Yoshikawa et al., 2002). /Symptoms of overt biotin deficiency include hair loss and a scaly red rash around the eyes, nose, mouth, and genital area. Neurological symptoms in adults have included depression, lethargy, hallucination, and numbness and tingling of the extremities. Individuals with hereditary disorders of biotin metabolism resulting in functional biotin deficiency have evidence of impaired immune system function, including increased susceptibility to bacterial and fungal infections. Zhang et al. (1997) reported low blood biotin levels in 43 non-insulin dependent diabetes mellitus patients with impaired utilization of glucose.
The AI for biotin assumes that current average intakes of biotin (35 mcg to 60 mcg/day) are meeting the dietary requirement (FNB-IOM, 1998). The IOM currently recommends an AI level for biotin of 35-60 μg/day for adults. (Food and Nutrition Board, 2000). The Daily Value (DV) for biotin in food and supplement labels is 300 μg per day. Based on current research a Tolerable Upper Limit for biotin has not been established by the IOM.
Folic Acid: Folic Acid is one of the important hematopoetic agents necessary for proper regeneration of the blood-forming elements and their function. Folic acid is a precursor of a large family of compounds which serve as coenzymes in carbon transfer reactions.
These reactions are required for the synthesis of purine and pyrimidine bases, interconversion of glycine and serine, biosynthesis of methionine methyl groups and degradation of histidine. Additionally, folic acid increases jejunal glycolytic enzymes and is involved in the desaturation and hydroxylation of long-chain fatty acids in the brain. A deficiency in folic acid results in megaloblastic anemia.

                        
                     
                  
               