
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Pharmacokinetics and Drug Metabolism
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Absorption
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Oral Bioavailability
                                 
                                    

                                    Maximal plasma cefdinir concentrations occur 2 to 4 hours postdose following capsule or suspension administration. Plasma cefdinir concentrations increase with dose, but the increases are less than dose-proportional from 300 mg (7 mg/kg) to 600 mg (14 mg/kg). Following administration of suspension to healthy adults, cefdinir bioavailability is 120% relative to capsules. Estimated bioavailability of cefdinir capsules is 21% following administration of a 300 mg capsule dose, and 16% following administration of a 600 mg capsule dose. Estimated absolute bioavailability of cefdinir suspension is 25%. Cefdinir oral suspension of 250 mg/5 mL strength was shown to be bioequivalent to the 125 mg/5 mL strength in healthy adults under fasting conditions.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Effect of Food
                                 
                                    

                                    The Cmax and AUC of cefdinir from the capsules are reduced by 16% and 10%, respectively, when given with a high-fat meal. In adults given the 250 mg/5 mL oral suspension with a high-fat meal, the Cmax and AUC of cefdinir are reduced by 44% and 33%, respectively. The magnitude of these reductions is not likely to be clinically significant because the safety and efficacy studies of oral suspension in pediatric patients were conducted without regard to food intake. Therefore, cefdinir may be taken without regard to food.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Cefdinir Capsules
                                 
                                    Cefdinir plasma concentrations and pharmacokinetic parameter values following administration of single 300 and 600 mg oral doses of cefdinir to adult subjects are presented in the following table:
                                    


                                 



                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Cefdinir Suspension
                                 
                                    Cefdinir plasma concentrations and pharmacokinetic parameter values following administration of single 7 and 14 mg/kg oral doses of cefdinir to pediatric subjects (age 6 months to 12 years) are presented in the following table:
                                    


                                    




                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Multiple Dosing
                                 
                                    

                                    Cefdinir does not accumulate in plasma following once- or twice-daily administration to subjects with normal renal function.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Distribution
                           
                              

                              The mean volume of distribution (Vdarea) of cefdinir in adult subjects is 0.35 L/kg (±0.29); in pediatric subjects (age 6 months to 12 years), cefdinir Vdarea is 0.67 L/kg (±0.38). Cefdinir is 60% to 70% bound to plasma proteins in both adult and pediatric subjects; binding is independent of concentration.
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Skin Blister
                                 
                                    

                                    In adult subjects, median (range) maximal blister fluid cefdinir concentrations of 0.65 (0.33 to 1.1) and 1.1 (0.49 to 1.9) mcg/mL were observed 4 to 5 hours following administration of 300 and 600 mg doses, respectively. Mean (±SD) blister Cmax and AUC (0-∞) values were 48% (±13) and 91% (±18) of corresponding plasma values.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Tonsil Tissue
                                 
                                    

                                    In adult patients undergoing elective tonsillectomy, respective median tonsil tissue cefdinir concentrations 4 hours after administration of single 300 and 600 mg doses were 0.25 (0.22 to 0.46) and 0.36 (0.22 to 0.8) mcg/g. Mean tonsil tissue concentrations were 24% (±8) of corresponding plasma concentrations.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Sinus Tissue
                                 
                                    

                                    In adult patients undergoing elective maxillary and ethmoid sinus surgery, respective median sinus tissue cefdinir concentrations 4 hours after administration of single 300 and 600 mg doses were <0.12 (<0.12 to 0.46) and 0.21 (<0.12 to 2) mcg/g. Mean sinus tissue concentrations were 16% (±20) of corresponding plasma concentrations.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Lung Tissue
                                 
                                    

                                    In adult patients undergoing diagnostic bronchoscopy, respective median bronchial mucosa cefdinir concentrations 4 hours after administration of single 300 and 600 mg doses were 0.78 (<0.06 to 1.33) and 1.14 (<0.06 to 1.92) mcg/mL, and were 31% (±18) of corresponding plasma concentrations. Respective median epithelial lining fluid concentrations were 0.29 (<0.3 to 4.73) and 0.49 (<0.3 to 0.59) mcg/mL, and were 35% (±83) of corresponding plasma concentrations.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Middle Ear Fluid
                                 
                                    

                                    In 14 pediatric patients with acute bacterial otitis media, respective median middle ear fluid cefdinir concentrations 3 hours after administration of single 7 and 14 mg/kg doses were 0.21 (<0.09 to 0.94) and 0.72 (0.14 to 1.42) mcg/mL. Mean middle ear fluid concentrations were 15% (±15) of corresponding plasma concentrations.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 CSF
                                 
                                    

                                    Data on cefdinir penetration into human cerebrospinal fluid are not available.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Metabolism and Excretion
                           
                              

                              Cefdinir is not appreciably metabolized. Activity is primarily due to parent drug. Cefdinir is eliminated principally via renal excretion with a mean plasma elimination half-life (t½) of 1.7 (±0.6) hours. In healthy subjects with normal renal function, renal clearance is 2 (±1) mL/min/kg, and apparent oral clearance is 11.6 (±6) and 15.5 (±5.4) mL/min/kg following doses of 300 and 600 mg, respectively. Mean percent of dose recovered unchanged in the urine following 300 and 600 mg doses is 18.4% (±6.4) and 11.6% (±4.6), respectively. Cefdinir clearance is reduced in patients with renal dysfunction (see 
                                    Special Populations: Patients with Renal Insufficiency
                                 ).

                                 
Because renal excretion is the predominant pathway of elimination, dosage should be adjusted in patients with markedly compromised renal function or who are undergoing hemodialysis (see 
                                    DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION
                                 ).
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Special Populations
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Patients with Renal Insufficiency
                                 
                                    

                                    Cefdinir pharmacokinetics were investigated in 21 adult subjects with varying degrees of renal function. Decreases in cefdinir elimination rate, apparent oral clearance (CL/F), and renal clearance were approximately proportional to the reduction in creatinine clearance (CLcr). As a result, plasma cefdinir concentrations were higher and persisted longer in subjects with renal impairment than in those without renal impairment. In subjects with CLcr between 30 and 60 mL/min, Cmax and t½ increased by approximately 2-fold and AUC by approximately 3-fold. In subjects with CLcr <30 mL/min, Cmax increased by approximately 2-fold, t½ by approximately 5-fold, and AUC by approximately 6-fold. Dosage adjustment is recommended in patients with markedly compromised renal function (creatinine clearance <30 mL/min; see 
                                          DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION
                                       ).
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Hemodialysis
                                 
                                    

                                    Cefdinir pharmacokinetics were studied in 8 adult subjects undergoing hemodialysis. Dialysis (4 hours duration) removed 63% of cefdinir from the body and reduced apparent elimination t½ from 16 (±3.5) to 3.2 (±1.2) hours. Dosage adjustment is recommended in this patient population (see 
                                          DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION
                                       ).
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Hepatic Disease
                                 
                                    

                                    Because cefdinir is predominantly renally eliminated and not appreciably metabolized, studies in patients with hepatic impairment were not conducted. It is not expected that dosage adjustment will be required in this population.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Geriatric Patients
                                 
                                    

                                    The effect of age on cefdinir pharmacokinetics after a single 300 mg dose was evaluated in 32 subjects 19 to 91 years of age. Systemic exposure to cefdinir was substantially increased in older subjects (N=16), Cmax by 44% and AUC by 86%. This increase was due to a reduction in cefdinir clearance. The apparent volume of distribution was also reduced, thus no appreciable alterations in apparent elimination t½ were observed (elderly: 2.2 ± 0.6 hours vs young: 1.8 ± 0.4 hours). Since cefdinir clearance has been shown to be primarily related to changes in renal function rather than age, elderly patients do not require dosage adjustment unless they have markedly compromised renal function (creatinine clearance <30 mL/min, see 
                                          
                                             Patients with Renal Insufficiency
                                          
                                       , above).
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Gender and Race
                                 
                                    

                                    The results of a meta-analysis of clinical pharmacokinetics (N=217) indicated no significant impact of either gender or race on cefdinir pharmacokinetics.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Microbiology
                     
                        

                        As with other cephalosporins, bactericidal activity of cefdinir results from inhibition of cell wall synthesis. Cefdinir is stable in the presence of some, but not all, β-lactamase enzymes. As a result, many organisms resistant to penicillins and some cephalosporins are susceptible to cefdinir.

                           
Cefdinir has been shown to be active against most strains of the following microorganisms, both in vitro and in clinical infections as described in 
                              INDICATIONS AND USAGE
                           .
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Aerobic Gram-Positive Microorganisms
                           
                              

                              
                                 Staphylococcus aureus (including β-lactamase producing strains)
NOTE: Cefdinir is inactive against methicillin-resistant staphylococci.

                                 Streptococcus pneumoniae (penicillin-susceptible strains only)

                                 Streptococcus pyogenes
                              
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Aerobic Gram-Negative Microorganisms
                           
                              

                              
                                 Haemophilus influenzae (including β-lactamase producing strains)

                                 Haemophilus parainfluenzae (including β-lactamase producing strains)

                                 Moraxella catarrhalis (including β-lactamase producing strains)

                                 
The following in vitro data are available, 
                                    but their clinical significance is unknown
                                 .

                                 
Cefdinir exhibits in vitro minimum inhibitory concentrations (MICs) of 1 mcg/mL or less against (≥90%) strains of the following microorganisms; however, the safety and effectiveness of cefdinir in treating clinical infections due to these microorganisms have not been established in adequate and well-controlled clinical trials.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Aerobic Gram-Positive Microorganisms
                           
                              

                              
                                 Staphylococcus epidermidis (methicillin-susceptible strains only)

                                 Streptococcus agalactiae
                                 
Viridans group streptococci

                                 
NOTE: Cefdinir is inactive against Enterococcus and methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus species.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Aerobic Gram-Negative Microorganisms
                           
                              

                              
                                 Citrobacter diversus
                                 

                                 Escherichia coli
                                 

                                 Klebsiella pneumoniae
                                 

                                 Proteus mirabilis
                                 

                                 
NOTE: Cefdinir is inactive against Pseudomonas and Enterobacter species.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Susceptibility Tests
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Dilution Techniques
                                 
                                    Quantitative methods are used to determine antimicrobial minimum inhibitory concentrations (MICs). These MICs provide estimates of the susceptibility of bacteria to antimicrobial compounds. The MICs should be determined using a standardized procedure. Standardized procedures are based on a dilution method(1) (broth or agar) or equivalent with standardized inoculum concentrations and standardized concentrations of cefdinir powder. The MIC values should be interpreted according to the following criteria:
                                    

                                    For organisms other than Haemophilus spp. and Streptococcus spp:
                                    

                                    


                                    


 For Haemophilus spp:a
                                    
                                    


                                    



                                       a These interpretive standards are applicable only to broth microdilution susceptibility tests with Haemophilus spp. using Haemophilus Test Medium (HTM).(1) 
                                    
                                    
                                       b The current absence of data on resistant strains precludes defining any results other than “Susceptible.” Strains yielding MIC results suggestive of a “nonsusceptible” category should be submitted to a reference laboratory for further testing.
                                    

                                    For Streptococcus spp:
                                    

                                    
                                       Streptococcus pneumoniae that are susceptible to penicillin (MIC ≤0.06 mcg/mL), or streptococci other than S. pneumoniae that are susceptible to penicillin (MIC≤0.12 mcg /mL), can beconsidered susceptible to cefdinir. Testing of cefdinir against penicillin-intermediate or penicillin-resistant isolates is not recommended. Reliable interpretive criteria for cefdinir are not available.
                                    

                                    A report of “Susceptible” indicates that the pathogen is likely to be inhibited if the antimicrobial compound in the blood reaches the concentration usually achievable. A report of “Intermediate” indicates that the result should be considered equivocal, and, if the microorganism is not fully susceptible to alternative, clinically feasible drugs, the test should be repeated. This category implies possible clinical applicability in body sites where the drug is physiologically concentrated or in situations where high dosage of drug can be used. This category also provides a buffer zone which prevents small uncontrolled technical factors from causing major discrepancies in interpretation. A report of “Resistant” indicates that the pathogen is not likely to be inhibited if the antimicrobial compound in the blood reaches the concentrations usually achievable; other therapy should be selected.
                                    

                                    Standardized susceptibility test procedures require the use of laboratory control microorganisms to control the technical aspects of laboratory procedures. Standard cefdinir powder should provide the following MIC values:
                                    

                                    


                                    



                                       c This quality control range is applicable only to H. influenzae ATCC 49766 tested by a broth microdilution procedure using HTM.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Diffusion Techniques
                                 
                                    Quantitative methods that require measurement of zone diameters also provide reproducible estimates of the susceptibility of bacteria to antimicrobial compounds. One such standardized procedure(2) requires the use of standardized inoculum concentrations. This procedure uses paper disks impregnated with 5 mcg cefdinir to test the susceptibility of microorganisms to cefdinir.

                                       
Reports from the laboratory providing results of the standard single-disk susceptibility test with a 5 mcg cefdinir disk should be interpreted according to the following criteria:

                                       
For organisms other than Haemophilus spp. and Streptococcus spp:d 
                                    
                                    


                                    



                                       d Because certain strains of Citrobacter, Providencia, and Enterobacter spp. have been reported to give false susceptible results with the cefdinir disk, strains of these genera should not be tested and reported with this disk.
                                    For Haemophilus spp:e
                                    
                                    


                                    



                                       e  These zone diameter standards are applicable only to tests with Haemophilus spp. using HTM.(2)
                                    
                                    
                                       f  The current absence of data on resistant strains precludes defining any results other than “Susceptible.” Strains yielding MIC results suggestive of a “nonsusceptible” category should be submitted to a reference laboratory for further testing.

                                       
For Streptococcus spp:

                                       
Isolates of Streptococcus pneumoniae should be tested against a 1 mcg oxacillin disk. Isolates with oxacillin zone sizes ≥20 mm are susceptible to penicillin and can be considered susceptible to cefdinir. Streptococci other than S. pneumoniaeshould be tested with a 10-unit penicillin disk. Isolates with penicillin zone sizes ≥28 mm are susceptible to penicillin and can be considered susceptible to cefdinir.

                                       
As with standardized dilution techniques, diffusion methods require the use of laboratory control microorganisms to control the technical aspects of laboratory procedures. For the diffusion technique, the 5 mcg cefdinir disk should provide the following zone diameters in these laboratory quality control strains:
                                    


                                    



                                       g This quality control range is applicable only to testing of H. influenzae ATCC 49766 using HTM.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         