
               
               
               7	DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
                  This section describes clinically relevant drug interactions with ATRIPLA. Drug interaction studies are described elsewhere in the labeling [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)
                     ].
               
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           Efavirenz:  Coadministration of efavirenz can alter the concentrations of other drugs and other drugs may alter the concentrations of efavirenz. The potential for drug-drug interactions must be considered before and during therapy. (4.2, 7.1, 12.3)
                           Didanosine: Tenofovir disoproxil fumarate increases didanosine concentrations. Use with caution and monitor for evidence of didanosine toxicity (e.g., pancreatitis, neuropathy) when coadministered. Consider dose reductions or discontinuations of didanosine if warranted. (7.2)
                           Atazanavir: Coadministration of ATRIPLA and atazanavir or atazanavir/ritonavir is not recommended.   (7.3)
                           Lopinavir/ritonavir: Coadministration increases tenofovir concentrations. Monitor for evidence of tenofovir toxicity.  (7.3)
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1	Efavirenz
                     
                        Efavirenz has been shown in vivo to induce CYP3A. Other compounds that are substrates of CYP3A may have decreased plasma concentrations when coadministered with efavirenz. In vitro studies have demonstrated that efavirenz inhibits CYP2C9, 2C19, and 3A4 isozymes in the range of observed efavirenz plasma concentrations. Coadministration of efavirenz with drugs primarily metabolized by these isozymes may result in altered plasma concentrations of the coadministered drug. Therefore, appropriate dose adjustments may be necessary for these drugs.
                        Drugs that induce CYP3A activity (e.g., phenobarbital, rifampin, rifabutin) would be expected to increase the clearance of efavirenz resulting in lowered plasma concentrations.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2	Emtricitabine and Tenofovir Disoproxil Fumarate  
                     
                        Since emtricitabine and tenofovir are primarily eliminated by the kidneys, coadministration of ATRIPLA with drugs that reduce renal function or compete for active tubular secretion may increase serum concentrations of emtricitabine, tenofovir, and/or other renally eliminated drugs. Some examples include, but are not limited to, acyclovir, adefovir dipivoxil, cidofovir, ganciclovir, valacyclovir, and valganciclovir.
                        Coadministration of tenofovir DF and didanosine should be undertaken with caution and patients receiving this combination should be monitored closely for didanosine-associated adverse reactions. Didanosine should be discontinued in patients who develop didanosine-associated adverse reactions [for didanosine dosing adjustment recommendations, see 
                              Table 4]. Suppression of CD4+ cell counts has been observed in patients receiving tenofovir DF with didanosine 400 mg daily. 
                        Lopinavir/ritonavir has been shown to increase tenofovir concentrations. The mechanism of this interaction is unknown. Patients receiving lopinavir/ritonavir with ATRIPLA should be monitored for tenofovir-associated adverse reactions. ATRIPLA should be discontinued in patients who develop tenofovir-associated adverse reactions [See Table  4
                           ].
                        Coadministration of atazanavir with ATRIPLA is not recommended since coadministration of atazanavir with either efavirenz or tenofovir DF has been shown to decrease plasma concentrations of atazanavir. Also, atazanavir has been shown to increase tenofovir concentrations. There are insufficient data to support dosing recommendations for atazanavir or atazanavir/ritonavir in combination with ATRIPLA  [See Table 4
                           ].
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3	Efavirenz, Emtricitabine and Tenofovir Disoproxil Fumarate   
                     
                        Other important drug interaction information for ATRIPLA is summarized in Table 1 and Table 4. The drug interactions described are based on studies conducted with efavirenz, emtricitabine or tenofovir DF as individual agents or are potential drug interactions; no drug interaction studies have been conducted using ATRIPLA [for pharmacokinetics data see 
                              Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)
                           , Tables 5–9]. The tables include potentially significant interactions, but are not all inclusive. 
                        


                     



                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4	Efavirenz Assay Interference
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                     
                        Cannabinoid Test Interaction:  Efavirenz does not bind to cannabinoid receptors. False-positive urine cannabinoid test results have been observed in non-HIV-infected volunteers receiving efavirenz when the Microgenics Cedia DAU Multi-Level THC assay was used for screening. Negative results were obtained when more specific confirmatory testing was performed with gas chromatography/mass spectrometry. For more information, please consult the SUSTIVA prescribing information.
                     
                  
               
            
         