
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        COCs lower the risk of becoming pregnant primarily by suppressing ovulation. Other possible mechanisms may include cervical mucus changes that inhibit sperm penetration and the endometrial changes that reduce the likelihood of implantation. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        Drospirenone is a spironolactone analogue with  antimineralocorticoid and antiandrogenic activity. The estrogen in Yaz is ethinyl estradiol.
                        
                           Contraception
                        
                        Two studies evaluated the effect of 3 mg DRSP / 0.02 mg EE combinations on the suppression of ovarian activity as assessed by measurement of follicle size via transvaginal ultrasound and serum hormone (progesterone and estradiol) analyses during two treatment cycles (21-day active tablet period plus 7-day pill-free period). More than 90% of subjects in these studies demonstrated ovulation inhibition. One study compared the effect of 3 mg DRSP/0.02 mg EE combinations with two different regimens (24-day active tablet period plus 4-day pill-free period vs. 21-day active tablet period plus 7-day pill-free period) on the suppression of ovarian activity during two treatment cycles. During the first treatment cycle, there were no subjects (0/49, 0%) taking the 24-day regimen who ovulated compared to 1 subject (1/50, 2%) using the 21-day regimen. After intentionally introduced dosing errors (3 missed active tablets on Days 1 to 3) during the second treatment cycle, there was 1 subject (1/49, 2%) taking the 24-day regimen who ovulated compared to 4 subjects (4/50, 8%) using the 21-day regimen.
                        
                           Acne
                        
                        Acne vulgaris is a skin condition with a multifactorial etiology including androgen stimulation of sebum production. While the combination of EE and DRSP increases sex hormone binding globulin (SHBG) and decreases free testosterone, the relationship between these changes and a decrease in the severity of facial acne in otherwise healthy women with this skin condition has not been established. The impact of the antiandrogenic activity of DRSP on acne is not known.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Absorption
                           
                              The absolute bioavailability of DRSP from a single entity tablet is about 76%. The absolute bioavailability of EE is approximately 40% as a result of presystemic conjugation and first-pass metabolism. The absolute bioavailability of Yaz, which is a combination tablet of DRSP and EE stabilized by betadex as a clathrate (molecular inclusion complex), has not been evaluated. The bioavailability of EE is similar when dosed via a betadex clathrate formulation compared to when it is dosed as a free steroid. Serum concentrations of DRSP and EE reached peak levels within 1–2 hours after administration of Yaz.
                              The pharmacokinetics of DRSP are dose proportional following single doses ranging from 1–10 mg. Following daily dosing of Yaz, steady state DRSP concentrations were observed after 8 days. There was about 2 to 3 fold accumulation in serum Cmax and AUC (0–24h) values of DRSP following multiple dose administration of Yaz (see Table I).
                              For EE, steady-state conditions are reported during the second half of a treatment cycle. Following daily administration of Yaz, serum Cmax and AUC (0–24h) values of EE accumulate by a factor of about 1.5 to 2 (see Table I).
                              


                           



                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    Food Effect 
                                 
                                 
                                    The rate of absorption of DRSP and EE following single administration of a formulation similar to Yaz was slower under fed (high fat meal) conditions with the serum Cmax being reduced about 40% for both components. The extent of absorption of DRSP, however, remained unchanged. In contrast, the extent of absorption of EE was reduced by about 20% under fed conditions.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Distribution
                           
                              DRSP and EE serum levels decline in two phases. The apparent volume of distribution of DRSP is approximately 4 L/kg and that of EE is reported to be approximately 4-5 L/kg.
                              DRSP does not bind to SHBG or corticosteroid binding globulin (CBG) but binds about 97% to other serum proteins. Multiple dosing over 3 cycles resulted in no change in the free fraction (as measured at trough levels). EE is reported to be highly but non-specifically bound to serum albumin (approximately 98.5 %) and induces an increase in the serum concentrations of both SHBG and CBG. EE induced effects on SHBG and CBG were not affected by variation of the DRSP dosage in the range of 2 to 3 mg.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Metabolism
                           
                              The two main metabolites of DRSP found in human plasma were identified to be the acid form of DRSP generated by opening of the lactone ring and the 4,5-dihydrodrospirenone-3-sulfate. These metabolites were shown not to be pharmacologically active. In in vitro studies with human liver microsomes, DRSP was metabolized only to a minor extent mainly by Cytochrome P450 3A4 (CYP3A4). 
                              EE has been reported to be subject to presystemic conjugation in both small bowel mucosa and the liver. Metabolism occurs primarily by aromatic hydroxylation but a wide variety of hydroxylated and methylated metabolites are formed. These are present as free metabolites and as conjugates with glucuronide and sulfate. CYP3A4 in the liver is responsible for the 2-hydroxylation which is the major oxidative reaction. The 2-hydroxy metabolite is further transformed by methylation and glucuronidation prior to urinary and fecal excretion.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Excretion
                           
                              DRSP serum levels are characterized by a terminal disposition phase half-life of approximately 30 hours after both single and multiple dose regimens. Excretion of DRSP was nearly complete after ten days and amounts excreted were slightly higher in feces compared to urine. DRSP was extensively metabolized and only trace amounts of unchanged DRSP were excreted in urine and feces. At least 20 different metabolites were observed in urine and feces. About 38–47% of the metabolites in urine were glucuronide and sulfate conjugates. In feces, about 17–20% of the metabolites were excreted as glucuronides and sulfates. 
                              For EE the terminal disposition phase half-life has been reported to be approximately 24 hours. EE is not excreted unchanged. EE is excreted in the urine and feces as glucuronide and sulfate conjugates and undergoes enterohepatic circulation.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Specific Populations 
                           
                              
                                 
                                    Pediatric Use
                                 : Safety and efficacy of Yaz has been established in women of reproductive age. Safety and efficacy are expected to be the same for postpubertal adolescents under the age of 18 and for users 18 years and older. Use of this product before menarche is not indicated.  [See Use in Specific Populations (8.4).]
                              
                              
                                 
                                    Geriatric Use
                                 : Yaz has not been studied in postmenopausal women and is not indicated in this population. [See Use in Specific Populations (8.5).]
                              
                              
                                 
                                    Race:
                                  No clinically significant difference was observed between the pharmacokinetics of DRSP or EE in Japanese versus Caucasian women (age 25–35) when 3mg DRSP/0.02 mg EE was administered daily for 21 days. Other ethnic groups have not been specifically studied.
                              
                                 
                                    Renal Impairment
                                 
                                 : Yaz is contraindicated in patients with renal impairment.
                              The effect of renal impairment on the pharmacokinetics of DRSP (3 mg daily for 14 days) and the effect of DRSP on serum potassium levels were investigated in female subjects (n=28, age 30–65) with normal renal function and mild and moderate renal impairment. All subjects were on a low potassium diet. During the study, 7 subjects continued the use of potassium sparing drugs for the treatment of their underlying illness. On the 14th day (steady-state) of DRSP treatment, the serum DRSP levels in the group with mild renal impairment (creatinine clearance CLcr, 50–80 mL/min) were comparable to those in the group with normal renal function (CLcr, >80 mL/min). The serum DRSP levels were on average 37% higher in the group with moderate renal impairment (CLcr, 30–50 mL/min) compared to those in the group with normal renal function. DRSP treatment did not show any clinically significant effect on serum potassium concentration. Although hyperkalemia was not observed in the study, in five of the seven subjects who continued use of potassium sparing drugs during the study, mean serum potassium levels increased by up to 0.33 mEq/L. [See Contraindications (4), Warnings and Precautions (5.2) and Use in Specific Populations (8.6).]
                              
                              
                                 
                                    Hepatic Impairment:
                                  Yaz is contraindicated in patients with hepatic disease. 
                              The mean exposure to DRSP in women with moderate liver impairment is approximately three times higher than the exposure in women with normal liver function. Yaz has not been studied in women with severe hepatic impairment. [See Contraindications (4), Warnings and Precautions (5.4) and Use in Specific Populations (8.7).]
                              
                              
                                 Drug Interactions 
                              
                              
                                 
                                    Effects of Other Drugs on Combined Hormonal Contraceptives
                                 
                              
                              
                                 
                                    Substances diminishing the efficacy of COCs:
                                  Drugs or herbal products that induce certain enzymes, including CYP3A4, may decrease the effectiveness of COCs or increase breakthrough bleeding. [See Drug Interactions (7.1).]
                              
                              
                                 
                                    Substances increasing the plasma levels of COCs:
                                 Co-administration of atorvastatin and certain COCs containing ethinyl estradiol increase AUC values for ethinyl estradiol by approximately 20%. Ascorbic acid and acetaminophen may increase plasma ethinyl estradiol levels, possibly by inhibition of conjugation. CYP3A4 inhibitors such as itraconazole or ketoconazole may increase plasma hormone levels.  [See Drug Interactions (7.1).]
                              
                              
                                 
                                    HIV protease inhibitors and non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors:
                                 Significant changes (increase or decrease) in the plasma levels of estrogen and progestin have been noted in some cases of co-administration with HIV protease inhibitors or with non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors. [See Drug Interactions (7.1).]
                              
                              
                                 
                                    Antibiotics: 
                                 There have been reports of pregnancy while taking hormonal contraceptives and antibiotics, but clinical pharmacokinetic studies have not shown consistent effects of antibiotics on plasma concentrations of synthetic steroids. [See Drug Interactions (7.1).]
                              
                              
                                 
                                    
                                       Effects of Combined Oral Contraceptives on Other Drugs
                                    
                                 
                              
                              COCs containing ethinyl estradiol may inhibit the metabolism of other compounds. COCs have been shown to significantly decrease plasma concentrations of lamotrigine, likely due to induction of lamotrigine glucuronidation. This may reduce seizure control; therefore, dosage adjustments of lamotrigine may be necessary. Consult the labeling of the concurrently-used drug to obtain further information about interactions with COCs or the potential for enzyme alterations. [See Drug Interactions (7.2).]
                              
                              Metabolism of DRSP and potential effects of DRSP on hepatic cytochrome P450 (CYP) enzymes have been investigated in in vitro and in vivo studies. In in vitro studies DRSP did not affect turnover of model substrates of CYP1A2 and CYP2D6, but had an inhibitory influence on the turnover of model substrates of CYP1A1, CYP2C9, CYP2C19 and CYP3A4, with CYP2C19 being the most sensitive enzyme. The potential effect of DRSP on CYP2C19 activity was investigated in a clinical pharmacokinetic study using omeprazole as a marker substrate. In the study with 24 postmenopausal women [including 12 women with homozygous (wild type) CYP2C19 genotype and 12 women with heterozygous CYP2C19 genotype] the daily oral administration of 3 mg DRSP for 14 days did not affect the oral clearance of omeprazole (40 mg, single oral dose) and the CYP2C19 product 5-hydroxy omeprazole. Furthermore, no significant effect of DRSP on the systemic clearance of the CYP3A4 product omeprazole sulfone was found. These results demonstrate that DRSP did not inhibit CYP2C19 and CYP3A4 in vivo. [See Drug Interactions (7.2).]
                              
                              Two additional clinical drug-drug interaction studies using simvastatin and midazolam as marker substrates for CYP3A4 were each performed in 24 healthy postmenopausal women. The results of these studies demonstrated that pharmacokinetics of the CYP3A4 substrates were not influenced by steady state DRSP concentrations achieved after administration of 3 mg DRSP/day.  [See Drug Interactions (7.2).]
                              
                              
                                 
                                    
                                       Interactions With Drugs That Have the Potential to Increase Serum Potassium 
                                    
                                 
                              
                              There is a potential for an increase in serum potassium in women taking Yaz with other drugs that may increase serum potassium [see Warnings and Precautions (5.2)]. 
                              A drug-drug interaction study of DRSP 3 mg/estradiol (E2) 1 mg versus placebo was performed in 24 mildly hypertensive postmenopausal women taking enalapril maleate 10 mg twice daily. Potassium levels were obtained every other day for a total of 2 weeks in all subjects. Mean serum potassium levels in the DRSP/E2 treatment group relative to baseline were 0.22 mEq/L higher that those in the placebo group. Serum potassium concentrations also were measured at multiple time points over 24 hours at baseline and on Day 14. On Day 14, the ratios for serum potassium Cmax and AUC in the DRSP/E2 group to those in the placebo group were 0.955 (90% CI: 0.914, 0.999) and 1.010 (90% CI: 0.944, 1.08), respectively. No patient in either treatment group developed hyperkalemia (serum potassium concentrations >5.5 mEq/L).
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         