
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
                  Consult the labeling of all concurrently-used drugs to obtain further information about interactions with hormonal contraceptives or the potential for enzyme alterations.
                  
               
               
               
                  
                     
                        Drugs or herbal products that induce certain enzymes (for example, CYP3A4) may decrease the effectiveness of COCs or increase breakthrough bleeding. Counsel patients to use a back-up or alternative method of contraception when enzyme inducers are used with COCs. (7.1)
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 Effects of Other Drugs on Combined Hormonal Contraceptives
                     
                        
                           
                              Substances diminishing the efficacy of COCs:
                            Drugs or herbal products that induce certain enzymes, including CYP3A4, may decrease the effectiveness of COCs or increase breakthrough bleeding. Some drugs or herbal products that may decrease the effectiveness of hormonal contraceptives include phenytoin, barbiturates, carbamazepine, bosentan, felbamate, griseofulvin, oxcarbazepine, rifampicin, topiramate and products containing St. John’s wort. Interactions between oral contraceptives and other drugs may lead to breakthrough bleeding and/or contraceptive failure. Counsel women to use an alternative method of contraception or a back-up method when enzyme inducers are used with COCs, and to continue back-up contraception for 28 days after discontinuing the enzyme inducer to ensure contraceptive reliability.
                        
                           
                              Substances increasing the plasma levels of COCs: 
                            Co-administration of atorvastatin and certain COCs containing EE increase AUC values for EE by approximately 20%. Ascorbic acid and  acetaminophen may increase plasma EE levels, possibly by inhibition of conjugation. CYP3A4 inhibitors such as itraconazole or ketoconazole may increase plasma hormone levels.
                        
                           
                              HIV protease inhibitors and non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors 
                           : Significant changes (increase and decrease) in plasma levels of estrogen and progestin have been noted in some cases of co-administration with HIV protease inhibitors or with non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors. 
                        
                           
                              Antibiotics
                           : There have been reports of pregnancy while taking hormonal contraceptives and antibiotics, but clinical pharmacokinetic studies have not shown consistent effects of antibiotics on plasma concentrations of synthetic steroids.
                        
                           
                              Effect on DRSP: The main metabolites of DRSP in human plasma are generated without involvement of the cytochrome P450 system. Inhibitors of this enzyme system are therefore unlikely to influence the metabolism of DRSP.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 Effects of Combined Oral Contraceptives on Other Drugs 
                     
                        COCs containing EE may inhibit the metabolism of other compounds. COCs have been shown to significantly decrease plasma concentrations of lamotrigine, likely due to induction of lamotrigine glucuronidation. This may reduce seizure control; therefore, dosage adjustments of lamotrigine may be necessary. Consult the labeling of the concurrently-used drug to obtain further information about interactions with COCs or the potential for enzyme alterations. 
                        
                           In vitro and clinical studies did not indicate an inhibitory potential of DRSP towards human CYP450 enzymes at clinically relevant concentrations [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)]. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3 Interactions that Have the Potential to Increase Serum Potassium
                     
                        There is a potential for an increase in serum potassium in women taking Yaz  with other drugs that may increase serum potassium [see Warnings and Precautions (5.2) and Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)]. 
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         