
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
                  Milnacipran undergoes minimal CYP450 related metabolism, with the majority of the dose excreted unchanged in urine (55%), and has a low binding to plasma proteins (13%). In vitro and in vivo studies showed that Savella is unlikely to be involved in clinically significant pharmacokinetic drug interactions [see Pharmacokinetics in Special Populations (12.4)].
               
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           Savella is unlikely to be involved in clinically significant pharmacokinetic drug interactions (7)
                           Pharmacodynamic interactions of Savella with other drugs can occur (7)
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 Monoamine Oxidase Inhibitors 
                     
                        
                           [See Contraindications (4.1)]
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 Serotonergic Drugs 
                     
                        Due to the mechanism of action of SNRIs and SSRIs, including Savella, and the potential for serotonin syndrome or Neuroleptic Malignant Syndrome (NMS) – like reactions, caution is advised when Savella is co-administered with other drugs that may affect the serotonergic neurotransmitter systems. This includes drugs such as triptans, lithium, tryptophan, antipsychotics and dopamine antagonists. 
                        Co-administration of Savella with other inhibitors of serotonin re-uptake may result in hypertension and coronary artery vasoconstriction, through additive serotonergic effects. Concomitant use of Savella with other SSRIs, SNRIs, or tryptophan is not recommended [see Warnings and Precautions (5.2)]. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3 Triptans 
                     
                        There have been rare postmarketing reports of serotonin syndrome with use of an SSRI and a triptan. If concomitant treatment of Savella with a triptan is clinically warranted, careful observation of the patient is advised, , particularly during treatment initiation and dose increases. [see Warnings and Precautions (5.2)] 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4 Catecholamines 
                     
                        Savella inhibits the reuptake of norepinephrine. Therefore concomitant use of Savella with epinephrine and norepinephrine may be associated with paroxysmal hypertension and possible arrhythmia [see Warnings and Precautions – Effects on Blood Pressure (5.3) and Effects on Heart Rate (5.4)] 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.5 CNS-active drugs 
                     
                        Given the primary CNS effects of Savella, caution should be used when it is taken in combination with other centrally acting drugs, including those with a similar mechanism of action. 
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Clomipramine: In a drug-drug interaction study, an increase in euphoria and postural hypotension was observed in patients who switched from clomipramine to Savella. 
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.6 Clinically Important Interactions with Select Cardiovascular Agents 
                     
                        Digoxin: Use of Savella concomitantly with digoxin may be associated with potentiation of adverse hemodynamic effects. Postural hypotension and tachycardia have been reported in combination therapy with intravenously administered digoxin (1 mg). Co-administration of Savella and intravenous digoxin should be avoided [see Warnings and Precautions (5.3, 5.4)] 
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Clonidine: Because Savella inhibits norepinephrine reuptake, co-administration with clonidine may inhibit clonidine's anti-hypertensive effect.” 
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         