
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Oritavancin is an antibacterial drug [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.4)].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        The antimicrobial activity of oritavancin appears to correlate with the ratio of area under the concentration-time curve to minimal inhibitory concentration (AUC/MIC) based on animal models of infection.
                        Exposure-response analyses from both preclinical and clinical studies support the treatment of clinically relevant Gram-positive microorganisms (e.g. S. aureus and S. pyogenes) causative of ABSSSI with a single 1200 mg dose of ORBACTIV.
                        
                           Cardiac Electrophysiology
                        
                        In a thorough QTc study of 135 healthy subjects at a dose 1.3 times the 1200 mg recommended dose, ORBACTIV did not prolong the QTc interval to any clinically relevant extent.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        The population PK analysis was derived using data from the two Phase 3 ABSSSI clinical trials in 297 patients. The mean pharmacokinetic parameters of oritavancin in patients following a single 1200 mg dose are presented in Table 2.
                        


                        


Oritavancin exhibits linear pharmacokinetics at a dose up to 1200 mg. The mean, population-predicted oritavancin concentration-time profile displays a multi-exponential decline with a long terminal plasma half-life as shown in Figure 1
                        
                        
                           Figure 1: Population Mean Plasma Concentration-Time Profile after a Single 1200 mg dose of Oritavancin Administered Intravenously Over 3 Hours – Semi-Log Scale
                        
                        
                           
                        
                        
                           Distribution
                        
                        Oritavancin is approximately 85% bound to human plasma proteins.
                        Based on population PK analysis, the population mean total volume of distribution is estimated to be approximately 87.6 L, indicating oritavancin is extensively distributed into the tissues.
                        Exposures of oritavancin in skin blister fluid were approximately 20% of those in plasma (AUC0-24) after single 800 mg dose in healthy subjects.
                        
                           Metabolism/Excretion
                        
                        Non-clinical studies including in vitro human liver microsome studies indicated that oritavancin is not metabolized. No mass balance study has been conducted in humans. In humans, oritavancin is slowly excreted unchanged in feces and urine with less than 1% and 5% of the dose recovered in feces and urine, respectively, after 2 weeks of collection.
                        Oritavancin has a terminal half-life of approximately 245 hours and a clearance of 0.445 L/h based on population pharmacokinetic analyses.
                        
                           Specific Populations
                        
                        No dosage adjustments of ORBACTIV are required for patients with mild to severe renal or mild to moderate hepatic impairment or other subpopulations including age, gender, race and weight.
                        
                           Renal Insufficiency
                        
                        The pharmacokinetics of oritavancin was examined in the Phase 3 ABSSSI trials in patients with normal renal function, CrCL ≥80 mL/min (n=238), mild renal impairment, CrCL 50-79 mL/min (n=48), and moderate renal impairment, CrCL 30-49 mL/min (n=11). Population pharmacokinetic analysis indicated that mild to moderate renal impairment had no clinically relevant effect on the exposure of oritavancin. No dedicated studies in dialysis patients have been conducted.
                        Dosage adjustment of ORBACTIV is not needed in patients with mild or moderate renal impairment. The pharmacokinetics of oritavancin in patients with severe renal impairment have not been evaluated.
                        
                           Hepatic Impairment
                        
                        The pharmacokinetics of oritavancin were evaluated in study of subjects with moderate hepatic impairment (Child-Pugh Class B) (n=20) and compared with healthy subjects (n=20) matched for gender, age and weight. There were no relevant changes in pharmacokinetics of oritavancin in subjects with moderate hepatic impairment.
                        Dosage adjustment of ORBACTIV is not needed in patients with mild or moderate hepatic impairment. The pharmacokinetics of oritavancin in patients with severe hepatic insufficiency has not been studied.
                        
                           Pediatric
                        
                        The pharmacokinetics of ORBACTIV in pediatric populations (<18 years of age) has not been studied [see Use in Specific Populations (8.4)].
                        
                           Age, Gender, Weight and Race
                        
                        Population pharmacokinetic analysis from the Phase 3 ABSSSI trials in patients indicated that gender, age, weight or race had no clinically relevant effect on the exposure of ORBACTIV. No dosage adjustment is warranted in these subpopulations.
                        
                           Drug Interactions
                        
                        In vitro studies with human liver microsomes showed that oritavancin inhibited the activities of cytochrome P450 (CYP) enzymes 1A2, 2B6, 2D6, 2C9, 2C19, and 3A4.  The observed inhibition of multiple CYP isoforms by oritavancin in vitro is likely to be reversible and the mechanism of inhibition, noncompetitive. In vitro studies indicate that oritavancin is neither a substrate nor an inhibitor of the efflux transporter P-glycoprotein (P-gp).
                        
                           Drugs that Inhibit or Induce CYP450 Enzymes
                        
                        Results from a drug-drug interaction study in healthy volunteers (n=16) evaluating a single 1200 mg dose of ORBACTIV showed that ORBACTIV is a weak inducer of CYP3A4 (a decrease of 18% in the mean AUC of midazolam) and CYP2D6 (decrease of 31% in the ratio of dextromethorphan to dextrorphan concentrations in the urine after administration of dextromethorphan). ORBACTIV was also a weak inhibitor of CYP2C19 (increase of 15% in the ratio of omeprazole to 5-OH-omeprazole concentrations in the plasma after administration of omeprazole) and also showed to be a weak inhibitor of CYP2C9 (with an increase of 31% in the mean AUC of warfarin) [see Warnings and Precautions (5.1), and Drug Interactions (7.1)].
                        Co-administration of ORBACTIV resulted in an increase of 18% in the ratio of 1-methylxanthine + 1 methylurate + 5-acetylamino-6-formylamino-3-methyluracil (1X + 1U + AFMU) to 1,7-dimethylurate (17U) concentrations in the urine after administration of caffeine (CYP1A2 probe substrate), and an increase of 16% in the ratio of AFMU to (1X +1U) concentrations in the urine after administration of caffeine (N-Acetyltransferase- 2 probe substrate). Co-administration of ORBACTIV did not change the mean systemic exposure of caffeine metabolite (Xanthine oxidase probe substrate).
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           oritavancin Figure 1
                           
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.4 Microbiology
                     
                        ORBACTIV is a semi-synthetic, lipoglycopeptide antibacterial drug. ORBACTIV exerts a concentration-dependent bactericidal activity in vitro against S. aureus, S. pyogenes, and E. faecalis.
                        
                           Mechanism of Action
                        
                        Oritavancin has three mechanisms of action: (i) inhibition of the transglycosylation (polymerization) step of cell wall biosynthesis by binding to the stem peptide of peptidoglycan precursors; (ii) inhibition of the transpeptidation (crosslinking) step of cell wall biosynthesis by binding to the peptide bridging segments of the cell wall; and (iii) disruption of bacterial membrane integrity, leading to depolarization, permeabilization, and cell death.  These multiple mechanisms contribute to the concentration-dependent bactericidal activity of oritavancin.
                        
                           Mechanism of Resistance 
                        
                        In serial passage studies, resistance to oritavancin was observed in isolates of S. aureus and E. faecalis. Resistance to oritavancin was not observed in clinical studies.
                        
                           Interaction with Other Antimicrobial Agents
                        
                        In in vitro studies, oritavancin exhibits synergistic bactericidal activity in combination with gentamicin, moxifloxacin or rifampicin against isolates of methicillin-susceptible S. aureus (MSSA), with gentamicin or linezolid against isolates of heterogeneous vancomycin-intermediate S. aureus (hVISA), VISA, and vancomycin-resistant S. aureus (VRSA), and with rifampin against isolates of VRSA.  In vitro studies demonstrated no antagonism between oritavancin and gentamicin, moxifloxacin, linezolid or rifampin.
                        
                           Antibacterial Activity
                        
                        Oritavancin has been shown to be active against most isolates of the following bacteria, both in vitro and in clinical infections as described in the Indications and Usage section [see Indications and Usage (1.1)].
                        
                           Staphylococcus aureus (including methicillin-resistant isolates) 
                        
                           Streptococcus agalactiae 
                        
                        
                           Streptococcus anginosus group (includes S. anginosus, S. intermedius, and S. constellatus)
                        
                           Streptococcus dysgalactiae
                        
                        
                           Streptococcus pyogenes
                        
                        
                           Enterococcus faecalis (vancomycin-susceptible isolates only)
                        The following in vitro data are available but their clinical significance has not been established. At least 90% of isolates of the following microorganisms exhibit an in vitro minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) less than or equal to 0.12 mcg/mL for oritavancin. However, the safety and effectiveness of oritavancin in treating clinical infections due to these bacteria have not been established in adequate and well-controlled clinical trials.
                        
                           Enterococcus faecium (vancomycin-susceptible isolates only)
                        
                           Susceptibility Testing Methods
                        
                        When available, the clinical microbiology laboratory should provide cumulative results of in vitro susceptibility test results for antimicrobial drugs used in local hospitals and practice areas to the physician as periodic reports that describe the susceptibility profile of nosocomial and community-acquired pathogens. These reports should aid the physician in selecting the most effective antimicrobial drug for treatment.
                        
                           Dilution technique
                        
                        Quantitative methods are used to determine antimicrobial minimal inhibitory concentrations (MICs). These MICs provide estimates of the susceptibility of bacteria to antimicrobial compounds.
                              1
                            Oritavancin MICs should be determined using a standardized procedure which are based on a broth microdilution method or equivalent with standardized inoculum concentrations and standardized concentrations of oritavancin. Oritavancin powder is dissolved and diluted in the presence of 0.002% polysorbate 80 and broth test medium is supplemented with polysorbate 80 to a final concentration of 0.002%. The MIC values should be interpreted according to the criteria provided in the Table 3.
                        


                        


A report of “Susceptible” indicates that the antimicrobial drug is likely to inhibit growth of the microorganism if the antimicrobial drug reaches the concentration usually achievable at the site of infection.
                        
                           Quality Control
                        
                        Standardized susceptibility test procedures require the use of laboratory control microorganisms to monitor and ensure the accuracy and precision of supplies and reagents used in the assay and the techniques of the individuals performing the test. Acceptable oritavancin MIC ranges for the quality control strains are shown in Table 4.
                        Quality control microorganisms are specific strains of organisms with intrinsic biological properties, and are very stable strains that will give a standard and reproducible susceptibility pattern. The specific strains used for microbiological quality control are not clinically significant.
                        


                        



                           Diffusion technique
                        
                        The use of the disk diffusion method is not recommended since quality control ranges have not been defined for oritavancin.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         