
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 Effect of ORBACTIV on CYP Substrates
                     
                        A cocktail drug-drug interaction study was conducted in healthy volunteers (n=16) evaluating the concomitant administration of a single 1200 mg dose of ORBACTIV with probe substrates for several CYP450 enzymes. ORBACTIV was found to be a nonspecific, weak inhibitor (CYP2C9 and CYP2C19) or inducer (CYP3A4 and CYP2D6) of several CYP isoforms [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                        Caution should be used when administering ORBACTIV concomitantly with drugs with a narrow therapeutic window that are predominantly metabolized by one of the affected CYP450 enzymes (e.g., warfarin), as co-administration may increase (e.g. for CYP2C9 substrates) or decrease (e.g. for CYP2D6 substrates) concentrations of the narrow therapeutic range drug.  Patients should be closely monitored for signs of toxicity or lack of efficacy if they have been given ORBACTIV while on a potentially affected compound (e.g. patients should be monitored for bleeding if concomitantly receiving ORBACTIV and warfarin)  [see Warnings and Precautions (5.1)].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 Drug-Laboratory Test Interactions
                     
                        ORBACTIV has been shown to artificially prolong aPTT for 48 hours and PT and INR for up to 24 hours by binding to and preventing action of the phospholipid reagents which activate coagulation in commonly used laboratory coagulation tests.  Effects by ORBACTIV on ACT are expected since the phospholipid reagents are also utilized in this coagulation test. ORBACTIV has no effect on the coagulation system. [see Warnings and Precautions (5.2)].
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         