
               
               
               7  DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
                  See also 
                        Contraindications (4.2), Warnings and Precautions (5.3), and Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)
                        
                     .
               
               
               
                  
                     
                        Co-administration of APTIVUS can alter the
concentrations of other drugs and other drugs may alter the concentration
of tipranavir. The potential for drug-drug interactions must be considered
prior to and during therapy. (4.2, 5.3, 7)
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1  Potential for APTIVUS/ritonavir
to Affect Other Drugs 
                     
                        APTIVUS co-administered with ritonavir at the recommended dose is
a net inhibitor of CYP 3A and may increase plasma concentrations of
agents that are primarily metabolized by CYP 3A. Thus, co-administration
of APTIVUS/ritonavir with drugs highly dependent on CYP 3A for clearance
and for which elevated plasma concentrations are associated with serious
and/or life-threatening events is contraindicated [
                              see Contraindications (4.2)
                              
                           ]. Co-administration with other CYP 3A substrates may require
a dose adjustment or additional monitoring [
                              see
Drug Interactions (7)
                              
                           ].
                        Clinically significant drug-drug
interactions of APTIVUS co-administered with ritonavir are summarized
in Table 4 below.
                        A phenotypic
cocktail study was conducted with 16 healthy volunteers to quantify
the influence of 10 days of APTIVUS/ritonavir capsule administration
on the activity of hepatic CYP 1A2 (caffeine), 2C9 (warfarin), 2C19
(omeprazole), 2D6 (dextromethorphan) and the activity of intestinal
and hepatic CYP 3A4/5 (midazolam) and P-glycoprotein (P-gp) (digoxin).
This study determined the first-dose and steady-state effects of 500
mg of APTIVUS co-administered with 200 mg of ritonavir twice daily
in capsule form. APTIVUS oral solution co-administered with ritonavir
capsules demonstrated similar effects as APTIVUS capsules co-administrated
with ritonavir.
                        There was no
net effect on CYP 2C9 or hepatic P-gp at first dose or steady state.
There was no net effect after first dose on CYP 1A2, but there was
moderate induction at steady state. There was modest inhibition of
CYP 2C19 at the first dose, but there was marked induction at steady
state. Potent inhibition of CYP 2D6 and both hepatic and intestinal
CYP 3A4/5 activities were observed after first dose and steady state.
                        Intestinal and hepatic P-gp activity was
assessed by administering oral and intravenous digoxin, respectively.
The digoxin results indicate P-gp was inhibited after the first dose
of APTIVUS/ritonavir followed by induction of P-gp over time. Thus,
it is difficult to predict the net effect of APTIVUS administered
with ritonavir on oral bioavailability and plasma concentrations of
drugs that are dual substrates of CYP 3A and P-gp. The net effect
will vary depending on the relative affinity of the co-administered
drugs for CYP 3A and P-gp, and the extent of intestinal first-pass
metabolism/efflux. An 
                              in vitro
                            induction study in human hepatocytes showed an increase in UGT1A1
by tipranavir similar to that evoked by rifampin. The clinical consequences
of this finding have not been established.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2  Potential for Other
Drugs to Affect Tipranavir 
                     
                        Tipranavir is a CYP 3A substrate and a P-gp substrate.
Co-administration of APTIVUS/ritonavir and drugs that induce CYP 3A
and/or P-gp may decrease tipranavir plasma concentrations. Co-administration
of APTIVUS/ritonavir and drugs that inhibit P-gp may increase tipranavir
plasma concentrations. Co-administration of APTIVUS/ritonavir with
drugs that inhibit CYP 3A may not further increase tipranavir plasma
concentrations, because the level of metabolites is low following
steady-state administration of APTIVUS/ritonavir 500/200 mg twice
daily.
                        Clinically significant
drug-drug interactions of APTIVUS co-administered with ritonavir are
summarized in Table 4 below.
                        


