
                     
                     
                     Drug Interactions
                     
                        
                           Serotonergic Drugs:  See 
                              CONTRAINDICATIONS, WARNINGS, and DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION.
                        
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Triptans
                              
                           
                           
                              There have been rare postmarketing reports of serotonin syndrome with use of an SSRI and a triptan. If concomitant treatment of citalopram with a triptan is clinically warranted, careful observation of the patient is advised, particularly during treatment initiation and dose increases (see 
                                    WARNINGS – Serotonin Syndrome).
                              
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              CNS Drugs
                           
                           
                              Given the primary CNS effects of citalopram, caution should be used when it is taken in combination with other centrally acting drugs.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Alcohol
                           
                           
                              Although citalopram did not potentiate the cognitive and motor effects of alcohol in a clinical trial, as with other psychotropic medications, the use of alcohol by depressed patients taking citalopram tablets is not recommended.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Monoamine Oxidase Inhibitors (MAOIs)
                           
                           
                              See 
                                    CONTRAINDICATIONS
                                 , 
                                    WARNINGS, and DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION
                                 .
                              Drugs That Interfere With Hemostasis (NSAIDs, Aspirin, Warfarin, etc.)
                              Serotonin release by platelets plays an important role in hemostasis. Epidemiological studies of the case-control and cohort design that have demonstrated an association between use of psychotropic drugs that interfere with serotonin reuptake and the occurrence of upper gastrointestinal bleeding have also shown that concurrent use of an NSAID or aspirin may potentiate the risk of bleeding. Altered anticoagulant effects, including increased bleeding, have been reported when SSRIs and SNRIs are coadministered with warfarin. Patients receiving warfarin therapy should be carefully monitored when citalopram is initiated or discontinued.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Cimetidine
                           
                           
                              In subjects who had received 21 days of 40 mg/day citalopram tablets, combined administration of 400 mg/day cimetidine for 8 days resulted in an increase in citalopram AUC and Cmax of 43% and 39%, respectively. 
                              Citalopram tablets 20 mg/day is the maximum recommended dose for patients taking concomitant cimetidine because of the risk of QT prolongation (see 
                                    DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION
                                 ).
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Digoxin
                           
                           
                              In subjects who had received 21 days of 40 mg/day citalopram tablets, combined administration of citalopram tablets and digoxin (single dose of 1 mg) did not significantly affect the pharmacokinetics of either citalopram or digoxin.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Lithium
                           
                           
                              Coadministration of citalopram tablets (40 mg/day for 10 days) and lithium (30 mmol/day for 5 days) had no significant effect on the pharmacokinetics of citalopram or lithium. Nevertheless, plasma lithium levels should be monitored with appropriate adjustment to the lithium dose in accordance with standard clinical practice. Because lithium may enhance the serotonergic effects of citalopram, caution should be exercised when citalopram tablets and lithium are coadministered.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Pimozide
                           
                           
                              In a controlled study, a single dose of pimozide 2 mg co-administered with citalopram 40 mg given once daily for 11 days was associated with a mean increase in QTc values of approximately 10 msec compared to pimozide given alone. Citalopram did not alter the mean AUC or Cmax of pimozide. The mechanism of this pharmacodynamic interaction is not known.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Theophylline
                           
                           
                              Combined administration of citalopram tablets (40 mg/day for 21 days) and the CYP1A2 substrate theophylline (single dose of 300 mg) did not affect the pharmacokinetics of theophylline.  The effect of theophylline on the pharmacokinetics of citalopram was not evaluated.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Sumatriptan
                           
                           
                              There have been rare postmarketing reports describing patients with weakness, hyperreflexia, and incoordination following the use of a SSRI and sumatriptan. If concomitant treatment with sumatriptan and an SSRI (e.g., fluoxetine, fluvoxamine, paroxetine, sertraline, citalopram) is clinically warranted, appropriate observation of the patient is advised.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Warfarin
                           
                           
                              Administration of 40 mg/day citalopram tablets for 21 days did not affect the pharmacokinetics of warfarin, a CYP3A4 substrate. Prothrombin time was increased by 5%, the clinical significance of which is unknown.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Carbamazepine
                           
                           
                              Combined administration of citalopram tablets (40 mg/day for 14 days) and carbamazepine (titrated to 400 mg/day for 35 days) did not significantly affect the pharmacokinetics of carbamazepine, a CYP3A4 substrate. Although trough citalopram plasma levels were unaffected, given the enzyme-inducing properties of carbamazepine, the possibility that carbamazepine might increase the clearance of citalopram should be considered if the two drugs are coadministered.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Triazolam
                           
                           
                              Combined administration of citalopram tablets (titrated to 40 mg/day for 28 days) and the CYP3A4 substrate triazolam (single dose of 0.25 mg) did not significantly affect the pharmacokinetics of either citalopram or triazolam.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Ketoconazole
                           
                           
                              Combined administration of citalopram tablets (40 mg) and ketoconazole (200 mg) decreased the Cmax and AUC of ketoconazole by 21% and 10%, respectively, and did not significantly affect the pharmacokinetics of citalopram.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              CYP2C19 Inhibitors
                           
                           
                              Citalopram tablets 20 mg/day is the maximum recommended dose for patients taking concomitant CYP2C19 inhibitors because of the risk of QT prolongation (see 
                                    WARNINGS, DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION and CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
                                 ).
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Metoprolol
                           
                           
                              Administration of 40 mg/day citalopram tablets for 22 days resulted in a two-fold increase in the plasma levels of the beta-adrenergic blocker metoprolol.  Increased metoprolol plasma levels have been associated with decreased cardioselectivity. Coadministration of citalopram tablets and metoprolol had no clinically significant effects on blood pressure or heart rate.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Imipramine and Other Tricyclic Antidepressants (TCAs)
                           
                           
                              
                                 In vitro studies suggest that citalopram is a relatively weak inhibitor of  CYP2D6.  Coadministration of citalopram tablets (40 mg/day for 10 days) with the TCA imipramine (single dose of 100 mg), a substrate for CYP2D6, did not significantly affect the plasma concentrations of imipramine or citalopram. However, the concentration of the imipramine metabolite desipramine was increased by approximately 50%. The clinical significance of the desipramine change is unknown. Nevertheless, caution is indicated in the coadministration of TCAs with citalopram tablets.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Electroconvulsive Therapy (ECT)
                           
                           
                              There are no clinical studies of the combined use of electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) and citalopram tablets.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               