
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
                  A number of drug interactions between vitamins and other drugs have been reported. Consult appropriate references for additional specific vitamin-drug interactions. The following are examples of these types of interactions:
               
               
               
                  
                     
                        A number of interactions between vitamins and drugs have been reported. The following are examples of these interactions:
                        
                           
                              Physical Incompatibilities
                            (7.1):
                        
                           
    Thiamine, riboflavin, pyridoxine, niacinamide, and ascorbic acid have been reported to decrease the antibiotic activity of erythromycin, kanamycin, streptomycin, doxycycline, and lincomycin. 
    
                           
    Bleomycin 
    
                        
                        
                           
                              Clinical Interactions
                           :
                        
                           
    Phenytoin (7.1)
    
                           
    Levodopa (7.1)
    
                           
    Chloramphenicol (7.2)
    
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 Clinical Interactions Affecting Drug Levels
                     
                        
                           
                              Folic acid
                           
                        
                        Phenytoin metabolism may be increased by folic acid. Low serum concentration of phenytoin may result in increased seizure frequency.
                        Patient's response to methotrexate therapy may be decreased by folic acid.
                        
                           
                              Pyridoxine
                           
                        
                        The metabolism of levodopa may be increased and its efficacy may be decreased by pyridoxine.
                        
                           
                              Antibiotics
                           
                        
                        Antibiotic activity of erythromycin, kanamycin, streptomycin, doxycycline, and lincomycin is decreased by thiamine, riboflavin, pyridoxine, niacinamide, and ascorbic acid. Bleomycin is inactivated 
                              in vitro 
                           by ascorbic acid and riboflavin.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 Clinical Interactions Affecting Vitamin Levels
                     
                        
                           
                              Hydralazine, Isoniazid
                           
                        
                        Pyridoxine requirements may be increased by concomitant administration of hydralazine or isoniazid.
                        
                           
                              Chloramphenicol
                           
                        
                        In patients with pernicious anemia, the hematologic response to vitamin B12 therapy may be inhibited by concomitant administration of chloramphenicol.
                        
                           
                              Phenytoin
                           
                        
                        Serum folic acid concentrations may be decreased by phenytoin and, therefore it should be avoided in pregnancy.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         