
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  Dopamine exhibits an inotropic action on the myocardium, resulting in increased cardiac output. It causes less increase in myocardial oxygen consumption than isoproterenol and the effect of dopamine usually is not associated with tachyarrhythmia. Reported clinical studies have revealed that the drug usually increases systolic and pulse pressure without any or only a minor elevating effect on diastolic pressure. Total peripheral resistance at low and intermediate doses is usually unchanged. Blood flow to peripheral vascular beds may decrease while mesenteric blood flow is increased. The drug also has been reported to produce dilation of the renal vasculature which is accompanied by increases in glomerular filtration rate, renal blood flow and sodium excretion. Increased urinary output produced by dopamine is usually not associated with decreased urine osmolality.
                  Solutions containing carbohydrate in the form of dextrose restore blood glucose levels and provide calories. Carbohydrate in the form of dextrose may aid in minimizing liver glycogen depletion and exerts a protein-sparing action. Dextrose injected parenterally undergoes oxidation to carbon dioxide and water.
                  Water is an essential constituent of all body tissues and accounts for approximately 70% of total body weight. Average normal adult daily requirement ranges from two to three liters (1.0 to 1.5 liters each for insensible water loss due to perspiration and urine production).
                  Water balance is maintained by various regulatory mechanisms. Water distribution depends primarily on the concentration of electrolytes and sodium (Na+) plays a major role in maintaining physiologic equilibrium.
                  The reported clearance rate of dopamine in critically ill infants and children has ranged from 46 to 168 mL/kg/min, with the higher values seen in the younger patients. The apparent volume of distribution in neonates is reported as 0.6 to 4 L/kg, leading to an elimination half-life of 5 to 11 minutes.
               
               
            
         