
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
                  Drug-drug interactions can be pharmacodynamic (combined pharmacologic effects) or pharmacokinetic (alteration of plasma levels). The risks of using ziprasidone in combination with other drugs have been evaluated as described below. All interactions studies have been conducted with oral ziprasidone. Based upon the pharmacodynamic and pharmacokinetic profile of ziprasidone, possible interactions could be anticipated: 
               
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           Ziprasidone should not be used in combination with other drugs that have demonstrated QT prolongation. (4.1, 7.3) 
                           The absorption of ziprasidone is increased up to two-fold in the presence of food. (7.9)
                           
                           The full prescribing information contains additional drug interactions. (7). 
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        7.1 Metabolic Pathway
                     
                     
                        Approximately two-thirds of ziprasidone is metabolized via a combination of chemical reduction by glutathione and enzymatic reduction by aldehyde oxidase. There are no known clinically relevant inhibitors or inducers of aldehyde oxidase. Less than one-third of ziprasidone metabolic clearance is mediated by cytochrome P450 catalyzed oxidation. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        7.2 In Vitro Studies
                     
                     
                        An in vitro enzyme inhibition study utilizing human liver microsomes showed that ziprasidone had little inhibitory effect on CYP1A2, CYP2C9, CYP2C19, CYP2D6 and CYP3A4, and thus would not likely interfere with the metabolism of drugs primarily metabolized by these enzymes. There is little potential for drug interactions with ziprasidone due to displacement [See Clinical Pharmacology 
                           
                              (12.3)
                           ]. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        7.3 Pharmacodynamic Interactions 
                     
                     
                        Ziprasidone should not be used with any drug that prolongs the QT interval [See Contraindications 
                           
                              (4.1)
                           ].
                        Given the primary CNS effects of ziprasidone, caution should be used when it is taken in combination with other centrally acting drugs. 
                        Because of its potential for inducing hypotension, ziprasidone may enhance the effects of certain antihypertensive agents. 
                        Ziprasidone may antagonize the effects of levodopa and dopamine agonists. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        7.4 Pharmacokinetic Interactions 
                     
                     
                        
                           
                              Carbamazepine
                           
                        
                        Carbamazepine is an inducer of CYP3A4; administration of 200 mg twice daily for 21 days resulted in a decrease of approximately 35% in the AUC of ziprasidone. This effect may be greater when higher doses of carbamazepine are administered. 
                        
                           Ketoconazole 
                        
                        Ketoconazole, a potent inhibitor of CYP3A4, at a dose of 400 mg QD for 5 days, increased the AUC and Cmax of ziprasidone by about 35 to 40%. Other inhibitors of CYP3A4 would be expected to have similar effects. 
                        
                           
                              Cimetidine 
                           
                        
                        Cimetidine at a dose of 800 mg QD for 2 days did not affect ziprasidone pharmacokinetics. 
                        
                           
                              Antacid 
                           
                        
                        The co-administration of 30 mL of Maalox® with ziprasidone did not affect the pharmacokinetics of ziprasidone. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        7.5 Lithium 
                     
                     
                        Ziprasidone at a dose of 40 mg twice daily administered concomitantly with lithium at a dose of 450 mg twice daily for 7 days did not affect the steady-state level or renal clearance of lithium. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        7.6 Oral Contraceptives 
                     
                     
                        
                           In vivo studies have revealed no effect of ziprasidone on the pharmacokinetics of estrogen or progesterone components. Ziprasidone at a dose of 20 mg twice daily did not affect the pharmacokinetics of concomitantly administered oral contraceptives, ethinyl estradiol (0.03 mg) and levonorgestrel (0.15 mg). 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        7.7 Dextromethorphan 
                     
                     
                        Consistent with in vitro results, a study in normal healthy volunteers showed that ziprasidone did not alter the metabolism of dextromethorphan, a CYP2D6 model substrate, to its major metabolite, dextrorphan. There was no statistically significant change in the urinary dextromethorphan/dextrorphan ratio. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        7.8 Valproate 
                     
                     
                        A pharmacokinetic interaction of ziprasidone with valproate is unlikely due to the lack of common metabolic pathways for the two drugs. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        7.9 Other Concomitant Drug Therapy
                     
                     
                        Population pharmacokinetic analysis of schizophrenic patients enrolled in controlled clinical trials has not revealed evidence of any clinically significant pharmacokinetic interactions with benztropine, propranolol, or lorazepam. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        7.10 Food Interaction
                     
                     
                        The absolute bioavailability of a 20 mg dose under fed conditions is approximately 60%. The absorption of ziprasidone is increased up to two-fold in the presence of food [see Clinical Pharmacology 
                           
                              (12.3)
                           
                           ]. 
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         