
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Methadone hydrochloride is a µ agonist; a synthetic opioid analgesic with multiple actions qualitatively similar to those of morphine, the most prominent of which involve the central nervous system and organs composed of smooth muscle. The principal therapeutic uses for methadone are for analgesia and for detoxification or maintenance in opioid addiction. The methadone abstinence syndrome, although qualitatively similar to that of morphine, differs in that the onset is slower, the course is more prolonged, and the symptoms are less severe.
                        Some data also indicate that methadone acts as an antagonist at the N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptor. The contribution of NMDA receptor antagonism to methadone's efficacy is unknown. Other NMDA receptor antagonists have been shown to produce neurotoxic effects in animals.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Pharmacokinetics
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Absorption
                           
                              Methadone Hydrochloride Injection is intended for parenteral (intravenous, subcutaneous and intramuscular) administration. Methadone pharmacokinetics following subcutaneous and intramuscular administration have not been systematically studied and differences among the various parenteral routes have not been well characterized. As with many drugs, absorption into the systemic circulation may vary with subcutaneous and intramuscular administration.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Distribution
                           
                              Methadone is a lipophilic drug and the steady state volume of distribution ranges between 2 - 6 L/kg. In plasma, methadone is predominantly bound to α1-acid glycoprotein (85% - 90%). Methadone is secreted in saliva, breast milk, amniotic fluid and umbilical cord plasma.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Metabolism
                           
                              Methadone is primarily metabolized by N-demethylation to an inactive metabolite, 2-ethylidene-1,5-dimethyl-3,3-diphenylpyrrolidene (EDDP). Cytochrome P450 enzymes, primarily CYP3A4 and to a lesser extent CYP2D6, are responsible for conversion of methadone to EDDP and other inactive metabolites, which are excreted mainly in urine.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Excretion
                           
                              Elimination of methadone is mediated by extensive biotransformation, followed by renal and fecal excretion. After single intravenous dose administration the plasma clearance of methadone ranged between 3-10 L/h and the terminal half-life (t½) ranged between 8 - 59 hours. Methadone has been known to persist in the liver and other tissues. Slow release from the liver and other tissues may prolong the duration of methadone action despite low plasma concentrations.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Pharmacokinetics in Special Populations
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Pregnancy
                           
                              There are no pharmacokinetic studies of parenteral methadone in pregnancy. The disposition of oral methadone has been studied in approximately 30 pregnant patients in 2nd and 3rd trimesters. Elimination of methadone was significantly changed in pregnancy. Total body clearance of methadone was increased in pregnant patients compared to the same patients postpartum or to non-pregnant opioid-dependent women. The terminal half-life of methadone is decreased during second and third trimesters. The decrease in plasma half-life and increased clearance of methadone resulting in lower methadone trough levels during pregnancy can lead to withdrawal symptoms in some pregnant patients. The dosage may need to be increased or the dosing interval decreased in pregnant patients receiving methadone (See 
                                    DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION
                                 ).
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Renal Impairment
                           
                              Methadone pharmacokinetics have not been extensively evaluated in patients with renal insufficiency. Unchanged methadone and its metabolites are excreted in urine to a variable degree. Methadone is a basic (pKa=9.2) compound and the luminal pH of the urinary tract can affect its extraction from plasma. Urine acidification has been shown to increase renal elimination of methadone. Forced diuresis, peritoneal dialysis, hemodialysis, or charcoal hemoperfusion have not been established as beneficial for increasing methadone or metabolite elimination.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Hepatic Impairment
                           
                              Methadone pharmacokinetics have not been extensively evaluated in patients with hepatic insufficiency. Methadone is metabolized in the liver and patients with liver impairment may be at risk of accumulating methadone after multiple dosing.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Gender
                           
                              The pharmacokinetics of methadone have not been evaluated for gender specificity.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Race
                           
                              The pharmacokinetics of methadone have not been evaluated for race specificity.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Geriatric
                           
                              The pharmacokinetics of methadone have not been evaluated in geriatric population.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Pediatric
                           
                              The pharmacokinetics of methadone have not been evaluated in pediatric population.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Drug Interactions
                           
                              
                                 (see PRECAUTIONS, Drug Interactions)
                              
                              Methadone undergoes hepatic N-demethylation by cytochrome P-450 isoforms, principally CYP3A4, and to a lesser extent CYP2D6. Coadministration of methadone with inducers of these enzymes may result in more rapid methadone metabolism and potentially, decreased effects of methadone. Conversely, administration with CYP3A4 or CYP2D6 inhibitors may reduce metabolism and potentiate methadone's effects. Therefore, drugs administered concomitantly with methadone should be evaluated for interaction potential (see 
                                    Drug Interactions
                                 ) 
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         