
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  
                  Following a single dose of two minocycline hydrochloride 100 mg capsules administered to 18 normal fasting adult volunteers, maximum serum concentrations were attained in 1 to 4 hours (average 2.1 hours) and ranged from 2.1 to 5.1 mcg/mL (average 3.5 mcg/mL).The serum half-life in the normal volunteers ranged from 11.1 to 22.1 hours (average 15.5 hours).
                  When minocycline hydrochloride capsules were given concomitantly with a high-fat meal, which included dairy products, the extent of absorption of minocycline hydrochloride capsules was unchanged compared to dosing under fasting conditions. The mean Tmax was delayed by one hour when administered with food, compared to dosing under fasting conditions. Minocycline hydrochloride capsules may be administered with or without food.
                  In previous studies with other minocycline dosage forms, the minocycline serum half-life ranged from 11 to 16 hours in 7 patients with hepatic dysfunction, and from 18 to 69 hours in 5 patients with renal dysfunction. The urinary and fecal recovery of minocycline when administered to 12 normal volunteers was one-half to one-third that of other tetracyclines.
                  
                     Microbiology
                  
                  The tetracyclines are primarily bacteriostatic and are thought to exert their antimicrobial effect by the inhibition of protein synthesis. The tetracyclines, including minocycline, have a similar antimicrobial spectrum of activity against a wide range of gram-positive and gram-negative organisms. Cross-resistance of these organisms to tetracycline is common.
                  Minocycline has been shown to be active against most strains of the following microorganisms, both in vitro and in clinical infections as described in the INDICATIONS AND USAGE section:
                  AEROBIC GRAM-POSITIVE MICROORGANISMS
                  Because many strains of the following gram-positive microorganisms have been shown to be resistant to tetracyclines, culture and susceptibility testing are especially recommended. Tetracycline antibiotics should not be used for streptococcal diseases unless the organism has been demonstrated to be susceptible. Tetracyclines are not the drug of choice in the treatment of any type of staphylococcal infection.
                  
                     Bacillus anthracis
                     1
                  
                  
                     Listeria monocytogenes
                     1
                  
                  
                     Staphylococcus aureus
                  
                  
                     Streptococcus pneumoniae
                  
                  AEROBIC GRAM-NEGATIVE MICROORGANISMS
                  
                     Bartonella bacilliformis
                  
                  
                     Brucella species
                  
                     Calymmatobacterium granulomatis
                  
                  
                     Campylobacter fetus
                  
                  
                     Francisella tularensis
                  
                  
                     Haemophilus ducreyi
                  
                  
                     Vibrio cholerae
                  
                  
                     Yersinia pestis
                  
                  Because many strains of the following groups of gram-negative microorganisms have been shown to be resistant to tetracyclines, culture and susceptibility tests are especially recommended.
                  
                     Acinetobacter species
                  
                     Enterobacter aerogenes
                  
                  
                     Escherichia coli
                  
                  
                     Haemophilus influenzae
                  
                  
                     Klebsiella species
                  
                     Neisseria gonorrhoeae
                     1
                  
                  
                     Neisseria meningitidis
                     1
                  
                  
                     Shigella species
                  "OTHER" MICROORGANISMS
                  
                     Actinomyces species1
                  
                  
                     Borrelia recurrentis
                  
                  
                     Chlamydia psittaci
                  
                  
                     Chlamydia trachomatis
                  
                  
                     Clostridium species1
                  
                  
                     Entamoeba species
                  
                     Fusobacterium nucleatum subspecies fusiforme
                     1
                  
                  
                     Mycobacterium marinum
                  
                  
                     Mycoplasma pneumoniae
                  
                  
                     Propionibacterium acnes
                  
                  
                     Rickettsiae
                  
                  
                     Treponema pallidum subspecies pallidum
                     1
                  
                  
                     Treponema pallidum subspecies pertenue
                     1
                  
                  
                     Ureaplasma urealyticum
                  
                  
                     1When penicillin is contraindicated, tetracyclines are alternative drugs in the treatment of infections caused by the cited microorganisms.
                  
                     Susceptibility Tests
                  
                  Susceptibility testing should be performed with tetracycline since it predicts susceptibility to minocycline. However, certain organisms (e.g., some staphylococci and Acinetobacter species) may be more susceptible to minocycline and doxycycline than to tetracycline.
                  
                     Dilution techniques:
                  
                  Quantitative methods are used to determine antimicrobial minimal inhibitory concentrations (MICs). These MICs provide estimates of the susceptibility of bacteria to antimicrobial compounds. The MICs should be determined using a standardized procedure. Standardized procedures are based on a dilution method (Ref1, Ref3) (broth or agar) or equivalent with standardized inoculum concentrations and standardized concentrations of tetracycline powder. The MIC values should be interpreted according to the following criteria:
                  For testing aerobic gram-negative microorganisms (Enterobacteriaceae), Acinetobacter species and Staphylococcus aureus:
                  


                  


For testing Haemophilus influenzae
                     2 and Streptococcus pneumoniae
                     3:
                  


                  



                     2These interpretative standards are applicable only to broth microdilution susceptibility testing with Haemophilus influenzae using Haemophilus Test Medium.Ref1
                  
                     3These interpretative standards are applicable only to broth microdilution susceptibility testing using cation-adjusted Muller-Hinton broth with 2 to 5% lysed horse blood.1
                  
                  For testing Neisseria gonorrhoeae
                     4:
                  


                  



                     4These interpretative standards are applicable only to agar dilution susceptibility testing using GC agar base and 1% defined growth supplements.Ref1
                  A report of "Susceptible" indicates that the pathogen is likely to be inhibited if the antimicrobial compound in the blood reaches the concentrations usually achievable. A report of "Intermediate" indicates that the result should be considered equivocal, and, if the microorganism is not fully susceptible to alternative, clinically feasible drugs, the test should be repeated. This category implies possible clinical applicability in body sites where the drug is physiologically concentrated or in situations where high dosage of drug can be used. This category also provides a buffer zone which prevents small uncontrolled technical factors from causing major discrepancies in interpretation. A report of "Resistant" indicates that the pathogen is not likely to be inhibited if the antimicrobial compound in the blood reaches the concentrations usually achievable; other therapy should be selected.
                  Standardized susceptibility test procedures require the use of laboratory control microorganisms to control the technical aspects of the laboratory procedures. Standard tetracycline powder should provide the following MIC values:
                  


                  



                     Diffusion techniques:
                  
                  Quantitative methods that require measurement of zone diameters also provide reproducible estimates of the susceptibility of bacteria to antimicrobial compounds. One such standardized procedure (Ref2, Ref3) requires the use of standardized inoculum concentrations. This procedure uses paper disks impregnated with 30 mcg tetracycline (class disk) or 30 mcg minocycline to test the susceptibility of microorganisms to minocycline. 
                  Reports from the laboratory providing results of the standard single-disk susceptibility test with a 30 mcg tetracycline or minocycline disk should be interpreted according to the following criteria:
                  For testing aerobic gram-negative microorganisms (Enterobacteriaceae), Acinetobacter species and Staphylococcus aureus:
                  
                  


                  


For testing Haemophilus influenzae
                     5:
                  


                  



                     5 These zone diameter standards are applicable only to susceptibility testing with Haemophilus influenzae using Haemophilus Test Medium and a 30 mcg tetracycline disk.Ref2
                  For testing Neisseria gonorrhoeae
                     6:
                  


                  



                     6These interpretative standards are applicable only to disk diffusion testing using GC agar and 1% growth supplements, and a 30 mcg tetracycline disk.Ref2
                  For testing Streptococcus pneumoniae
                     7:
                  


                  



                     7These interpretative standards are applicable only to disk diffusion testing using Muller-Hinton agar adjusted with 5% sheep blood and a 30 mcg tetracycline disk.Ref2
                  For testing Vibrio cholerae
                     8:
                  


                  



                     8 These interpretative standards are applicable only to disk diffusion testing performed with a 30 mcg tetracycline disk. (Ref2)
                  Interpretation should be as stated above for results using dilution techniques. Interpretation involves correlation of the diameter obtained in the disk test with the MIC for tetracycline.
                  As with standardized dilution techniques, diffusion methods require the use of laboratory control microorganisms that are used to control the technical aspects of the laboratory procedures. For the diffusion technique, the 30 mcg tetracycline or minocycline disk should provide the following zone diameters in these laboratory test quality control strains:
                  


                  



 

               
               
            
         