
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  
                     
                        ·         Atazanavir: Do not co-administer with atazanavir. (7.1)
                        ·         Drugs with pH-Dependent Absorption: May interfere with the absorption of drugs where gastric pH is important for bioavailability. (7.1)
                        ·         Warfarin:Concomitant warfarin use may require monitoring for increases in INR and prothrombin time. (7.2)
                        ·         Tacrolimus:Concomitant tacrolimus use may increase tacrolimus whole blood concentrations. (7.3) 
                        ·         Theophylline: Titration of theophylline dosage may be required when concomitant lansoprazole delayed-release capsules use is started or stopped. (7.4)
                        ·         Methotrexate: Lansoprazole delayed-release capsules may increase serum levels of methotrexate. (7.6)
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 Drugs with pH-Dependent Absorption Kinetics
                     
                        Lansoprazole delayed-release capsule causes long-lasting inhibition of gastric acid secretion. Lansoprazole delayed-release capsules and other PPIs are likely to substantially decrease the systemic concentrations of the HIV protease inhibitor atazanavir, which is dependent upon the presence of gastric acid for absorption, and may result in a loss of therapeutic effect of atazanavir and the development of HIV resistance. Therefore, lansoprazole delayed-release capsules and other PPIs should not be co-administered with atazanavir [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                        
                                       
                        Lansoprazole delayed-release capsules and other PPIs may interfere with the absorption of other drugs where gastric pH is an important determinant of oral bioavailability (e.g., ampicillin esters, digoxin, iron salts, ketoconazole) [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 Warfarin
                     
                        In a study of healthy subjects, co-administration of single or multiple 60 mg doses of lansoprazole delayed-release capsules and warfarin did not affect the pharmacokinetics of warfarin nor prothrombin time [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3 )]. However, there have been reports of increased INR and prothrombin time in patients receiving PPIs and warfarin concomitantly. Increases in INR and prothrombin time may lead to abnormal bleeding and even death. Patients treated with PPIs and warfarin concomitantly may need to be monitored for increases in INR and prothrombin time [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3 Tacrolimus
                     
                        Concomitant administration of lansoprazole and tacrolimus may increase whole blood levels of tacrolimus, especially in transplant patients who are intermediate or poor metabolizers of CYP2C19.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4 Theophylline
                     
                        A minor increase (10%) in the clearance of theophylline was observed following the administration of lansoprazole delayed-release capsules concomitantly with theophylline. Although the magnitude of the effect on theophylline clearance is small, individual patients may require additional titration of their theophylline dosage when lansoprazole delayed-release capsules is started or stopped to ensure clinically effective blood levels [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.5 Clopidogrel
                     
                        Concomitant administration of lansoprazole and clopidogrel in healthy subjects   had no clinically important effect   on exposure to the active metabolite of clopidogrel or clopidogrel-induced platelet inhibition  [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)]. No dose adjustment of clopidogrel is necessary when administered with an approved dose of lansoprazole delayed-release capsules.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.6 Methotrexate
                     
                        Case reports, published population pharmacokinetic studies, and retrospective analyses suggest that concomitant administration of PPIs and methotrexate (primarily at high dose; see methotrexate prescribing information) may elevate and prolong serum levels of methotrexate and/or its metabolite hydroxymethotrexate. However, no formal drug interaction studies of high dose methotrexate with PPIs have been conducted [see Warnings and Precautions (5.5)].
                                       
                        In a study of rheumatoid arthritis patients receiving low-dose methotrexate, lansoprazole delayed-release capsules and naproxen, no effect on pharmacokinetics of methotrexate was observed [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)]
                        
                         
                          
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.7   Combination Therapy with Clarithromycin 
                     
                        Concomitant administration of clarithromycin with other drugs can lead to serious adverse reactions due to drug interactions [see Warnings and Precautions in prescribing information for clarithromycin]. Because of these drug interactions, clarithromycin is contraindicated for co-administration with certain drugs [see Contraindications in prescribing information for clarithromycin]. 
                                       
                        For information about drug interactions of antibacterial agents (amoxicillin and clarithromycin) indicated in combination with lansoprazole delayed-release capsules, refer to the DRUG INTERACTIONS section of their package inserts.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         