
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY

               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1  Mechanism of Action

                     
                        Linaclotide is a guanylate cyclase-C (GC-C) agonist. Both linaclotide and its active metabolite bind to GC-C and act locally on the luminal surface of the intestinal epithelium. Activation of GC-C results in an increase in both intracellular and extracellular concentrations of cyclic guanosine monophosphate (cGMP). Elevation in intracellular cGMP stimulates secretion of chloride and bicarbonate into the intestinal lumen, mainly through activation of the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) ion channel, resulting in increased intestinal fluid and accelerated transit. In animal models, linaclotide has been shown to both accelerate GI transit and reduce intestinal pain. The linaclotide-induced reduction in visceral pain in animals is thought to be mediated by increased extracellular cGMP, which was shown to decrease the activity of pain-sensing nerves.

                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics

                     
                        Although the pharmacologic effects of LINZESS in humans have not been fully evaluated, in clinical studies, LINZESS has been shown to change stool consistency as measured by the Bristol Stool Form Scale (BSFS) and increase stool frequency.

                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics

                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Absorption
                              
                              LINZESS is minimally absorbed with low systemic availability following oral administration. Concentrations of linaclotide and its active metabolite in plasma are below the limit of quantitation after oral doses of 145 mcg or 290 mcg were administered. Therefore, standard pharmacokinetic parameters such as area under the curve (AUC), maximum concentration (Cmax), and half-life (t½) cannot be calculated.

                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Distribution
                              
                              Given that linaclotide plasma concentrations following therapeutic oral doses are not measurable, linaclotide is expected to be minimally distributed to tissues.

                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Metabolism
                              
                              Linaclotide is metabolized within the gastrointestinal tract to its principal, active metabolite by loss of the terminal tyrosine moiety. Both linaclotide and the metabolite are proteolytically degraded within the intestinal lumen to smaller peptides and naturally occurring amino acids.

                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Elimination
                              
                              Active peptide recovery in the stool samples of fed and fasted subjects following the daily administration of 290 mcg of LINZESS for seven days averaged about 5% (fasted) and about 3% (fed) and virtually all as the active metabolite.

                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Food Effect
                              
                              In a cross-over study, 18 healthy subjects were given LINZESS 290 mcg for 7 days both in the non-fed and fed state. Neither linaclotide nor its active metabolite was detected in the plasma. Taking LINZESS immediately after the high fat breakfast resulted in looser stools and a higher stool frequency compared with taking it in the fasted state [see Dosage and Administration (2.1, 2.2)].  In clinical trials, LINZESS was administered on an empty stomach, at least 30 minutes before breakfast.

                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Specific Populations
                              
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Age and Gender
                                    
                                    Clinical studies to determine the impact of age and gender on the pharmacokinetics of LINZESS have not been conducted. See Use in Specific Populations (8.5) for information regarding patients aged 65 years and older.

                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Hepatic Impairment
                                    
                                    LINZESS has not been specifically studied in patients who have hepatic impairment. Hepatic impairment is not expected to affect the metabolism or clearance of the parent drug or its metabolite because linaclotide is metabolized within the gastrointestinal tract [see Use in Specific Populations (8.6)].

                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Renal Impairment
                                    
                                    LINZESS has not been specifically studied in patients who have renal impairment. Renal impairment is not expected to affect clearance of the parent drug or its metabolite because linaclotide has low systemic availability following oral administration and is metabolized within the gastrointestinal tract [see Use in Specific Populations (8.6)].

                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         