
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           Diuretics: Excessive drop in blood pressure (7.1)
                           Antidiabetics: Increased risk of hypoglycaemia (7.2)
                           NSAIDS: Increased risk of  renal impairment and loss of antihypertensive efficacy (7.3)
                           Dual inhibition of the renin-angiotensin system: Increased risk of renal impairment, hypotension and hyperkalemia (7.4)
                           Lithium: Symptoms of lithium toxicity (7.6)
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 Diuretics
                     
                        
                           Hypotension
                        
                        Patients on diuretics, especially those in whom diuretic therapy was recently instituted, may occasionally experience an excessive reduction of blood pressure after initiation of therapy with benazepril. The possibility of hypotensive effects with benazepril can be minimized by either discontinuing or decreasing the dose of diuretic prior to initiation of treatment with benazepril [see Dosage and Administration (2.1)].
                        
                        

                        
                           Hyperkalemia
                        
                        

                        Potassium-sparing diuretics (spironolactone, amiloride, triamterene, and others) can increase the risk of hyperkalemia. Therefore, if concomitant use of such agents is indicated, monitor the patient’s serum potassium frequently. Benazepril attenuates potassium loss caused by thiazide-type diuretics.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 Antidiabetics
                     
                        Concomitant administration of benazepril and antidiabetic medicines (insulins, oral hypoglycemic agents) may increase the risk of hypoglycemia.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3 Non-Steroidal Anti-Inflammatory Agents Including Selective Cyclooxygenase-2 Inhibitors (COX-2 Inhibitors)
                     
                        In patients who are elderly, volume-depleted (including those on diuretic therapy), or with compromised renal function, co-administration of NSAIDs, including selective COX-2 inhibitors, with ACE inhibitors, including benazepril, may result in deterioration of renal function, including possible acute renal failure. These effects are usually reversible. Monitor renal function periodically in patients receiving benazepril and NSAID therapy.
                        

                        The antihypertensive effect of ACE inhibitors, including benazepril, may be attenuated by NSAIDs.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4 Dual Blockade of the Renin-Angiotensin System (RAS)
                     
                        Dual Blockade of the RAS with angiotensin receptor blockers, ACE inhibitors, or aliskiren is associated with increased risks of hypotension, hyperkalemia, and changes in renal function (including acute renal failure) compared to monotherapy. Most patients receiving the combination of two RAS inhibitors do not obtain any additional benefit compared to monotherapy. In general, avoid combined use of RAS inhibitors. Closely monitor blood pressure, renal function and electrolytes in patients on benazepril and other agents that affect the RAS. 
                        

                        Do not co-administer aliskiren with benazepril in patients with diabetes. Avoid use of aliskiren with benazepril in patients with renal impairment (GFR <60 mL/min).
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.5 Mammalian Target of Rapamycin (mTOR) Inhibitors
                     
                        Patients receiving coadministration of ACE inhibitor and mTOR inhibitor (e.g., temsirolimus, sirolimus, everolimus) therapy may be at increased risk for angioedema. Monitor for signs of angioedema [see Warnings and Precautions (5.2)].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.6 Lithium
                     
                        Lithium toxicity has been reported in patients receiving lithium concomitantly with benazepril. Lithium toxicity was usually reversible upon discontinuation of lithium or benazepril. Monitor serum lithium levels during concurrent use.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.7 Gold
                     
                        Nitritoid reactions (symptoms include facial flushing, nausea, vomiting and hypotension) have been reported rarely in patients on therapy with injectable gold (sodium aurothiomalate) and concomitant ACE inhibitor therapy.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         