
               
               
               
                  7
		     
	D
                  RUG INTERACTION
                  S
               
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           Patients on valproate should begin at a BANZEL dose lower than 10 mg/kg per day (pediatric patients) or 400 mg per day (adults) (7.2)

                           
                           Hormonal contraceptives may be less effective with BANZEL; use additional non-hormonal forms of contraception (7.3)
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        7.1
		     
	Effects of BANZEL on other AEDs
                     
                     
                        Population pharmacokinetic analysis of average concentration at steady state of carbamazepine, lamotrigine, phenobarbital, phenytoin, topiramate, and valproate showed that typical rufinamide Cavss levels had little effect on the pharmacokinetics of other AEDs. Any effects, when they occur, have been more marked in the pediatric population.
                        Table 6 summarizes the drug-drug interactions of BANZEL with other AEDs.
                        


                        


Phenytoin:  The decrease in clearance of phenytoin estimated at typical levels of rufinamide (Cavss 15 μg/mL) is predicted to increase plasma levels of phenytoin by 7 to 21%. As phenytoin is known to have non-linear pharmacokinetics (clearance becomes saturated at higher doses), it is possible that exposure will be greater than the model prediction.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        7.2
		     
	Effects of Other AEDs on BANZEL
                     
                     
                        Potent cytochrome P450 enzyme inducers, such as carbamazepine, phenytoin, primidone, and phenobarbital, appear to increase the clearance of BANZEL (see Table 6). Given that the majority of clearance of BANZEL is via a non-CYP-dependent route, the observed decreases in blood levels seen with carbamazepine, phenytoin, phenobarbital, and primidone are unlikely to be entirely attributable to induction of a P450 enzyme. Other factors explaining this interaction are not understood. Any effects, where they occurred, were likely to be more marked in the pediatric population.
                        
                           Valproate
                        
                        Patients stabilized on BANZEL before being prescribed valproate should begin valproate therapy at a low dose, and titrate to a clinically effective dose. Similarly, patients on valproate should begin at a BANZEL dose lower than 10 mg/kg per day (pediatric patients) or 400 mg per day (adults) [see
                            
                           Dosage
                            and 
                           Administration 
                           (
                           
                              2.5
                           
                           )
                           , Clinical Pharmacology (
                           
                              12.3
                           
                           )].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        7.3
		     
	Effects of BANZEL on 
                        Hormonal Contraceptives
                     
                     
                        Female patients of childbearing age should be warned that the concurrent use of BANZEL with hormonal contraceptives may render this method of contraception less effective. Additional non-hormonal forms of contraception are recommended when using BANZEL [see 
                           Clinical Pharmacology (
                           
                              12.3
                           
                           ) and 
                           Patient Counseling 
                           Information
                            (
                           
                              17
                           
                           )].
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         