
               
               
               
                  7     DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  No drug interaction studies have been conducted between Amturnide and other drugs. In a phase III sub-study, there was no clinically relevant change in the exposure of aliskiren, amlodipine, and HCTZ observed with Amturnide compared to the dual combinations of aliskiren and amlodipine, amlodipine and HCTZ, and aliskiren and HCTZ. Studies with the individual aliskiren, amlodipine, and HCTZ components are described below.
                  
                     Aliskiren
                  
                  
                     Cyclosporine: Avoid coadministration of cyclosporine with aliskiren [see Warnings and Precautions (5.7) and Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                  
                     Itraconazole: Avoid coadministration of itraconazole with aliskiren [see Warnings and Precautions (5.7) and Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                  
                     Nonsteroidal Anti-Inflammatory Drugs (NSAIDs) including selective Cyclooxygenase-2 inhibitors (COX-2 inhibitors): In patients who are elderly, volume-depleted (including those on diuretic therapy), or with compromised renal function, coadministration of NSAIDs, including selective COX-2 inhibitors with agents that affect the RAAS, including aliskiren, may result in deterioration of renal function, including possible acute renal failure. These effects are usually reversible. Monitor renal function periodically in patients receiving aliskiren and NSAID therapy.
                  The antihypertensive effect of aliskiren may be attenuated by NSAIDs. 
                  
                     Dual Blockade of the Renin-Angiotensin-Aldosterone System (RAAS): The concomitant use of aliskiren with other agents acting on the RAAS such as ACEIs or ARBs is associated with an increased risk of hypotension, hyperkalemia, and changes in renal function (including acute renal failure) compared to monotherapy. Most patients receiving the combination of two drugs that inhibit the renin-angiotensin system do not obtain any additional benefit compared to monotherapy. In general, avoid combined use of aliskiren with ACE inhibitors or ARBs, particularly in patients with CrCl less than 60 mL/min.
                  Monitor blood pressure, renal function, and electrolytes in patients on aliskiren and other agents that affect the RAAS [see Warnings and Precautions (5.4, 5.6, 5.9)].
                  The concomitant use of aliskiren with an ARB or an ACEI in diabetic patients is contraindicated [see Contraindications (4)].
                  
                     Furosemide: Oral coadministration of aliskiren and furosemide reduced exposure to furosemide.  Monitor diuretic effects when furosemide is coadministered with aliskiren.
                  
                     Amlodipine
                      
                  
                  
                     Simvastatin: Coadministration of simvastatin with amlodipine increases the systemic exposure of simvastatin.  Limit the dose of simvastatin in patients on amlodipine to 20 mg daily.
                  
                     CYP3A4 Inhibitors: Coadministration with CYP3A inhibitors (moderate and strong) result in increased systemic exposure to amlodipine warranting dose reduction. Monitor for symptoms of hypotension and edema when amlodipine is coadministered with CYP3A4 inhibitors to determine the need for dose adjustment.
                  
                     CYP3A4 Inducers: No information is available on the quantitative effects of CYP3A4 inducers on amlodipine. Blood pressure should be monitored when amlodipine is coadministered with CYP3A4 inducers.
                  
                     HCTZ
                  
                  When administered concurrently, the following drugs may interact with thiazide diuretics.
                  
                     Antidiabetic drugs (oral agents and insulin): Dosage adjustment of the antidiabetic drug may be required.
                  
                     Lithium: Diuretic agents increase the risk of lithium toxicity. Increases in serum lithium concentrations and lithium toxicity have been reported during concomitant administration of lithium with angiotensin II receptor antagonists. Monitoring of serum lithium levels is recommended during concomitant use.
                  
                     Nonsteroidal Anti-Inflammatory Drugs (NSAIDs) and COX-2 selective agents: When Amturnide and NSAIDs are used concomitantly, observe the patient to determine if the desired effect of the diuretic is obtained.
                  
                     Ion-exchange Resins: Staggering the dosage of HCTZ and resin (e.g., cholestyramine, colestipol) such that HCTZ is administered at least 4 hours before or 4 to 6 hours after the administration of resins would potentially minimize the interaction [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
               
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           Cyclosporine or Itraconazole: Avoid concomitant use (5.10, 7, 12.3)
                           Nonsteroidal Anti-Inflammatory Drugs (NSAIDs):  Increased risk of renal impairment and loss of antihypertensive effect. (7)
                           Simvastatin: Avoid doses greater than 20 mg daily. (7)
                           Antidiabetic Drugs: Antidiabetic dosage adjustment may be required. (7)
                           Cholestyramine and Colestipol: Reduce absorption of thiazides. (7)
                           Lithium: Increased risk of lithium toxicity when used with diuretics.(7)
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         