
                     
                     
                     
                        Drug Interactions:
                     
                     
                        The drug interaction data described in this section were obtained from controlled clinical trials and studies involving otherwise healthy adults with epilepsy. 
                        
                           Us
                           e in Conjunction with Other Antiepileptic Drugs (See 
                           
                              DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION
                           
                           ):
                        
                        
                           The addition of felbamate to antiepileptic drug
                           s (AEDs ) affects the steady-state plasma 
                           concentrations of AEDs . The net effect of these interactions is summarized in Table 2:
                        


                        



                           Specific Effects of Felbamate on Other Antiepileptic Drugs:
                        
                        
                           Phenytoin:  Felbamate causes an increase in steady-state phenytoin plasma concentrations. In 10 otherwise health subjects with epilepsy ingesting phenytoin, the steady-state through (Cmin) phenytoin plasma concentration was 17±5 micrograms/mL. The steady-state Cmin increased to 21±5 micrograms/mL when 1200mg/day of felbamate was coadministered. Increasing the felbamate dose to
                        1800 mg/day in six of these subjects increased the steady-state phenytoin Cmin to 25±7 micrograms/mL. In order to maintain phenytoin levels, limit adverse experiences, and achieve the felbamate dose of 3600mg/day, a phenytoin dose reduction of approximately 40% was necessary for eight of these 10 subjects. 
                        In a controlled clinical trial, a 20% reduction of the phenytoin dose at the initiation of felbamate therapy resulted in phenytoin levels comparable to those prior to felbamate administration.
                        
                           Carbamazepine: Felbamate causes a decrease in the steady-state carbamazepine plasma concentrations and an increase in the steady-state carbamazepine epoxide plasma concentration. In nine otherwise healthy subjects with epilepsy ingesting carbamazepine, the steady-state through (Cmin) carbamazepine concentration was 8±2 micrograms/mL. The carbamazepine steady-state Cmin decreased 31% to 5±1 micrograms/mL when felbamate (3000 mg/day, divided into three doses) was coadministered.
                        Carbamazepine epoxide steady-state Cmin concentrations increased 57% from 1±0.3 to 1.6±0.4 micrograms/mL with the addition of felbamate.
                        In clinical trials, similar changes in carbamazepine and carbamazepine epoxide were seen. 
                        
                           Valproate:
                            Felbamate causes an increase in steady-state valproate concentration. In four subjects with epilepsy ingesting valproate, the steady-state through (Cmin) valproate plasma concentration was 63±16 micrograms/mL. The steady-state Cmin increased to 78±14 micrograms/mL when 1200 mg/day of
                        felbamate was coadministered. Increasing the felbamate dose to 2400 mg/day increased the steady-state valproate Cmin to 96±25 micrograms/mL. Corresponding values for free valproate Cmin concentrations were 7±3, 9±4 and 11±6 micrograms/mL for 0, 1200, and 2400 mg/day felbamate, respectively. The ratios of the AUCs of unbound valproate to the AUCs of the total valproate were 11.1%, 13%, and 11.5%, with coadministration of 0, 1200, and 2400 mg/day of felbamate, respectively. This indicates that the protein binding of valproate did not change appreciably with increasing doses of felbamate.
                        
                           Phenobarbital:
                            Coadministration of felbamate with phenobarbital causes an increase in phenobarbital plasma concentrations. In 12 otherwise healthy male volunteers ingesting phenobarbital, the steady-state through (Cmin) phenobarbital concentration was 14.2 micrograms/mL. The steady-state Cmin concentration increased to 17.8 micrograms/mL when 2400mg/day of felbamate was coadministered for one week. 
                        
                           Effects of Other Antiepileptic Drugs on Felbamate: 
		     
	
                        
                           Phenytoin
                           : Phenytoin causes an approximate doubling of the clearance of felbamate at steady-state and, therefore, the addition of phenytoin causes an approximate 45% decrease in the steady-state trough concentrations of felbamate as compared to the same does of felbamate given as monotherapy. 
                        
                           Carbamazepine:
                            Carbamazepine causes an approximate 50% increase in the clearance of felbamate at steady-state and, therefore, the addition of carbamazepine results in an approximate 40% decrease in the steady-state trough concentrations of felbamate as compared to the same dose of felbamate given as monotherapy.  
                        
                           Valproate:
                             Available data suggest that there is no significant effect of valproate on the clearance of felbamate at steady-state. Therefore, the addition of valproate is not expected to cause a clinically important effect on felbamate plasma concentrations. 
                        
                           Phenobarbital:
                            It appears that phenobarbital may reduce plasma felbamate concentrations. Steady-state plasma felbamate concentrations were found to be 29% lower than the mean concentrations of a group of newly diagnosed subjects with epilepsy also receiving 2400mg of felbamate a day. 
                        
                           Effects of Antacids on Felbamate: 
                        
                        The rate and extent of absorption of a 2400mg dose of felbamate as monotherapy given as tablets was not affected when coadministered with antacids. 
                        
                           Effects of Eryth
                           romycin on Felbamate:
                        
                        The coadministration of erythromycin (1000mg/day) for 10 days did not alter the pharmacokinetic parameters of Cmax, Cmin, AUC, Cl/kg or tmax at felbamate daily doses of 3000 or 3600mg/day in 10 otherwise healthy subjects with epilepsy. 
                        
                           Effects of Felbamate on Low-Dose Combination Oral Contraceptives: 
                        
                        A group of 24 nonsmoking, healthy white female volunteers established on an oral contraceptive regimen containing 30 mcg ethinyl estradiol and 75 mcg gestodene for at least 3 months received 2400 mg/day of felbamate from midcycle (day 15) to midcycle (day 14) of two consecutive oral contraceptive cycles. Felbamate treatment resulted in a 42% decrease in the gestodene AUC ₀₋₂₄ , but no clinically relevant effect was observed on the pharmacokinetic parameters of ethinyl estradiol. No volunteer showed hormonal evidence of ovulation, but one volunteer reported intermenstrual bleeding during
                        felbamate treatment.
                     
                     
                  
               