
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY:
               
                  
                     Hyoscyamine sulfate:  Hyoscyamine sulfate is a parasympatholytic which
relaxes smooth muscles and thus produces an antispasmodic effect. It is well
absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract and is rapidly distributed throughout the
body tissues. Following oral administration, the drug has an onset of action of
20 to 30 minutes. The half-life is 3.5 hours. Hyoscyamine is distributed
throughout the body, crosses the blood-brain barrier, and is approximately 50%
bound to plasma proteins. It is metabolized in the liver to tropic acid, tropine,
and hyoscyamine glucuronide. Hyoscyamine is excreted primarily unchanged in
the urine within 12 hours. Its biotransformation is hepatic. 
                  
                     Methenamine:  Methenamine, after oral administration, undergoes hydrolysis
and generates formaldehyde, which provides bactericidal or bacteriostatic
action. Methenamine is rapidly absorbed from the intestinal tract and is
excreted, for the most part, unchanged in the urine at which point it is
hydrolyzed if the urine is acidic. It is almost completely excreted (90%) in the
urine within 24 hours; of this at a pH of 5, approximately 10-30% is converted to
formaldehyde in the stomach.
                  
                     Phenyl salicylate:  Phenyl salicylate, a form of salicylic acid, is a mild analgesic
for pain relief.
                  
                     Sodium phosphate, monobasic:  Sodium phosphate, monobasic increases
urinary acidity helping to maintain an acid pH necessary for the degradation of
methenamine.
                  
                     Methylene blue: Methylene blue is a monoamine oxidase inhibitor with weak
antiseptic properties. It is well absorbed by the intestinal tract and rapidly
reduced to leukomethylene blue, which is stabilized in the urine. Approximately
70-80% is excreted unchanged in the urine.
               
               
            
         