
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
                  
                     Potential for other drugs to affect ivacaftor
                  
               
               
               
                  
                     
                        CYP3A inhibitors: Reduce KALYDECO dose to one tablet or one packet of granules twice a week when co-administered with strong CYP3A inhibitors (e.g., ketoconazole). Reduce KALYDECO dose to one tablet or one packet of granules once daily when co-administered with moderate CYP3A inhibitors (e.g., fluconazole). Avoid food containing grapefruit or Seville oranges. (7.1, 12.3)
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1     Inhibitors of CYP3A
                     
                        Ivacaftor is a sensitive CYP3A substrate. Co-administration with ketoconazole, a strong CYP3A inhibitor, significantly increased ivacaftor exposure [measured as area under the curve (AUC)] by 8.5-fold. Based on simulations of these results, a reduction of the KALYDECO dose is recommended when co-administered with strong CYP3A inhibitors, such as ketoconazole, itraconazole, posaconazole, voriconazole, telithromycin, and clarithromycin, as follows: in patients 6 years and older reduce dose to one 150 mg tablet twice a week; in patients 2 to less than 6 years with body weight less than 14 kg, reduce dose to one 50 mg packet of granules twice a week; and in patients 2 to less than 6 years with body weight 14 kg or greater, reduce dose to one 75 mg packet of granules twice a week.
                        Co-administration with fluconazole, a moderate inhibitor of CYP3A, increased ivacaftor exposure by 3-fold. Therefore, a reduction of the KALYDECO dose is recommended for patients taking concomitant moderate CYP3A inhibitors, such as fluconazole and erythromycin, as follows: in patients 6 years and older reduce dose to one 150 mg tablet once daily; in patients 2 to less than 6 years with body weight less than 14 kg, reduce dose to one 50 mg packet of granules once daily; and in patients 2 to less than 6 years with body weight 14 kg or greater, reduce dose to one 75 mg packet of granules once daily.
                        Co-administration of KALYDECO with grapefruit juice, which contains one or more components that moderately inhibit CYP3A, may increase exposure of ivacaftor. Therefore, food containing grapefruit or Seville oranges should be avoided during treatment with KALYDECO [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)
                           ].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2     Inducers of CYP3A
                     
                        Co-administration with rifampin, a strong CYP3A inducer, significantly decreased ivacaftor exposure (AUC) by approximately 9-fold. Therefore, co-administration with strong CYP3A inducers, such as rifampin, rifabutin, phenobarbital, carbamazepine, phenytoin, and St. John's wort is not recommended [see Warnings and Precautions (5.2)
                            and 
                              Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)
                           ].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3     Ciprofloxacin
                     
                        Co-administration of KALYDECO with ciprofloxacin had no effect on the exposure of ivacaftor. Therefore, no dose adjustment is necessary during concomitant administration of KALYDECO with ciprofloxacin [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)
                           ].
                        
                           Potential for ivacaftor to affect other drugs
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4     CYP3A and/or P-gp Substrates
                     
                        Ivacaftor and its M1 metabolite have the potential to inhibit CYP3A and P-gp. Co-administration with midazolam, a sensitive CYP3A substrate, increased midazolam exposure 1.5-fold, consistent with weak inhibition of CYP3A by ivacaftor. Co-administration with digoxin, a sensitive P-gp substrate, increased digoxin exposure by 1.3-fold, consistent with weak inhibition of P-gp by ivacaftor. Administration of KALYDECO may increase systemic exposure of drugs that are substrates of CYP3A and/or P-gp, which may increase or prolong their therapeutic effect and adverse events. Therefore, caution and appropriate monitoring are recommended when co-administering KALYDECO with sensitive CYP3A and/or P-gp substrates, such as digoxin, cyclosporine, and tacrolimus [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)
                           ].
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         