
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY

               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action

                     
                        Ciclesonide is a pro-drug that is enzymatically hydrolyzed to a pharmacologically active metabolite, C21-desisobutyryl-ciclesonide (des-ciclesonide or RM1) following intranasal application.  Des-ciclesonide has anti-inflammatory activity with affinity for the glucocorticoid receptor that is 120 times higher than the parent compound.

                        The precise mechanism through which ciclesonide affects allergic rhinitis symptoms is not known.  Corticosteroids have been shown to have a wide range of effects on multiple cell types (e.g., mast cells, eosinophils, neutrophils, macrophages, and lymphocytes) and mediators (e.g., histamine, eicosanoids, leukotrienes, and cytokines) involved in allergic inflammation.

                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics

                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Adrenal Function: In a 6-week, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, parallel-group trial in adolescents and adults 12-73 years of age with perennial allergic rhinitis, daily doses of 148 mcg and 282 mcg of ZETONNA were compared to placebo nasal aerosol.  Dexamethasone 6 mg was used as an active control during the last 4 days of the trial.  Adrenal function was assessed by 24-hr serum cortisol AUC before and after the treatment. At the end of 6 weeks of treatment, the LS means (SE) change from baseline in serum cortisol AUC(0-24) was -5.0 (4.6) mcg•hour/dL, -2.6 (4.6) mcg•hour/dL, and -4.6 (5.0) mcg•hour/dL for placebo (n=57), 148 mcg ZETONNA (n=60), and 282 mcg ZETONNA (n=50), respectively.  The LS means difference from placebo for the change from baseline in serum cortisol AUC(0-24) was -2.4 mcg•hour/dL (95% CI: -15.1, 10.2) and -0.5 mcg•hour/dL (95% CI: -13.9, 13.0) for 148 mcg/day and 282 mcg/day treatments, respectively. The effects observed with the active control (dexamethasone, n=18) validate the sensitivity of the study to assess the effect of ciclesonide on the HPA axis.

                              In a 6-week, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, parallel-group trial in patients 6 to 11 years of age with perennial allergic rhinitis, a daily dose of 74 mcg of ZETONNA was compared to placebo nasal aerosol. Adrenal function was assessed by 24-hr serum cortisol AUC before and after the treatment. At the end of 6 weeks of treatment, the LS means (SE) change from baseline in serum cortisol AUC(0-24) was 5.9 (5.6) mcg•hour/dL and 1.7 (5.2) mcg•hour/dL for placebo and ZETONNA, respectively .  The LS means difference from placebo for the change from baseline in serum cortisol AUC(0-24) was 7.6 mcg•hour/dL (95% CI: -7.4, 22.6).

                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics

                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Absorption:  Ciclesonide and des-ciclesonide have negligible oral bioavailability (both less than 1%) due to low gastrointestinal absorption and high first-pass metabolism.  The intranasal administration of ciclesonide at recommended doses results in negligible serum concentrations of ciclesonide.  However, the known active metabolite (des-ciclesonide) is detected in the serum of some patients after nasal inhalation of ciclesonide.  The bioanalytical assay used has a lower limit of quantification of 10 pg/mL, for both ciclesonide and des-ciclesonide, respectively.

                              The low systemic exposure of des-ciclesonide following ciclesonide nasal aerosol administration was confirmed in a crossover trial in 29 healthy adults. The median Cmax of des-ciclesonide was 59 pg/mL following a single dose of ciclesonide nasal aerosol (296 mcg) compared to 602 pg/mL following a single dose of orally inhaled ciclesonide (320 mcg) and 12 pg/mL following a single dose of ciclesonide aqueous nasal spray (300 mcg). The pharmacokinetics of intranasally administered ciclesonide have been assessed in perennial allergic rhinitis patients resulting in similar exposure compared to healthy subjects.

                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Distribution:  Following intravenous administration of 800 mcg of ciclesonide, the volumes of distribution of ciclesonide and des-ciclesonide were approximately 2.9 L/kg and 12.1 L/kg, respectively.  The percentage of ciclesonide and des-ciclesonide bound to human plasma proteins averaged ≥ 99% each, with ≤ 1% of unbound drug detected in the systemic circulation.  Des-ciclesonide is not significantly bound to human transcortin.

                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Metabolism:  Ciclesonide is hydrolyzed to a biologically active metabolite, des-ciclesonide, by esterases.  Des-ciclesonide undergoes further metabolism in the liver to additional metabolites mainly by the cytochrome P450 (CYP) 3A4 isozyme and to a lesser extent by CYP 2D6.  The full range of potentially active metabolites of ciclesonide has not been characterized.  After intravenous administration of 14C-ciclesonide, 19.3% of the resulting radioactivity in the plasma is accounted for by ciclesonide or des-ciclesonide; the remainder may be a result of other, as yet, unidentified multiple metabolites.

                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Elimination:  Following intravenous administration of 800 mcg of ciclesonide, the clearance values of ciclesonide and des-ciclesonide were high (approximately 152 L/hr and 228 L/hr, respectively).  14C-ciclesonide was predominantly excreted via the feces after intravenous administration (66%) indicating that excretion through bile is the major route of elimination.  Approximately 20% or less of drug related radioactivity was excreted in the urine.

                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Special Populations:

                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Hepatic Impairment:  Compared to healthy subjects, the systemic exposure (Cmax and AUC) in patients with liver impairment increased in the range of 1.4 to 2.7-fold after ex-actuator administration of 1280 mcg ciclesonide via oral inhalation.  Dose adjustment in liver impairment is not necessary.

                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Renal Impairment:  Trials in renally-impaired patients were not conducted since renal excretion of des-ciclesonide is a minor route of elimination (≤ 20%).

                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Drug-Drug Interactions: Ciclesonide inhibited human recombinant cytochrome P450 enzymes at high concentration (3 microM) in vitro, but clinically relevant metabolic interactions are not anticipated. Based on in vitro studies in human liver microsomes, ciclesonide and des-ciclesonide appear to have no inhibitory or induction potential on the metabolism of other drugs metabolized by cytochrome P450 enzymes. In vitro studies demonstrated that the plasma protein binding of des-ciclesonide was not affected by warfarin or salicylic acid, indicating no potential for protein binding-based drug interactions.

                                    In a drug interaction study, co-administration of orally inhaled ciclesonide and oral ketoconazole, a strong inhibitor of cytochrome P450 3A4, increased the exposure (AUC) of the active metabolite of ciclesonide, des-ciclesonide, by approximately 3.6-fold at steady state, while levels of ciclesonide remained unchanged.

                                    In another drug interaction study, co-administration of orally inhaled ciclesonide and oral erythromycin, a moderate inhibitor of cytochrome P450 3A4, had no effect on the pharmacokinetics of either des-ciclesonide or erythromycin.

                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         