
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  
                     
                        Ezogabine plasma levels may be reduced by concomitant administration of phenytoin or carbamazepine. An increase in dosage of POTIGA should be considered when adding phenytoin or carbamazepine. (7.1)
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 Antiepileptic Drugs
                     
                        The potentially significant interactions between POTIGA and concomitant AEDs are summarized in Table 5.
                        
                           Table 5. Significant Interactions between POTIGA and Concomitant Antiepileptic Drugs (AEDs)
                        
                        


                        



                           a Based on results of a Phase 2 study.
                        
                           b Inducer for uridine 5'-diphosphate (UDP)-glucuronyltransferases (UGTs).
                        
                           c A decrease in dosage of POTIGA should be considered when carbamazepine or phenytoin is discontinued.
                        
                           [See Clinical Pharmacology (12.3).]
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 Alcohol
                     
                        Alcohol increased systemic exposure to POTIGA. Patients should be advised of possible worsening of ezogabine’s general dose-related adverse reactions if they take POTIGA with alcohol [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3 Laboratory Tests
                     
                        Ezogabine has been shown to interfere with clinical laboratory assays of both serum and urine bilirubin, which can result in falsely elevated readings.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         