
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  Hydrocodone is a semisynthetic narcotic analgesic and antitussive with multiple actions qualitatively similar to those of codeine. Most of these involve the central nervous system and smooth muscle. The precise mechanism of action of hydrocodone and other opiates is not known, although it is believed to relate to the existence of opiate receptors in the central nervous system. In addition to analgesia, narcotics may produce drowsiness, changes in mood and mental clouding.
                  The analgesic action of acetaminophen involves peripheral influences, but the specific mechanism is yet undetermined. Antipyretic activity is mediated through hypothalamic heat regulating centers.
                  Acetaminophen inhibits prostaglandin synthetase. Therapeutic doses of acetaminophen have negligible effects on the cardiovascular or respiratory systems; however, toxic doses may cause circulatory failure and rapid, shallow breathing.
               
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        The behavior of the individual components is described below.
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Hydrocodone
                           
                              Following a 10 mg oral dose of hydrocodone administered to five adult male subjects, the mean peak concentration was 23.6 ± 5.2 ng/mL. Maximum serum levels were achieved at 1.3 ± 0.3 hours and the half-life was determined to be 3.8 ± 0.3 hours. Hydrocodone exhibits a complex pattern of metabolism including O-demethylation, N-demethylation and 6-keto reduction to the corresponding 6-α-and 6-β-hydroxymetabolites. See OVERDOSAGE for toxicity information.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Acetaminophen
                           
                              Acetaminophen is rapidly absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract and is distributed throughout most body tissues. The plasma half-life is 1.25 to 3 hours, but may be increased by liver damage and following overdosage. Elimination of acetaminophen is principally by liver metabolism (conjugation) and subsequent renal excretion of metabolites. Approximately 85% of an oral dose appears in the urine within 24 hours of administration, most as the glucuronide conjugate, with small amounts of other conjugates and unchanged drug. See OVERDOSAGE for toxicity information.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         