
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  A variety of clinical studies have demonstrated that elevated 
levels of total cholesterol (Total-C), low density lipoprotein cholesterol 
(LDL-C), triglycerides (TG) and apolipoprotein B (a membrane transport complex 
for LDL-C) promote human atherosclerosis. Similarly, decreased levels of 
HDL-cholesterol (HDL-C) and its transport complex, apolipoprotein A, are 
associated with the development of atherosclerosis. Epidemiologic investigations 
have established that cardiovascular morbidity and mortality vary directly with 
the level of Total-C and LDL-C and inversely with the level of HDL-C. 
                        Like LDL, cholesterol-enriched triglyceride-rich lipoproteins, 
including VLDL, IDL and remnants, can also promote atherosclerosis. Elevated 
plasma triglycerides are frequently found in a triad with low HDL-C levels and 
small LDL particles, as well as in association with non-lipid metabolic risk 
factors for coronary heart disease. As such, total plasma TG has not 
consistently been shown to be an independent risk factor for CHD. Furthermore, 
the independent effect of raising HDL or lowering TG on the risk of coronary and 
cardiovascular morbidity and mortality has not been determined.
                        In patients with hypercholesterolemia and mixed dyslipidemia, treatment 
with Lescol® (fluvastatin sodium) or Lescol® XL (fluvastatin sodium) reduced Total-C, LDL-C, 
apolipoprotein B, and triglycerides while producing an increase in HDL-C. 
Increases in HDL-C are greater in patients with low HDL-C (<35 mg/dL). 
Neither agent had a consistent effect on either Lp(a) or fibrinogen. The effect 
of Lescol or Lescol XL induced changes in lipoprotein levels, including 
reduction of serum cholesterol, on cardiovascular mortality has not been 
determined.
                  
                  
                  Mechanism of Action
                  Lescol is a competitive inhibitor of HMG-CoA reductase, which is 
responsible for the conversion of 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-coenzyme A 
(HMG-CoA) to mevalonate, a precursor of sterols, including cholesterol. The 
inhibition of cholesterol biosynthesis reduces the cholesterol in hepatic cells, 
which stimulates the synthesis of LDL receptors and thereby increases the uptake 
of LDL particles. The end result of these biochemical processes is a reduction 
of the plasma cholesterol concentration.
                  
                  
                  Pharmacokinetics/Metabolism
                  
                  
                  Oral Absorption 
                  Fluvastatin is absorbed rapidly and completely following oral 
administration of the capsule, with peak concentrations reached in less than 1 
hour. Following administration of a 10 mg dose, the absolute bioavailability is 
24% (range 9%-50%). Administration with food reduces the rate but not the extent 
of absorption. At steady state, administration of fluvastatin with the evening 
meal results in a two-fold decrease in Cmax and more than 
two-fold increase in tmax as compared to administration 4 
hours after the evening meal. No significant differences in extent of absorption 
or in the lipid-lowering effects were observed between the two administrations. 
After single or multiple doses above 20 mg, fluvastatin exhibits saturable 
first-pass metabolism resulting in higher than expected plasma fluvastatin 
concentrations. 
                        Fluvastatin has two optical enantiomers, an active 3R,5S and an 
inactive 3S,5R form. In vivo studies showed that stereo-selective hepatic 
binding of the active form occurs during the first pass resulting in a 
difference in the peak levels of the two enantiomers, with the active to 
inactive peak concentration ratio being about 0.7. The approximate ratio of the 
active to inactive approaches unity after the peak is seen and thereafter the 
two enantiomers decline with the same half-life. After an intravenous 
administration, bypassing the first-pass, metabolism, the ratios of the 
enantiomers in plasma were similar throughout the concentration-time 
profiles.
                        Fluvastatin administered as Lescol XL 80 mg tablets reaches peak 
concentration in approximately 3 hours under fasting conditions, after a low-fat 
meal, or 2.5 hours after a low-fat meal. The mean relative bioavailability of 
the XL tablet is approximately 29% (range: 9%-66%) compared to that of the 
Lescol immediate-release capsule administered under fasting conditions. 
Administration of a high-fat meal delayed the absorption (Tmax: 6H) and increased the bioavailability of the XL tablet by 
approximately 50%. Once Lescol XL begins to be absorbed, fluvastatin 
concentrations rise rapidly. The maximum concentration seen after a high-fat 
meal is much less than the peak concentration following a single dose or 
twice daily dose of the 40 mg Lescol capsule. Overall variability in the 
pharmacokinetics of Lescol XL is large (42%-64% CV for Cmax and AUC), and especially so after a high-fat meal (63%-89% 
for Cmax and AUC). Intrasubject variability in the 
pharmacokinetics of Lescol XL under fasting conditions (about 25% for Cmax and AUC) tends to be much smaller as compared to the 
overall variability. Multiple peaks in plasma fluvastatin concentrations have 
been observed after Lescol XL administration.
                  
                  
                  Distribution 
                  Fluvastatin is 98% bound to plasma proteins. The mean volume of 
distribution (VDss) is estimated at 0.35 L/kg. The parent 
drug is targeted to the liver and no active metabolites are present 
systemically. At therapeutic concentrations, the protein binding of fluvastatin 
is not affected by warfarin, salicylic acid and glyburide.
                  
                  
                  Metabolism
                  Fluvastatin is metabolized in the liver, primarily via 
hydroxylation of the indole ring at the 5- and 6-positions. N-dealkylation and 
beta-oxidation of the side-chain also occurs. The hydroxy metabolites have some 
pharmacologic activity, but do not circulate in the blood. Both enantiomers of 
fluvastatin are metabolized in a similar manner.
                        In vitro studies demonstrated that fluvastatin undergoes oxidative 
metabolism, predominantly via 2C9 isozyme systems (75%). Other isozymes that 
contribute to fluvastatin metabolism are 2C8 (~5%) and 3A4 (~20%). (See PRECAUTIONS: Drug Interactions Section).
                  
                  
                  Elimination
                  Fluvastatin is primarily (about 90%) eliminated in the feces as 
metabolites, with less than 2% present as unchanged drug. Urinary recovery is 
about 5%. After a radiolabeled dose of fluvastatin, the clearance was 0.8 
L/h/kg. Following multiple oral doses of radiolabeled compound, there was no 
accumulation of fluvastatin; however, there was a 2.3- fold accumulation of 
total radioactivity.
                        Steady-state plasma concentrations show no evidence of accumulation of 
fluvastatin following immediate release capsule administration of up to 80 mg 
daily, as evidenced by a beta-elimination half-life of less than 3 hours. 
However, under conditions of maximum rate of absorption (i.e., fasting) systemic 
exposure to fluvastatin is increased 33% to 53% compared to a single 20 mg or 
40 mg dose of the immediate- release capsule. Following once daily 
administration of the 80 mg Lescol XL tablet for 7 days, systemic exposure to 
fluvastatin is increased (20%-30%) compared to a single dose of the 80 mg Lescol 
XL tablet. Terminal half-life of Lescol XL was about 9 hours as a result of the 
slow-release formulation. 
                        Single-dose and steady-state pharmacokinetic parameters in 33 subjects 
with hypercholesterolemia for the capsules and in 35 healthy subjects for the 
extended-release tablets are summarized below: 
                  


                  



                  
                  Special Populations
                  
                  
                  Renal Insufficiency:
                  No significant (<6%) renal excretion of fluvastatin occurs in 
humans.
                  
                  
                  Hepatic Insufficiency:
                  Fluvastatin is subject to saturable first-pass 
metabolism/sequestration by the liver and is eliminated primarily via the 
biliary route. Therefore, the potential exists for drug accumulation in patients 
with hepatic insufficiency. Caution should therefore be exercised when 
fluvastatin sodium is administered to patients with a history of liver disease 
or heavy alcohol ingestion (see WARNINGS). 
                        Fluvastatin AUC and Cmax values increased by 
about 2.5- fold in hepatic insufficiency patients. This result was attributed to 
the decreased presystemic metabolism due to hepatic dysfunction. The enantiomer 
ratios of the two isomers of fluvastatin in hepatic insufficiency patients were 
comparable to those observed in healthy subjects.
                  
                  
                  Age:
                  Plasma levels of fluvastatin are not affected by age. 
                  
                  
                  Gender:
                  Women tend to have slightly higher (but statistically 
insignificant) fluvastatin concentrations than men for the immediate- release 
capsule. This is most likely due to body weight differences, as adjusting for 
body weight decreases the magnitude of the differences seen. For Lescol XL, 
there are 67% and 77% increases in systemic availability for women over men 
under fasted and high- fat meal conditions.
                  
                  
                  Pediatric:
                  Pharmacokinetic data in the pediatric population are not 
available. 

                  
               
               
            
         