
               
               
               DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
                  
Gabapentin is not appreciably metabolized nor does it interfere with the metabolism of commonly coadministered antiepileptic drugs.
The drug interaction data described in this section were obtained from studies involving healthy adults and adult patients with epilepsy.

                  

                  Phenytoin

                  In a single (400 mg) and multiple dose (400 mg TID) study of gabapentin in epileptic patients (n = 8) maintained on phenytoin monotherapy for at least 2 months, gabapentin had no effect on the steady-state trough plasma concentrations of phenytoin and phenytoin had no effect on gabapentin pharmacokinetics.

                  

                  Carbamazepine

                     

                     

                     Valproic Acid

                        

                        

                        Phenobarbital

                           

                           

                           Naproxen

                           Coadministration (n = 18) of naproxen sodium capsules (250 mg) with gabapentin (125 mg) appears to increase the amount of gabapentin absorbed by 12% to 15%. Gabapentin had no effect on naproxen pharmacokinetic parameters. These doses are lower than the therapeutic doses for both drugs. The magnitude of interaction within the recommended dose ranges of either drug is not known.

                           

                           Hydrocodone

                              

                              

                              Morphine

                              A literature article reported that when a 60 mg controlled-release morphine capsule was administered 2 hours prior to a 600 mg gabapentin capsule (n = 12), mean gabapentin AUC increased by 44% compared to gabapentin administered without morphine (see PRECAUTIONS). Morphine pharmacokinetic parameter values were not affected by administration of gabapentin 2 hours after morphine. The magnitude of interaction at other doses is not known.

                              

                              Cimetidine

                              In the presence of cimetidine at 300 mg QID (n = 12) the mean apparent oral clearance of gabapentin fell by 14% and creatinine clearance fell by 10%. Thus cimetidine appeared to alter the renal excretion of both gabapentin and creatinine, an endogenous marker of renal function. This small decrease in excretion of gabapentin by cimetidine is not expected to be of clinical importance. The effect of gabapentin on cimetidine was not evaluated.

                              

                              Oral Contraceptive

                                 

                                 

                                 Antacid (Aluminum Hydroxide and Magnesium Hydroxide)

                                 Aluminum hydroxide and magnesium hydroxide reduced the bioavailability of gabapentin (n = 16) by about 20%. This decrease in bioavailability was about 5% when gabapentin was administered 2 hours after aluminum hydroxide and magnesium hydroxide. It is recommended that gabapentin be taken at least 2 hours following aluminum hydroxide and magnesium hydroxide administration.

                                 

                                 Effect of Probenecid

                                 Probenecid is a blocker of renal tubular secretion. Gabapentin pharmacokinetic parameters without and with probenecid were comparable. This indicates that gabapentin does not undergo renal tubular secretion by the pathway that is blocked by probenecid.

                                 

                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
            
         