
                     
                     
                     Drug Interactions
                     
                        
                           Beta-adrenergic Blocking Agents:(See INDICATIONS and WARNINGS.) Experience in over 
1400 patients in a non-comparative clinical trial has shown that concomitant 
administration of nifedipine and beta-blocking agents is usually well tolerated, 
but there have been occasional literature reports suggesting that the 
combination may increase the likelihood of congestive heart failure, severe 
hypotension or exacerbation of angina.
                        
                           Long Acting Nitrates:Nifedipine may be safely 
co-administered with nitrates, but there have been no controlled studies to 
evaluate the antianginal effectiveness of this combination.
                        
                           Digitalis:Since there have been isolated reports of 
patients with elevated digoxin levels, and there is a possible interaction 
between digoxin and nifedipine, it is recommended that digoxin levels be 
monitored when initiating, adjusting and discontinuing nifedipine to avoid 
possible over- or under-digitalization.
                        
                           Quinidine:There have been rare reports of an 
interaction between quinidine and nifedipine (with a decreased plasma level of 
quinidine).
                        
                           Coumarin Anticoagulants:There have been rare reports 
of increased prothrombin time in patients taking coumarin anticoagulants to whom 
nifedipine was administered. However, the relationship to nifedipine therapy is 
uncertain.
                        
                           Cimetidine:A study in six healthy volunteers has 
shown a significant increase in peak nifedipine plasma levels (80%) and 
area-under-the-curve (74%) after a one week course of cimetidine at 1000 mg per 
day and nifedipine at 40 mg per day. Ranitidine produced smaller, 
non-significant increases. The effect may be mediated by the known inhibition of 
cimetidine on hepatic cytochrome P-450, the enzyme system probably responsible 
for the first-pass metabolism of nifedipine. If nifedipine therapy is initiated 
in a patient currently receiving cimetidine, cautious titration is advised.
                     
                  
               