
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  Nifedipine is a calcium ion influx inhibitor (slow channel 
blocker or calcium ion antagonist) and inhibits the transmembrane influx of 
calcium ions into cardiac muscle and smooth muscle. The contractile processes of 
cardiac muscle and vascular smooth muscle are dependent upon the movement of 
extracellular calcium ions into these cells through specific ion channels. 
Nifedipine selectively inhibits calcium ion influx across the cell membrane of 
cardiac muscle and vascular smooth muscle without changing serum calcium 
concentrations.
                  
                     Mechanism Of Action
                     :The precise means by which 
this inhibition relieves angina has not been fully determined, but includes at 
least the following two mechanisms:
                  1) Relaxation And Prevention Of Coronary Artery Spasm:Nifedipine dilates the 
main coronary arteries and coronary arterioles, both in normal and ischemic 
regions, and is a potent inhibitor of coronary artery spasm, whether spontaneous 
or ergonovine-induced. This property increases myocardial oxygen delivery in 
patients with coronary artery spasm, and is responsible for the effectiveness of 
nifedipine in vasospastic (Prinzmetal’s or variant) angina. Whether this effect 
plays any role in classical angina is not clear, but studies of exercise 
tolerance have not shown an increase in the maximum exercise rate-pressure 
product, a widely accepted measure of oxygen utilization. This suggests that, in 
general, relief of spasm or dilation of coronary arteries is not an important 
factor in classical angina.
                  2) Reduction Of Oxygen Utilization:Nifedipine regularly reduces arterial 
pressure at rest and at a given level of exercise by dilating peripheral 
arterioles and reducing the total peripheral resistance (afterload) against 
which the heart works. This unloading of the heart reduces myocardial energy 
consumption and oxygen requirements and probably accounts for the effectiveness 
of nifedipine in chronic stable angina.
                  
                     
                     Pharmacokinetics And Metabolism
                     :Nifedipine is rapidly 
and fully absorbed after oral administration. The drug is detectable in serum 10 
minutes after oral administration, and peak blood levels occur in approximately 
30 minutes. Bioavailability is proportional to dose from 10 to 30 mg; half-life 
does not change significantly with dose. There is little difference in relative 
bioavailability when nifedipine capsules are given orally and either swallowed 
whole, bitten and swallowed, or bitten and held sublingually. However, biting 
through the capsule prior to swallowing does result in slightly earlier plasma 
concentrations than if capsules are swallowed intact. It is highly bound by 
serum proteins. Nifedipine is extensively converted to inactive metabolites and 
approximately 80 percent of nifedipine and metabolites are eliminated via the 
kidneys. The half-life of nifedipine in plasma is approximately two hours. Since 
hepatic biotransformation is the predominant route for the disposition of 
nifedipine, the pharmacokinetics may be altered in patients with chronic liver 
disease. Patients with hepatic impairment (liver cirrhosis) have a longer 
disposition half-life and higher bioavailability of nifedipine than healthy 
volunteers. The degree of serum protein binding of nifedipine is high (92-98%). 
Protein binding may be greatly reduced in patients with renal or hepatic 
impairment.
                  In healthy subjects, the elimination half-life of a BID sustained release 
nifedipine formulation [that was neither nifedipine capsules nor nifedipine 
extended release tablets] was longer in elderly subjects (6.7 h) compared to young subjects (3.8 
h) following oral administration. A decreased clearance was also observed in the 
elderly (348 mL/min) following intravenous administration.
                  Co-administration of nifedipine with grapefruit juice resulted in 
approximately a 2-fold increase in nifedipine AUC and Cmax 
with no change in half-life. The increased plasma concentrations are most 
likely due to inhibition of CYP 3A4 related first-pass metabolism.
                  
                     Hemodynamics: Like other slow channel blockers, 
nifedipine exerts a negative inotropic effect on isolated myocardial tissue. 
This is rarely, if ever, seen in intact animals or man, probably because of 
reflex responses to its vasodilating effects. In man, nifedipine causes 
decreased peripheral vascular resistance and a fall in systolic and diastolic 
pressure, usually modest (5-10mm Hg systolic), but sometimes larger. There is 
usually a small increase in heart rate, a reflex response to vasodilation. 
Measurements of cardiac function in patients with normal ventricular function 
have generally found a small increase in cardiac index without major effects on 
ejection fraction, left ventricular end diastolic pressure (LVEDP) or volume 
(LVEDV). In patients with impaired ventricular function, most acute studies have 
shown some increase in ejection fraction and reduction in left ventricular 
filling pressure.
                  
                     Electrophysiologic Effects: Although like other 
members of its class, nifedipine decreases sinoatrial node function and 
atrioventricular conduction in isolated myocardial preparations; such effects 
have not been seen in studies in intact animals or in man. In formal 
electrophysiologic studies, predominantly in patients with normal conduction 
systems, nifedipine has had no tendency to prolong atrioventricular conduction, 
prolong sinus node recovery time, or slow sinus rate.
               
               
            
         