
               
               
               
                  CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGYTestim® 1% (testosterone gel) delivers 
physiologic amounts of testosterone, producing circulating testosterone levels 
that approximate normal levels (e.g., 300 - 1000 ng/dL) seen in healthy 
men.
                  
                  Testosterone - General Androgen EffectsTestosterone and dihydrotestosterone (DHT), endogenous androgens, 
are responsible for normal growth and development of the male sex organs and for 
maintenance of secondary sex characteristics. These effects include the growth 
and maturation of the prostate, seminal vesicles, penis, and scrotum; the 
development of male hair distribution, such as facial, pubic, chest, and 
axillary hair; laryngeal enlargement; vocal cord thickening; alterations in body 
musculature; and fat distribution. 
                  Male hypogonadism results from insufficient secretion of testosterone and is 
characterized by low serum testosterone concentrations. Symptoms associated with 
male hypogonadism include decreased sexual desire with or without impotence, 
fatigue and loss of energy, mood depression, regression of secondary sexual 
characteristics, and osteoporosis. Hypogonadism is a risk factor for 
osteoporosis in men. 
                  Drugs in the androgen class also promote retention of nitrogen, sodium, 
potassium, phosphorus, and decreased urinary excretion of calcium. 
                  Androgens have been reported to increase protein anabolism and decrease 
protein catabolism. Nitrogen balance is improved only when there is sufficient 
intake of calories and protein. Androgens have been reported to stimulate the 
production of red blood cells by enhancing erythropoietin production.
                  Androgens are responsible for the growth spurt of adolescence and for the 
eventual termination of linear growth brought about by fusion of the epiphyseal 
growth centers. In children, exogenous androgens accelerate linear growth rates 
but may cause a disproportionate advancement in bone maturation. Use over long 
periods may result in fusion of the epiphyseal growth centers and termination of 
the growth process.
                  During exogenous administration of androgens, endogenous testosterone release 
may be inhibited through feedback inhibition of pituitary luteinizing hormone 
(LH). At large doses of exogenous androgens, spermatogenesis may also be 
suppressed through feedback inhibition of pituitary follicle-stimulating hormone 
(FSH).
                  There is a lack of substantial evidence that androgens are effective in 
accelerating fracture healing or in shortening post-surgical 
convalescence.
                  
                  PharmacokineticsThe pharmacokinetics of Testim® have been 
evaluated with administration of doses containing 50 mg and 100 mg of 
testosterone to adult males with morning testosterone levels ≤300 ng/dL.
                  
                  AbsorptionTestim® is a topical formulation that 
dries quickly when applied to the skin surface. The skin serves as a reservoir 
for the sustained release of testosterone into the systemic circulation. 
Approximately 10% of the testosterone applied on the skin surface is absorbed 
into the systemic circulation during a 24-hour period.
                  
                  Single DoseIn single dose studies, when either Testim® 50 mg or 100 mg was administered, absorption of testosterone 
into the blood continued for the entire 24 hour dosing period. Also, mean peak 
and average serum concentrations within the normal range were achieved within 24 
hours.
                  
                  Multiple DoseWith single daily applications of Testim® 
50 mg and 100 mg, follow-up measurements at 30 and 90 days after starting 
treatment have confirmed that serum testosterone and DHT concentrations are 
generally maintained within the normal range.
                  Figure 1 summarizes the 24-hour pharmacokinetic profile of testosterone for 
patients maintained on Testim® 50 mg or Testim® 100 mg for 30 days.
                  
                     Figure 1
                  
                  
                     Mean Steady-State Serum Testosterone (±SD) (ng/dL) 
Concentrations on Day 30 in Patients Applying Testim® Once Daily
                  
                  

                  
                     
                  
                  
                     

                  
                  The average daily testosterone concentration produced by Testim® 100 mg at Day 30 was 612 (± 286) ng/dL and by Testim® 50 mg at Day 30 was 365 (± 187) ng/dL.
                  Figure 2 summarizes the 24-hour pharmacokinetic profile of DHT for patients 
maintained on Testim® 50 mg or Testim® 100 mg for 30 days.
                  
                     Figure 2
                  
                  
                     Mean Steady-State Serum Dihydrotestosterone (±SD) (pg/mL) 
Concentrations on Day 30 in Patients Applying Testim® Once Daily
                  
                  

                  
                     
                  
                  
                     

                  
                  The average daily DHT concentration produced by Testim® 100 mg at Day 30 was 555 (± 293) pg/mL and by Testim® 50 mg at Day 30 was 346 (± 212) pg/mL.
                  
                  WashingThe effect of showering (with mild soap) at 1, 2 and 6 hours post 
application of Testim® 100 mg was evaluated in a clinical 
trial in 12 men. The study demonstrated that the overall effect of washing was 
to lessen testosterone levels; however, when washing occurred two or more hours 
post drug application, serum testosterone levels remained within the normal 
range.
                  
                  DistributionCirculating testosterone is chiefly bound in the serum to sex 
hormone-binding globulin (SHBG) and albumin. The albumin-bound fraction of 
testosterone easily dissociates from albumin and is presumed to be bioactive. 
The portion of testosterone bound to SHBG is not considered biologically active. 
Approximately 40% of testosterone in plasma is bound to SHBG, 2% remains unbound 
(free) and the rest is bound to albumin and other proteins. The amount of SHBG 
in the serum and the total testosterone level will determine the distribution of 
bioactive and nonbioactive androgen.
                  
                  MetabolismThere is considerable variation in the half-life of testosterone 
as reported in the literature, ranging from ten to 100 minutes.
                  Testosterone is metabolized to various 17-keto steroids through two different 
pathways. The major active metabolites of testosterone are estradiol and DHT. 
Testosterone is metabolized to DHT by steroid 5α-reductase located in the skin, 
liver, and the urogenital tract of the male. DHT binds with greater affinity to 
SHBG than does testosterone. In many tissues, the activity of testosterone 
depends on its reduction to DHT, which binds to cytosol receptor proteins. The 
steroid-receptor complex is transported to the nucleus where it initiates 
transcription and cellular changes related to androgen action. In reproductive 
tissues, DHT is further metabolized to 3α and 3β androstanediol. Inactivation of 
testosterone occurs primarily in the liver.
                  DHT concentrations increased in parallel with testosterone concentrations 
during Testim® treatment. After 90 days of treatment, 
mean DHT concentrations remained generally within the normal range for 
Testim®-treated subjects. 
                  
                  ExcretionAbout 90% of a testosterone dose given intramuscularly is 
excreted in the urine as glucuronic and sulfuric acid conjugates of testosterone 
and metabolites; about 6% of a dose is excreted in the feces, mostly in the 
unconjugated form. 
                  
                  Special PopulationIn patients treated with Testim® there are 
no observed differences in the average daily serum testosterone concentration at 
steady-state based on age or cause of hypogonadism. No formal studies were 
conducted in a pediatric age population or in patients with renal or hepatic 
insufficiencies.
                  
                     
                        

                     
                  
               
               
               
                  
                     Figure 1
                     
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     Figure 2
                     
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         