
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  Lactated Ringer’s Irrigation exerts a mechanical cleansing action for sterile irrigation of body cavities, tissues or wounds, indwelling urethral catheters and surgical drainage tubes, and for washing, rinsing or soaking surgical dressings, instruments and laboratory specimens. It also serves as a vehicle for drugs used for irrigation or other pharmaceutical preparations.
                  Lactated Ringer’s Irrigation provides an isotonic irrigation with the same ionic constituents as Lactated Ringer’s Injection, USP, a modification of Hartmann’s Solution.
                  Lactated Ringer’s Irrigation is considered generally compatible with living tissues and organs.
                  Calcium chloride in water dissociates to provide calcium (Ca++) and chloride (Cl¯) ions. They are normal constituents of the body fluids and are dependent on various physiologic mechanisms for maintenance of balance between intake and output. Approximately 80% of body calcium is excreted in the feces as insoluble salts; urinary excretion accounts for the remaining 20%.
                  Potassium chloride in water dissociates to provide potassium (K+) and chloride (Cl¯) ions. Potassium is the chief cation of body cells (160 mEq/liter of intracellular water). It is found in low concentration in plasma and extracellular fluids (3.5 to 5.0 mEq/liter in a healthy adult). Potassium plays an important role in electrolyte balance.
                  Normally about 80 to 90% of the potassium intake is excreted in the urine; the remainder in the stools and to a small extent, in the perspiration. The kidney does not conserve potassium well so that during fasting or in patients on a potassium-free diet, potassium loss from the body continues resulting in potassium depletion.
                  Sodium chloride in water dissociates to provide sodium (Na+) and chloride (Cl¯) ions. Sodium (Na+) is the principal cation of the extracellular fluid and plays a large part in the therapy of fluid and electrolyte disturbances. Chloride (Cl¯) has an integral role in buffering action when oxygen and carbon dioxide exchange occurs in the red blood cells. The distribution and excretion of sodium (Na+) and chloride (Cl¯) are largely under the control of the kidney which maintains a balance between intake and output.
                  Sodium lactate in water dissociates to provide sodium (Na+) and lactate (C3H5O3¯) ions. The lactate anion provides an alkalizing effect resulting from simultaneous removal by the liver of lactate and hydrogen ions. In the liver, the lactate is metabolized to glycogen which is ultimately converted to carbon dioxide and water by oxidative metabolism.
                  The lactate anion acts as a source (alternate) of bicarbonate when normal production and utilization of lactic acid is not impaired as a result of disordered lactate metabolism. Since metabolic conversion is dependent on the integrity of cellular oxidative processes, lactate may be inadequate or ineffective as a source of bicarbonate in patients suffering from acidosis associated with shock or other disorders involving reduced perfusion of body tissues. When oxidative activity is intact, one to two hours time is required for metabolism of lactate.
                  Water is an essential constituent of all body tissues and accounts for approximately 70% of total body weight. Average normal adult daily requirement ranges from two to three liters (1 to 1.5 liters each for insensible water loss by perspiration and urine production).
                  Water balance is maintained by various regulatory mechanisms. Water distribution depends primarily on the concentration of electrolytes in the body compartments and sodium (Na+) plays a major role in maintaining physiologic equilibrium.
               
               
            
         