
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  Amoxicillin is stable in the presence of gastric acid and is rapidly absorbed after oral administration. Amoxicillin diffuses readily into most body tissues and fluids, with the exception of brain and spinal fluid, except when meninges are inflamed. The half-life of amoxicillin is 61.3 minutes. Most of the amoxicillin is excreted unchanged in the urine; its excretion can be delayed by concurrent administration of probenecid. In blood serum, amoxicillin is approximately 20% protein-bound.
                  Orally administered doses of 250 mg and 500 mg amoxicillin capsules result in average peak blood levels 1 to 2 hours after administration in the range of 3.5 mcg/mL to 5 mcg/mL and 5.5 mcg/mL to 7.5 mcg/mL, respectively.
               
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        Microbiology:
                     
                     
                        Amoxicillin is similar to ampicillin in its bactericidal action against susceptible organisms during the stage of active multiplication. It acts through the inhibition of biosynthesis of cell wall mucopeptide. Amoxicillin has been shown to be active against most strains of the following microorganisms, both and in clinical infections as described in the section.
                                    in vitro
                           
                              INDICATIONS AND USAGE
                           
                        
                        spp.* (β-lactamase–negative strains only) spp. (α- and β-hemolytic strains only) * Staphylococci which are susceptible to amoxicillin but resistant to methicillin/oxacillin should be considered as resistant to amoxicillin.
                                    
                              Aerobic Gram-Positive Microorganisms:
                                            

                              
                           
                           Enterococcus faecalis
                                        

                           
                           Staphylococcus
                           

                           Streptococcus pneumoniae
                                        

                           
                           Streptococcus
                           

                        
                        (β-lactamase–negative strains only) (β-lactamase–negative strains only) (β-lactamase–negative strains only) (β-lactamase–negative strains only)
                                    
                              Aerobic Gram-Negative Microorganisms:
                                            

                              
                           
                           Escherichia coli
                           

                           Haemophilus influenzae
                           

                           Neisseria gonorrhoeae
                           

                           Proteus mirabilis
                        
                        
                           Helicobacter:
                                        

                           
                           Helicobacter pylori
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           Susceptibility Tests:
                        
                     
                     
                        Quantitative methods are used to determine antimicrobial minimum inhibitory concentrations (MICs). These MICs provide estimates of the susceptibility of bacteria to antimicrobial compounds. The MICs should be determined using a standardized procedure. Standardized procedures are based on a dilution method (broth or agar) or equivalent with standardized inoculum concentrations and standardized concentrations of powder. Ampicillin is sometimes used to predict susceptibility of to amoxicillin; however, some intermediate strains have been shown to be susceptible to amoxicillin. Therefore, susceptibility should be tested using amoxicillin powder.
                                    Dilution Techniques:
                           1
                           ampicillin
                           S. pneumoniae
                           S. pneumoniae
                        
                        The MIC values should be interpreted according to the following criteria:
                        
                           
                              For Gram-Positive Aerobes:
                                            

                              
                           
                        
                        





                        


These interpretive criteria are based on the recommended doses for respiratory tract infections.
                                    NOTE:
                        
                        
                           For Gram-Negative Aerobes:
                        
                        



                        


A report of “Susceptible” indicates that the pathogen is likely to be inhibited if the antimicrobial compound in the blood reaches the concentrations usually achievable. A report of “Intermediate” indicates that the result should be considered equivocal, and, if the microorganism is not fully susceptible to alternative, clinically feasible drugs, the test should be repeated. This category implies possible clinical applicability in body sites where the drug is physiologically concentrated or in situations where high dosage of drug can be used. This category also provides a buffer zone, which prevents small uncontrolled technical factors from causing major discrepancies in interpretation. A report of “Resistant” indicates that the pathogen is not likely to be inhibited if the antimicrobial compound in the blood reaches the concentrations usually achievable; other therapy should be selected.
                        Standardized susceptibility test procedures require the use of laboratory control microorganisms to control the technical aspects of the laboratory procedures.
                        Standard powder should provide the following MIC values:
                                    ampicillin
                        
                        


                        


Using to determine susceptibility:
                                    amoxicillin
                        
                        


                        


Quantitative methods that require measurement of zone diameters also provide reproducible estimates of the susceptibility of bacteria to antimicrobial compounds. One such standardized procedure requires the use of standardized inoculum concentrations. This procedure uses paper disks impregnated with 10 mcg ampicillin to test the susceptibility of microorganisms, except to amoxicillin. Interpretation involves correlation of the diameter obtained in the disk test with the MIC for .
                                    Diffusion Techniques:
                           2
                           S. pneumoniae,
                           ampicillin
                        
                        Reports from the laboratory providing results of the standard single-disk susceptibility test with a 10 mcg ampicillin disk should be interpreted according to the following criteria:
                        
                           For gram-positive aerobes:
                        
                        




                        


For streptococci (other than β-hemolytic streptococci and ), an ampicillin MIC should be determined.
                                    NOTE:
                           S. pneumoniae
                        
                        should be tested using a 1 mcg oxacillin disk. Isolates with oxacillin zone sizes of ≥ 20 mm are susceptible to amoxicillin. An amoxicillin MIC should be determined on isolates of with oxacillin zone sizes of ≤ 19 mm.
                                    S. pneumoniae
                                        

                           
                           S. pneumoniae
                           S. pneumoniae
                        
                        
                           For gram-negative aerobes:
                        
                        



                        


Interpretation should be as stated above for results using dilution techniques.
                        As with standard dilution techniques, disk diffusion susceptibility test procedures require the use of laboratory control microorganisms. The 10 mcg ampicillin disk should provide the following zone diameters in these laboratory test quality control strains:
                        


                        


Using 1 mcg oxacillin disk:
                        


                     



                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        Susceptibility testing for
                                    Helicobacter pylori:
                        
                     
                     
                        susceptibility testing methods and diagnostic products currently available for determining minimum inhibitory concentrations (MICs) and zone sizes have not been standardized, validated, or approved for testing microorganisms.
                                    In vitro
                           H. pylori
                        
                        Culture and susceptibility testing should be obtained in patients who fail triple therapy. If clarithromycin resistance is found, a non-clarithromycin-containing regimen should be used.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         