
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           Statins: Caution should be used when prescribing niacin with statins as these agents can increase risk of myopathy/rhabdomyolysis. ,
                                        (5.2
                              7.1)
                           
                           Bile Acid Sequestrants: Bile acid sequestrants have a high niacin-binding capacity and should be taken at least 4 - 6 hours before NIASPAN administration.
                                        (7.2)
                           
                        
                        

                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 Statins
                     
                        Caution should be used when prescribing niacin (≥1 gm/day) with statins as these drugs can increase risk of myopathy/rhabdomyolysis. Combination therapy with NIASPAN and lovastatin or NIASPAN and simvastatin should not exceed doses of 2000 mg NIASPAN and 40 mg lovastatin or simvastatin daily. .
                                    [see Warnings and Precautions and Clinical Pharmacology ]
                                        (5)
                              (12.3)
                           
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 Bile Acid Sequestrants
                     
                        An study results suggest that the bile acid-binding resins have high niacin binding capacity. Therefore, 4 to 6 hours, or as great an interval as possible, should elapse between the ingestion of bile acid-binding resins and the administration of NIASPAN .
                                    in vitro
                           [see Clinical Pharmacology ]
                                        (12.3)
                           
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3 Aspirin
                     
                        Concomitant aspirin may decrease the metabolic clearance of nicotinic acid. The clinical relevance of this finding is unclear.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4 Antihypertensive Therapy
                     
                        Niacin may potentiate the effects of ganglionic blocking agents and vasoactive drugs resulting in postural hypotension.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.5 Other
                     
                        Vitamins or other nutritional supplements containing large doses of niacin or related compounds such as nicotinamide may potentiate the adverse effects of NIASPAN.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.6 Laboratory Test Interactions
                     
                        Niacin may produce false elevations in some fluorometric determinations of plasma or urinary catecholamines.  Niacin may also give false-positive reactions with cupric sulfate solution (Benedict’s reagent) in urine glucose tests.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         