
                     
                     
                     
                        Drug Interactions
                     
                     
                        CNS Depressants: Morphine should be used with great caution and in reduced dosage in patients who are concurrently receiving other central nervous system (CNS) depressants including sedatives, hypnotics, general anesthetics, antiemetics, phenothiazines, other tranquilizers and alcohol because of the risk of respiratory depression, hypotension and profound sedation or coma. When such combined therapy is contemplated, the initial dose of one or both agents should be reduced by at least 50%.
                        Muscle Relaxants: morphine sulfate extended-release may enhance the neuromuscular blocking action of skeletal relaxants and produce an increased degree of respiratory depression.
                        Mixed Agonist/Antagonist Opioid Analgesics: Agonist/antagonist analgesics (i.e., pentazocine, nalbuphine, and butorphanol) should be administered with caution to a patient who has received or is receiving a course of therapy with a pure opioid agonist analgesic such as morphine sulfate extended-release. In this situation, mixed agonist/antagonist analgesics may reduce the analgesic effect of morphine sulfate extended-release c and/or may precipitate withdrawal symptoms in these patients.
                        Monoamine Oxidase Inhibitors (MAOIs): MAOIs have been reported to intensify the effects of at least one opioid drug causing anxiety, confusion and significant depression of respiration or coma. Morphine sulfate extended-release should not be used in patients taking MAOIs or within 14 days of stopping such treatment.
                        Cimetidine: There is an isolated report of confusion and severe respiratory depression when a hemodialysis patient was concurrently administered morphine and cimetidine.
                        Diuretics: Morphine can reduce the efficacy of diuretics by inducing the release of antidiuretic hormone. Morphine may also lead to acute retention of urine by causing spasm of the sphincter of the bladder, particularly in men with prostatism. 
                     
                     
                  
               