
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  Like other topical corticosteroids, mometasone furoate has 
anti-inflammatory, antipruritic, and vasoconstrictive properties. The mechanism 
of the anti-inflammatory activity of the topical steroids, in general, is 
unclear. However, corticosteroids are thought to act by the induction of 
phospholipase A2 inhibitory proteins, collectively called 
lipocortins. It is postulated that these proteins control the biosynthesis of 
potent mediators of inflammation such as prostaglandins and leukotrienes by 
inhibiting the release of their common precursor arachidonic acid. Arachidonic 
acid is released from membrane phospholipids by phospholipase A2.
                  
                  PharmacokineticsThe extent of percutaneous absorption of topical corticosteroids 
is determined by many factors including the vehicle and the integrity of the 
epidermal barrier. Occlusive dressings with hydrocortisone for up to 24 hours 
have not been demonstrated to increase penetration; however, occlusion of 
hydrocortisone for 96 hours markedly enhances penetration. Studies in humans 
indicate that approximately 0.4% of the applied dose of ELOCON Cream 0.1% enters 
the circulation after 8 hours of contact on normal skin without occlusion. 
Inflammation and/or other disease processes in the skin may increase 
percutaneous absorption.
                  Studies performed with ELOCON Cream 0.1% indicate that it is in the medium 
range of potency as compared with other topical corticosteroids.
                  In a study evaluating the effects of mometasone furoate cream on the 
hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis, 15 grams were applied twice daily for 
7 days to six adult patients with psoriasis or atopic dermatitis. The cream was 
applied without occlusion to at least 30% of the body surface. The results show 
that the drug caused a slight lowering of adrenal corticosteroid secretion.
                  In a pediatric trial, 24 atopic dermatitis patients, of which 19 patients 
were age 2 to 12 years, were treated with ELOCON Cream 0.1% once daily. The 
majority of patients cleared within 3 weeks.
                  Ninety-seven pediatric patients ages 6 to 23 months, with atopic dermatitis, 
were enrolled in an open-label, hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis safety 
study. ELOCON Cream 0.1% was applied once daily for approximately 3 weeks over a 
mean body surface area of 41% (range 15% to 94%). In approximately 16% of 
patients who showed normal adrenal function by Cortrosyn test before starting 
treatment, adrenal suppression was observed at the end of treatment with ELOCON 
Cream 0.1%. The criteria for suppression were: basal cortisol level of less than or equal to 5 
mcg/dL, 30-minute post-stimulation level of less than or equal to 18 mcg/dL, or an increase of less than 7 
mcg/dL. Follow-up testing 2 to 4 weeks after stopping treatment, available for 5 
of the patients, demonstrated suppressed HPA axis function in one patient, using 
these same criteria.
               
               
            
         