
                     
                     
                     Drug Interactions
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Amphotericin B Injection and Potassium-Depleting Agents
                           
                              When corticosteroids are administered concomitantly with potassium-depleting agents (e.g., 
           
 
  amphotericin B, diuretics), patients should be observed closely for development of hypokalemia. In addition, there have been cases reported in which concomitant use of amphotericin B and hydrocortisone was followed by cardiac enlargement and congestive heart failure.
          

 
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Antibiotics
                           
                              Macrolide antibiotics have been reported to cause a significant decrease in corticosteroid clearance (see 
           
 
  
                                    PRECAUTIONS: Drug Interactions:
                                 
                                  Hepatic Enzyme Inducers, Inhibitors and Substrates).
          

 
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Anticholinesterases
                           
                              Concomitant use of anticholinesterase agents (e.g., 
           
 
  neostigmine, pyridostigmine) and corticosteroids may produce severe weakness in patients with myasthenia gravis. If possible, anticholinesterase agents should be withdrawn at least 24 hours before initiating corticosteroid therapy. If concomitant therapy must occur, it should take place under close supervision and the need for respiratory support should be anticipated.
          

 
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Anticoagulants, Oral
                           
                              Co-administration of corticosteroids and 
           
 
  warfarin usually results in inhibition of response to warfarin, although there have been some conflicting reports. Therefore, coagulation indices should be monitored frequently to maintain the desired anticoagulant effect.
          

 
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Antidiabetics
                           
                              Because corticosteroids may increase blood glucose concentrations, dosage adjustments of antidiabetic agents may be required.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Antitubercular drugs
                           
                              Serum concentrations of 
           
 
  isoniazid may be decreased.
          

 
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Bupropion
                           
                              Since systemic steroids, as well as bupropion, can lower the seizure threshold, concurrent administration should be undertaken only with extreme caution; low initial dosing and small gradual increases should be employed.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Cholestyramine
                           
                              Cholestyramine may increase the clearance of corticosteroids.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Cyclosporine
                           
                              Increased activity of both cyclosporine and corticosteroids may occur when the two are used concurrently. Convulsions have been reported with this concurrent use.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Digitalis Glycosides
                           
                              Patients on digitalis glycosides may be at increased risk of arrhythmias due to hypokalemia.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Estrogens, Including Oral Contraceptives
                           
                              Estrogens may decrease the hepatic metabolism of certain corticosteroids, thereby increasing their effect.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Fluoroquinolones
                           
                              Post-marketing surveillance reports indicate that the risk of tendon rupture may be increased in patients receiving concomitant fluoroquinolones (e.g., 
           
 
  ciprofloxacin, levofloxacin) and corticosteroids, especially in the elderly. Tendon rupture can occur during or after treatment with quinolones.
          

 
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Hepatic Enzyme Inducers, Inhibitors and Substrates
                           
                              Drugs which 
           
 
  induce cytochrome P450 3A4 (CYP 3A4) enzyme activity (e.g., 
           
 
  barbiturates, phenytoin, carbamazepine, rifampin) may enhance the metabolism of corticosteroids and require that the dosage of the corticosteroid be increased. Drugs which 
           
 
  inhibit CYP 3A4 (e.g., 
           
 
  ketoconazole, itraconazole, ritonavir, indinavir, macrolide antibiotics such as erythromycin) have the potential to result in increased plasma concentrations of corticosteroids. Glucocorticoids are moderate inducers of CYP 3A4. Co-administration with other drugs that are metabolized by CYP 3A4 (e.g., 
           
 
  indinavir, erythromycin) may increase their clearance, resulting in decreased plasma concentration.
          

 
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Ketoconazole
                           
                              Ketoconazole has been reported to decrease the metabolism of certain corticosteroids by up to 60%, leading to increased risk of corticosteroid side effects. In addition, ketoconazole alone can inhibit adrenal corticosteroid synthesis and may cause adrenal insufficiency during corticosteroid withdrawal.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Nonsteroidal Anti-Inflammatory Agents (NSAIDS)
                           
                              Concomitant use of 
           
 
  aspirin (or other 
           
 
  nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory agents) and corticosteroids increases the risk of gastrointestinal side effects. Aspirin should be used cautiously in conjunction with corticosteroids in hypoprothrombinemia. The clearance of salicylates may be increased with concurrent use of corticosteroids; this could lead to decreased salicylate serum levels or increase the risk of salicylate toxicity when corticosteroid is withdrawn.
          

 
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Phenytoin
                           
                              In post-marketing experience, there have been reports of both increases and decreases in phenytoin levels with dexamethasone co-administration, leading to alterations in seizure control. Phenytoin has been demonstrated to increase the hepatic metabolism of corticosteroids, resulting in a decreased therapeutic effect of the corticosteroid.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Quetiapine
                           
                              Increased doses of quetiapine may be required to maintain control of symptoms of schizophrenia in patients receiving a glucocorticoid, a hepatic enzyme inducer.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Skin Tests
                           
                              Corticosteroids may suppress reactions to skin tests.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Thalidomide
                           
                              Co-administration with thalidomide should be employed cautiously, as toxic epidermal necrolysis has been reported with concomitant use.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Vaccines
                           
                              Patients on corticosteroid therapy may exhibit a diminished response to toxoids and live or inactivated vaccines due to inhibition of antibody response. Corticosteroids may also potentiate the replication of some organisms contained in live attenuated vaccines. Routine administration of vaccines or toxoids should be deferred until corticosteroid therapy is discontinued if possible (see 
           
 
  
                                    WARNINGS: Infection:
                                 
                                  Vaccination).
          

 
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               