
               
               
               
                  CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
                  
                  Mechanism of Action 
                     Tramadol hydrochloride 
is a centrally acting synthetic opioid analgesic. Although its mode of action is 
not completely understood, from animal tests, at least two complementary 
mechanisms appear applicable: binding of parent and M1 metabolite to µ-opioid 
receptors and weak inhibition of reuptake of norepinephrine and serotonin.
                  
                     Opioid activity is due 
to both low affinity binding of the parent compound and higher affinity binding 
of the O-demethylated metabolite M1 to µ-opioid receptors. In animal models, M1 
is up to 6 times more potent than tramadol in producing analgesia and 200 times 
more potent in µ-opioid binding. Tramadol-induced analgesia is only partially 
antagonized by the opiate antagonist naloxone in several animal tests. The 
relative contribution of both tramadol and M1 to human analgesia is dependent 
upon the plasma concentrations of each compound.
                  
                     Tramadol has been shown 
to inhibit reuptake of norepinephrine and serotonin in 
vitro, as have some other opioid analgesics. These mechanisms may 
contribute independently to the overall analgesic profile of tramadol. The 
relationship between exposure of tramadol and M1 and efficacy has not been 
evaluated in the tramadol hydrochloride ER tablets clinical studies. 
                  
                     Apart from analgesia, 
tramadol administration may produce a constellation of symptoms (including 
dizziness, somnolence, nausea, constipation, sweating and pruritus) similar to 
that of other opioids. In contrast to morphine, tramadol has not been shown to 
cause histamine release. At therapeutic doses, tramadol has no effect on heart 
rate, left-ventricular function or cardiac index. Orthostatic hypotension has 
been observed.
                  
                  
                  Pharmacokinetics 
                     The analgesic activity 
of tramadol is due to both parent drug and the M1 metabolite. Tramadol 
hydrochloride ER tablet is administered as a racemate and both the [-] and [+] 
forms of both tramadol and M1 are detected in the circulation.
                  
                     The pharmacokinetics of 
tramadol hydrochloride ER tablets are approximately dose-proportional over a 100 
to 400 mg dose range in healthy subjects. The observed tramadol AUC values for 
the 400 mg dose were 26% higher than predicted based on the AUC values for the 
200 mg dose. The clinical significance of this finding has not been studied and 
is not known.
                  
                  
                  
                  
                     Absorption
                  
                  
                     In healthy subjects, the 
bioavailability of a tramadol hydrochloride ER 200 mg tablet relative to a 50 mg 
every six hours dosing regimen of the immediate-release dosage form (tramadol 
hydrochloride) was approximately 85 to 90%. Consistent with the extended-release 
nature of the formulation, there is a lag time in drug absorption following 
tramadol hydrochloride ER tablets administration. The mean peak plasma 
concentrations of tramadol and M1 after administration of tramadol hydrochloride 
ER tablets to healthy volunteers are attained at about 12 hours and 15 hours, 
respectively, after dosing (see Table 1 and Figure 2). Following administration 
of the tramadol hydrochloride ER tablet, steady-state plasma concentrations of 
both tramadol and M1 are achieved within four days with once daily dosing.
                  
                     The mean (%CV) 
pharmacokinetic parameter values for tramadol hydrochloride ER tablet 200 mg 
administered once daily and tramadol hydrochloride immediate-release 50 mg 
administered every six hours are provided in Table 1. 

                  
                  


                  



                     Figure 2: Mean 
Steady-State Tramadol (a) and M1 (b) Plasma Concentrations on Day 8 Post Dose 
after Administration of 200 mg Tramadol Hydrochloride ER Tablet Once Daily and 
50 mg Tramadol Hydrochloride Tablets Every 6 Hours.
                  
                  

                  

                  
                  

                  

                  
                  
                     Food 
Effects
                  
                  
                     After a single dose 
administration of 200 mg tramadol hydrochloride ER tablet with a high fat meal, 
the C max and AUC0-∞ of tramadol 
decreased 28% and 16%, respectively, compared to fasting conditions. Mean Tmax was increased by 3 hour (from 14 hour under fasting 
conditions to 17 hour under fed conditions). While tramadol hydrochloride ER 
tablet may be taken without regard to food, it is recommended that it be taken 
in a consistent manner. 
                  
                  
                  
                  
                     Distribution
                  
                  
                     The volume of 
distribution of tramadol was 2.6 and 2.9 liters/kg in male and female subjects, 
respectively, following a 100 mg intravenous dose. The binding of tramadol to 
human plasma proteins is approximately 20% and binding also appears to be 
independent of concentration up to 10 mcg/mL. Saturation of plasma protein 
binding occurs only at concentrations outside the clinically relevant 
range.
                  
                  
                  
                  
                     Metabolism
                  
                  
                     Tramadol is extensively 
metabolized after oral administration. The major metabolic pathways appear to be 
N – (mediated by CYP3A4 and CYP2B6) and O – (mediated by CYP2D6) demethylation 
and glucuronidation or sulfation in the liver. One metabolite (O-desmethyl 
tramadol, denoted M1) is pharmacologically active in animal models. Formation of 
M1 is dependent on CYP2D6 and as such is subject to inhibition, which may affect 
the therapeutic response (see PRECAUTIONS - Drug Interactions). 
                  
                  
                  
                  
                     Elimination
                  
                  
                     Tramadol is eliminated 
primarily through metabolism by the liver and the metabolites are eliminated 
primarily by the kidneys. Approximately 30% of the dose is excreted in the urine 
as unchanged drug, whereas 60% of the dose is excreted as metabolites. The 
remainder is excreted either as unidentified or as unextractable metabolites. 
The mean terminal plasma elimination half-lives of racemic tramadol and racemic 
M1 after administration of tramadol hydrochloride ER tablets are approximately 
7.9 and 8.8 hours, respectively.
                  
                  
                  Special Populations 
                  
                  
                  
                     Renal
                  
                  
                     Impaired renal function 
results in a decreased rate and extent of excretion of tramadol and its active 
metabolite, M1. The pharmacokinetics of tramadol were studied in patients with 
mild or moderate renal impairment after receiving multiple doses of tramadol 
hydrochloride ER tablets 100 mg. There is no consistent trend observed for 
tramadol exposure related to renal function in patients with mild (CLcr: 50 to 
80 mL/min) or moderate (CLcr: 30 to 50 mL/min) renal impairment in comparison to 
patients with normal renal function. However, exposure of M1 increased 20 to 40% 
with increased severity of the renal impairment (from normal to mild and 
moderate). Tramadol hydrochloride ER tablets have not been studied in patients 
with severe renal impairment (CLcr  30 mL/min). The limited availability of 
dose strengths of tramadol hydrochloride ER tablets does not permit the dosing 
flexibility required for safe use in patients with severe renal impairment. 
Therefore, tramadol hydrochloride ER tablets should not be used in patients with 
severe renal impairment (see PRECAUTIONS - Use in Renal and Hepatic Disease and DOSAGE 
AND ADMINISTRATION). The total amount of tramadol and M1 removed during a 
4 hour dialysis period is less than 7% of the administered dose. 
                  
                  
                  
                  
                     Hepatic
                  
                  
                     Pharmacokinetics of 
tramadol was studied in patients with mild or moderate hepatic impairment after 
receiving multiple doses of tramadol hydrochloride ER tablets 100 mg. The 
exposure of plus  minus and minus minus tramadol was similar in mild and moderate hepatic 
impairment patients in comparison to patients with normal hepatic function. 
However, exposure of  and ­M1 decreased 50% with increased severity of 
the hepatic impairment (from normal to mild and moderate). The pharmacokinetics 
of tramadol after the administration of tramadol hydrochloride ER tablets has 
not been studied in patients with severe hepatic impairment. After the 
administration of tramadol immediate-release tablets to patients with advanced 
cirrhosis of the liver, tramadol area under the plasma concentration time curve 
was larger and the tramadol and M1 half-lives were longer than subjects with 
normal hepatic function. The limited availability of dose strengths of tramadol 
hydrochloride ER tablets does not permit the dosing flexibility required for 
safe use in patients with severe hepatic impairment. Therefore, tramadol 
hydrochloride ER tablets should not be used in patients with severe hepatic 
impairment (see PRECAUTIONS - Use in 
Renal and Hepatic Disease and DOSAGE AND 
ADMINISTRATION). 
                  
                  
                  
                  
                     Geriatric
                  
                  
                     The effect of age on the 
absorption of tramadol from tramadol hydrochloride ER tablets in patients over 
the age of 65 years has not been studied and is unknown (see PRECAUTIONS and DOSAGE AND 
ADMINISTRATION). 
                  
                  
                  
                  
                     Gender
                  
                  
                     Based on pooled 
multiple-dose pharmacokinetics studies for tramadol hydrochloride ER tablets in 
166 healthy subjects (111 males and 55 females), the dose-normalized AUC values 
for tramadol were somewhat higher in females than in males. There was a 
considerable degree of overlap in values between male and female groups. Dosage 
adjustment based on gender is not recommended.
                  
                  
                  Drug Interactions 
                     The formation of the 
active metabolite, M1, is mediated by CYP2D6. Approximately 7% of the population 
has reduced activity of the CYP2D6 isoenzyme of cytochrome P-450. Based on a 
population PK analysis of Phase I studies with immediate-release tablets in 
healthy subjects, concentrations of tramadol were approximately 20% higher in 
"poor metabolizers" versus "extensive metabolizers," while M1 concentrations 
were 40% lower. In vitro drug interaction studies in 
human liver microsomes indicate that inhibitors of CYP2D6 (fluoxetine, 
norfluoxetine, amitriptyline, and quinidine) inhibit the metabolism of tramadol 
to various degrees, suggesting that concomitant administration of these 
compounds could result in increases in tramadol concentrations and decreased 
concentrations of M1. The full pharmacological impact of these alterations in 
terms of either efficacy or safety is unknown. 
                  
                     Tramadol is also 
metabolized by CYP3A4. Administration of CYP3A4 inhibitors, such as ketoconazole 
and erythromycin, or inducers, such as rifampin and St. John’s Wort, with 
tramadol hydrochloride ER tablets may affect the metabolism of tramadol leading 
to altered tramadol exposure (see PRECAUTIONS - Drug Interactions). 
                  
                  
                  
                  
                     Quinidine
                  
                  
                     Tramadol is metabolized 
to M1 by CYP2D6. A study was conducted to examine the effect of quinidine, a 
selective inhibitor of CYP2D6, on the pharmacokinetics of tramadol by 
administering 200 mg quinidine two hours before the administration of tramadol 
hydrochloride ER tablets 100 mg. The results demonstrated that the exposure of 
tramadol increased 50 to 60% and the exposure of M1 decreased 50 to 60% (see 
PRECAUTIONS - Drug Interactions). In vitro drug interaction studies in human 
liver microsomes indicate that tramadol has no effect on quinidine 
metabolism.
                  
                  
                  
                  
                     Carbamazepine
                  
                  
                     Carbamazepine, a CYP3A4 
inducer, increases tramadol metabolism. Patients taking carbamazepine may have a 
significantly reduced analgesic effect of tramadol. Because of the seizure risk 
associated with tramadol, concomitant administration of tramadol hydrochloride 
ER tablets and carbamazepine is not recommended (see PRECAUTIONS - Drug Interactions). 

                  
                  
                  
                  
                     Cimetidine
                  
                  
                     Concomitant 
administration of tramadol immediate-release tablets with cimetidine does not 
result in clinically significant changes in tramadol pharmacokinetics. No 
alteration of the tramadol hydrochloride ER tablets dosage regimen with 
cimetidine is recommended.
                  

                  
                     

                  
                  
                     

                  
               
               
               
                  
                     CHART A
                     
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     CHART B
                     
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         