
                     
                     
                     Drug Interactions
                     
                        Limited clinical data on potential drug interactions are available.
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Drugs Metabolized By the Hepatic P450 System
                           
                              As tretinoin is metabolized by the hepatic P450 system, there is a potential for alteration of pharmacokinetics parameters in patients administered concomitant medications that are also inducers or inhibitors of this system. Medications that generally induce hepatic P450 enzymes include rifampicin, glucocorticoids, phenobarbital and pentobarbital. Medications that generally inhibit hepatic P450 enzymes include ketoconazole, cimetidine, erythromycin, verapamil, diltiazem and cyclosporine. To date there are no data to suggest that co-use with these medications increases or decreases either efficacy or toxicity of tretinoin. 
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Agents Known to Cause Pseudotumor Cerebri/Intracranial Hypertension (Such as Tetracyclines)
                           
                              Tretinoin may cause pseudotumor cerebri/intracranial hypertension. Concomitant administration of tretinoin and agents known to cause pseudotumor cerebri/intracranial hypertension as well might increase the risk of this condition (see WARNINGS).
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Vitamin A
                           
                              As with other retinoids, tretinoin must not be administered in combination with vitamin A because symptoms of hypervitaminosis A could be aggravated.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Anti-fibrinolytic Agents (Such as Tranexamic Acid, Aminocaproic Acid, or Aprotinin)
                           
                              Cases of fatal thrombotic complications have been reported rarely in patients concomitantly treated with tretinoin and anti-fibrinolytic agents. Therefore, caution should be exercised when administering tretinoin concomitantly with these agents (see PRECAUTIONS, General).
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Effect of Food
                                 
                                    No data on the effect of food on the absorption of tretinoin are available. The absorption of retinoids as a class has been shown to be enhanced when taken together with food.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               