
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Endogenous estrogens are largely responsible for the development and maintenance of the female reproductive system and secondary sexual characteristics.  Although circulating estrogens exist in a dynamic equilibrium of metabolic interconversions, estradiol is the principal intracellular human estrogen and is substantially more potent than its metabolites, estrone and estriol, at the receptor level.
                        The primary source of estrogen in normally cycling adult women is the ovarian follicle, which secretes 70 to 500 mcg of estradiol daily, depending on the phase of the menstrual cycle.  After menopause, most endogenous estrogen is produced by conversion of androstenedione, secreted by the adrenal cortex, to estrone in the peripheral tissues.  Thus, estrone and the sulfate-conjugated form, estrone sulfate, are the most abundant circulating estrogens in postmenopausal women. 
                        Estrogens act through binding to nuclear receptors in estrogen-responsive tissues.  To date, two estrogen receptors have been identified.  These vary in proportion from tissue to tissue.
                        Circulating estrogens modulate the pituitary secretion of the gonadotropins, luteinizing hormone (LH), and FSH through a negative feedback mechanism.  Estrogens act to reduce the elevated levels of these hormones seen in postmenopausal women.
                        Progestin compounds enhance cellular differentiation and generally oppose the actions of estrogens by decreasing estrogen receptor levels, increasing local metabolism of estrogens to less active metabolites, or inducing gene products that blunt cellular responses to estrogen. Progestins exert their effects in target cells by binding to specific progesterone receptors that interact with progesterone response elements in target genes. Progesterone receptors have been identified in the female reproductive tract, breast, pituitary, hypothalamus, and central nervous system. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        There are no pharmacodynamic data known for Activella tablets.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        
                           Absorption
                        
                        
                           Estradiol
                        
                        Estradiol is absorbed through the gastrointestinal tract.  Following oral administration of Activella tablets, peak plasma estradiol concentrations are reached within 5 to 8 hours.  The oral bioavailability of estradiol following administration of Activella 1 mg/0.5 mg when compared to a combination oral solution is 53%.  Administration of Activella 1 mg/0.5 mg with food did not modify the bioavailability of estradiol.
                        
                           Norethindrone Acetate
                        
                        After oral administration, norethindrone acetate is absorbed and transformed to norethindrone.  Norethindrone reaches a peak plasma concentration within 0.5 to 1.5 hours after the administration of Activella tablets.  The oral bioavailability of norethindrone following administration of Activella 1 mg/0.5 mg when compared to a combination oral solution is 100%.  Administration of Activella 1 mg/0.5 mg with food increases norethindrone AUC0-72 by 19% and decreases Cmax by 36%.
                        The pharmacokinetic parameters of estradiol (E2), estrone (E1), and norethindrone (NET) following oral administration of 1 Activella 1 mg/0.5 mg or 2 Activella 0.5 mg/0.1 mg tablet(s) to healthy postmenopausal women are summarized in Table 3.
                        
                           TABLE 3 PHARMACOKINETIC PARAMETERS AFTER ADMINISTRATION OF 1 TABLET OF ACTIVELLA 1 MG/0.5 MG OR 2 TABLETS OF ACTIVELLA 0.5 MG/0.1 MG TO HEALTHY POSTMENOPAUSAL WOMEN
                        
                        


                        


AUC = area under the curve, 0 – last quantifiable sample
                        Cmax = maximum plasma concentration, 
                        tmax = time at maximum plasma concentration, 
                        t1/2 = half-life
                        Following continuous dosing with once-daily administration of Activella 1 mg/0.5 mg, serum concentrations of estradiol, estrone, and norethindrone reached steady-state within two weeks with an accumulation of 33 to 47% above concentrations following single dose administration.  Unadjusted circulating concentrations of E2, E1, and NET during Activella 1 mg/0.5 mg treatment at steady state (dosing at time 0) are provided in Figures 1a and 1b.
                        
                           Figure 1a: Mean Baseline-Uncorrected Estradiol and Estrone Serum Concentration-Time Profiles Following Multiple Doses of Activella 1 mg/0.5 mg (N=24)
                        
                        
                           Figure 1b: Mean Baseline-Uncorrected Norethindrone Serum Concentration-Time Profile Following Multiple Doses of Activella 1 mg/0.5 mg (N=24) 
                        
                        
                           Figure 1b: Mean Baseline-Uncorrected Norethindrone Serum Concentration-Time Profile Following Multiple Doses of Activella 1 mg/0.5 mg (N=24) 
                        
                        
                           Distribution
                        
                        
                           Estradiol
                        
                        The distribution of exogenous estrogens is similar to that of endogenous estrogens.  Estrogens are widely distributed in the body and are generally found in higher concentrations in the sex hormone target organs.  Estradiol circulates in the blood bound to SHBG (37%) and to albumin (61%), while only approximately 1 to 2% is unbound.  
                        
                           Norethindrone Acetate
                        
                        Norethindrone also binds to a similar extent to SHBG (36%) and to albumin (61%).
                        
                           Metabolism 
                        
                        
                           Estradiol
                        
                        Exogenous estrogens are metabolized in the same manner as endogenous estrogens.  Circulating estrogens exist in a dynamic equilibrium of metabolic interconversions.  These transformations take place mainly in the liver.  Estradiol is converted reversibly to estrone, and both can be converted to estriol, which is a major urinary metabolite.  Estrogens also undergo enterohepatic recirculation via sulfate and glucuronide conjugation in the liver, biliary secretion of conjugates into the intestine, and hydrolysis in the intestine followed by reabsorption.  In postmenopausal women, a significant proportion of the circulating estrogens exist as sulfate conjugates, especially estrone sulfate, which serves as a circulating reservoir for the formation of more active estrogens.  
                        
                           Norethindrone Acetate  
                        
                        The most important metabolites of norethindrone are isomers of 5α-dihydro-norethindrone and tetrahydro-norethindrone, which are excreted mainly in the urine as sulfate or glucuronide conjugates.  
                        
                           Excretion
                        
                        
                           Estradiol
                        
                        Estradiol, estrone, and estriol are excreted in the urine along with glucuronide and sulfate conjugates.  The half-life of estradiol following single dose administration of Activella 1 mg/0.5 mg is 12 to 14 hours.  
                        
                           Norethindrone Acetate
                        
                        The terminal half-life of norethindrone is about 8 to 11 hours.
                        
                           Use in Specific Populations 
                        
                        No pharmacokinetic studies were conducted in specific populations, including women with renal or hepatic impairment. 
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           Figure 1a
                           
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           Figure 1b
                           
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         