
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  The pharmacokinetic data were derived from the capsule 
formulation; however, bioequivalence has been demonstrated for the oral 
solution, capsule, tablet, and suspension formulations under fasting 
conditions.
                  Following oral administration of cefprozil to fasting subjects, approximately 
95% of the dose was absorbed. The average plasma half-life in normal subjects 
was 1.3 hours, while the steady-state volume of distribution was estimated to be 
0.23 L/kg. The total body clearance and renal clearance rates were approximately 
3 mL/min/kg and 2.3 mL/min/kg, respectively.
                  Average peak plasma concentrations after administration of 250 mg, 500 mg, or 
1 g doses of cefprozil to fasting subjects were approximately 6.1, 10.5, and 
18.3 mcg/mL, respectively, and were obtained within 1.5 hours after dosing. 
Urinary recovery accounted for approximately 60% of the administered dose. (See 
Table.)
                  
                  


                  



                     * Data represent mean values of 12 healthy 
volunteers.
                  During the first 4 hour period after drug administration, the average urine 
concentrations following 250 mg, 500 mg, and 1 g doses were approximately 700 
mcg/mL, 1000 mcg/mL, and 2900 mcg/mL, respectively.
                  Administration of cefprozil with food did not affect the extent of absorption 
(AUC) or the peak plasma concentration (Cmax) of 
cefprozil. However, there was an increase of 0.25 to 0.75 hours in the time to 
maximum plasma concentration of cefprozil (Tmax).
                  The bioavailability of the capsule formulation of cefprozil was not affected 
when administered 5 minutes following an antacid.
                  Plasma protein binding is approximately 36% and is independent of 
concentration in the range of 2 mcg/mL to 20 mcg/mL.
                  There was no evidence of accumulation of cefprozil in the plasma in 
individuals with normal renal function following multiple oral doses of up to 
1000 mg every 8 hours for 10 days.
                  In patients with reduced renal function, the plasma half-life may be 
prolonged up to 5.2 hours depending on the degree of the renal dysfunction. In 
patients with complete absence of renal function, the plasma half-life of 
cefprozil has been shown to be as long as 5.9 hours. The half-life is shortened 
during hemodialysis. Excretion pathways in patients with markedly impaired renal 
function have not been determined. (See 
                          PRECAUTIONS
                      
and 
                          DOSAGE AND 
ADMINISTRATION
                     .)
                  In patients with impaired hepatic function, the half-life increases to 
approximately 2 hours. The magnitude of the changes does not warrant a dosage 
adjustment for patients with impaired hepatic function.
                  Healthy geriatric volunteers (≥ 65 years old) who received a single 1 g dose 
of cefprozil had 35% to 60% higher AUC and 40% lower renal clearance values 
compared with healthy adult volunteers 20 to 40 years of age. The average AUC in 
young and elderly female subjects was approximately 15% to 20% higher than in 
young and elderly male subjects. The magnitude of these age- and gender-related 
changes in the pharmacokinetics of cefprozil is not sufficient to necessitate 
dosage adjustments.
                  Adequate data on CSF levels of cefprozil are not available.
                  Comparable pharmacokinetic parameters of cefprozil are observed between 
pediatric patients (6 months to 12 years) and adults following oral 
administration of selected matched doses. The maximum concentrations are 
achieved at 1 to 2 hours after dosing. The plasma elimination half-life is 
approximately 1.5 hours. In general, the observed plasma concentrations of 
cefprozil in pediatric patients at the 7.5, 15, and 30 mg/kg doses are similar 
to those observed within the same time frame in normal adult subjects at the 
250, 500 and 1000 mg doses, respectively. The comparative plasma concentrations 
of cefprozil in pediatric patients and adult subjects at the equivalent dose 
level are presented in the table below.
                  
                  


                  


an=11   bn=5   cn=9   dn=11

                  

               
               
            
         