
                     
                     
                     
                        Drug Interactions

                     
                     
                        Phenytoin is extensively bound to serum plasma proteins and is prone to competitive displacement. Phenytoin is metabolized by hepatic cytochrome P450 enzymes CYP2C9 and CYP2C19, and is particularly susceptible to inhibitory drug interactions because it is subject to saturable metabolism. Inhibition of metabolism may produce significant increases in circulating phenytoin concentrations and enhance the risk of drug toxicity. Phenytoin is a potent inducer of hepatic drug-metabolizing enzymes. Serum level determinations for phenytoin are especially helpful when possible drug interactions are suspected.
                        The most commonly occurring drug interactions are listed below:
                        Note: The list is not intended to be inclusive or comprehensive. Individual drug package inserts should be consulted.
                        
                           Drugs that affect phenytoin concentrations: 
                        
                        
                           Drugs, which may increase phenytoin serum levels, include: acute alcohol intake, amiodarone, anti-epileptic agents (felbamate, topiramate, oxcarbazepine), azoles (fluconazole, ketoconazole, itraconazole, voriconazole), chloramphenicol, chlordiazepoxide, cimetidine, diazepam, disulfiram, estrogens, ethosuximide, fluorouracil, fluoxetine, fluvoxamine, H2-antagonists, halothane, isoniazid, methylphenidate, omeprazole, phenothiazines, salicylates, sertraline, succinimides, sulfonamides, ticlopidine, tolbutamide, trazodone, and warfarin.
                           Drugs, which may decrease phenytoin levels, include: carbamazepine, chronic alcohol abuse, nelfinavir, reserpine, ritonavir, and sucralfate.
                           Ingestion times of phenytoin and antacid preparations containing calcium should be staggered in patients with low serum phenytoin levels to prevent absorption problems.
                           Drugs which may either increase or decrease phenytoin serum levels include: phenobarbital, sodium valproate, and valproic acid. Similarly, the effect of phenytoin on phenobarbital, valproic acid, and sodium valproate serum levels is unpredictable.
                           The addition or withdrawal of these agents in patients on phenytoin therapy may require an adjustment of the phenytoin dose to achieve optimal clinical outcome.
                        
                        
                           Drugs affected by phenytoin: 
                        
                        
                           Drugs that should not be coadministered with phenytoin: Delavirdine
                           Drugs whose efficacy is impaired by phenytoin include: azoles (fluconazole, ketoconazole, itraconazole, voriconazole), corticosteroids, doxycycline, estrogens, furosemide, irinotecan, oral contraceptives, paclitaxel, paroxetine, quinidine, rifampin, sertraline, teniposide, theophylline, vitamin D, and warfarin.
                           Increased and decreased PT/INR responses have been reported when phenytoin is coadministered with warfarin.
                           Phenytoin decreases plasma concentrations of certain HIV antivirals (amprenavir, efavirenz, Kaletra (lopinavir/ritonavir), indinavir, nelfinavir, ritonavir, saquinavir), and anti-epileptic agents (felbamate, topiramate, oxcarbazepine, quetiapine).
                           The addition or withdrawal of phenytoin during concomitant therapy with these agents may require adjustment of the dose of these agents to achieve optimal clinical outcome.
                        
                     
                     
                  
               