
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           Diuretics: Possibility of excessive hypotension 
          
  
     (7.1).
         
 
    
                           Lithium: Use with caution 
          
  
     (7.3).
         
 
    
                           Gold: Nitritoid reactions have been reported 
          
  
     (7.4).
         
 
    
                           NSAIDs use may lead to increased risk of renal impairment and loss of antihypertensive effect 
          
  
     (7.5).
         
 
    
                           mTOR inhibitor use may increase angioedema risk (7.8) 
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 Diuretics
                     
                        

                        Patients on diuretics, especially those in whom diuretic therapy was recently instituted, may occasionally experience an excessive reduction of blood pressure after initiation of therapy with ramipril. The possibility of hypotensive effects with ramipril can be minimized by either decreasing or discontinuing the diuretic or increasing the salt intake prior to initiation of treatment with ramipril. If this is not possible, reduce the starting dose 
         
 
  [see 
                           
                              Dosage and Administration (2)]
         
 
  .
         
 
  

                           
Ramipril can attenuate potassium loss caused by thiazide diuretics. Potassium-sparing diuretics (spironolactone, amiloride, triamterene, and others) or potassium supplements can increase the risk of hyperkalemia. Therefore, if concomitant use of such agents is indicated, monitor the patient's serum potassium frequently.
        

 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 Other Agents Affecting RAS
                     
                        In general, avoid combined use of RAS inhibitors. 
         
 
  [see 
          
  
   Warnings and Precautions (5.7)]
         
 
  . Do not co-administer aliskiren with ramipril in patients with diabetes 
         
 
  [see 
          
  
   Contraindications (4)].
         
 
  
                        
                        

                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3 Lithium
                     
                        

                        Increased serum lithium levels and symptoms of lithium toxicity have been reported in patients receiving ACE inhibitors during therapy with lithium; therefore, frequent monitoring of serum lithium levels is recommended. If a diuretic is also used, the risk of lithium toxicity may be increased.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4 Gold
                     
                        

                        Nitritoid reactions (symptoms include facial flushing, nausea, vomiting and hypotension) have been reported rarely in patients on therapy with injectable gold (sodium aurothiomalate) and concomitant ACE inhibitor therapy including ramipril.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.5 Non-Steroidal Anti-Inflammatory Agents including Selective Cyclooxygenase-2 Inhibitors (COX-2 Inhibitors)
                     
                        

                        In patients who are elderly, volume-depleted (including those on diuretic therapy), or with compromised renal function, coadministration of NSAIDs, including selective COX-2 inhibitors, with ACE inhibitors, including ramipril, may result in deterioration of renal function, including possible acute renal failure. These effects are usually reversible. Monitor renal function periodically in patients receiving ramipril and NSAID therapy.
         
 
  

                           
The antihypertensive effect of ACE inhibitors, including ramipril, may be attenuated by NSAIDs.
        

 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.6 mTOR Inhibitors
                     
                        Patients taking concomitant mTOR inhibitor (e.g., temsirolimus) therapy may be at increased risk for angioedema 
         
 
  [see 
          
  
   Warnings and Precautions (5.1)]
         
 
  .
        

 
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         