
               
               
               12  CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism
of Action
                     
                        
                           SYNJARDY
                           
SYNJARDY combines 2 antihyperglycemic agents with complementary
mechanisms of action to improve glycemic control in patients with
type 2 diabetes:  empagliflozin, a sodium-glucose co-transporter 2
(SGLT2) inhibitor, and metformin, a member of the biguanide class.
                        
                           Empagliflozin
                           
Sodium-glucose co-transporter 2 (SGLT2) is the predominant
transporter responsible for reabsorption of glucose from the glomerular
filtrate back into the circulation.  Empagliflozin is an inhibitor
of SGLT2.  By inhibiting SGLT2, empagliflozin reduces renal reabsorption
of filtered glucose and lowers the renal threshold for glucose, and
thereby increases urinary glucose excretion.
                        
                           Metformin hydrochloride
                           
Metformin is an antihyperglycemic agent which improves glucose tolerance
in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus, lowering both basal and
postprandial plasma glucose.  It is not chemically or pharmacologically
related to any other classes of oral antihyperglycemic agents.  Metformin
decreases hepatic glucose production, decreases intestinal absorption
of glucose, and improves insulin sensitivity by increasing peripheral
glucose uptake and utilization.  Unlike SUs, metformin does not produce
hypoglycemia in either patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus or normal
subjects (except in special circumstances) [see Warnings and
Precautions (5.5)] and does
not cause hyperinsulinemia.  With metformin therapy, insulin secretion
remains unchanged while fasting insulin levels and day-long plasma
insulin response may actually decrease.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        
                           Empagliflozin
                           

                           Urinary Glucose Excretion
                           
In patients
with type 2 diabetes, urinary glucose excretion increased immediately
following a dose of empagliflozin and was maintained at the end of
a 4-week treatment period averaging at approximately 64 grams per
day with 10 mg empagliflozin and 78 grams per day with 25 mg empagliflozin
once daily [see Clinical Studies (14)].
                        
                           Urinary Volume
                           
In a 5-day study,
mean 24-hour urine volume increase from baseline was 341 mL on Day
1 and 135 mL on Day 5 of empagliflozin 25 mg once daily treatment.
                        
                           Cardiac Electrophysiology
                           
In a randomized, placebo-controlled, active-comparator,
crossover study, 30 healthy subjects were administered a single oral
dose of empagliflozin 25 mg, empagliflozin 200 mg (8 times the maximum
dose), moxifloxacin, and placebo.  No increase in QTc was observed
with either 25 mg or 200 mg empagliflozin.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        
                           SYNJARDY
                           
The results
of a bioequivalence study in healthy subjects demonstrated that SYNJARDY
(empagliflozin/metformin hydrochloride) 5 mg/500 mg, 5 mg/1000 mg,
12.5 mg/500 mg, and 12.5 mg/1000 mg combination tablets are bioequivalent
to coadministration of corresponding doses of empagliflozin and metformin
as individual tablets.
                        Administration of 12.5 mg empagliflozin/1000 mg metformin under fed
conditions resulted in a 9% decrease in AUC and a 28% decrease in
Cmax for empagliflozin, when compared to fasted
conditions.  For metformin, AUC decreased by 12% and Cmax decreased by 26% compared to fasting conditions.  The observed effect
of food on empagliflozin and metformin is not considered to be clinically
relevant.
                        
                           Empagliflozin
                           

                           Absorption
                           
The pharmacokinetics
of empagliflozin has been characterized in healthy volunteers and
patients with type 2 diabetes and no clinically relevant differences
were noted between the two populations.  After oral administration,
peak plasma concentrations of empagliflozin were reached at 1.5 hours
post-dose.  Thereafter, plasma concentrations declined in a biphasic
manner with a rapid distribution phase and a relatively slow terminal
phase.  The steady state mean plasma AUC and Cmax were 1870 nmol·h/L and 259 nmol/L, respectively, with 10 mg empagliflozin
once daily treatment, and 4740 nmol·h/L and 687 nmol/L, respectively,
with 25 mg empagliflozin once daily treatment.  Systemic exposure
of empagliflozin increased in a dose-proportional manner in the therapeutic
dose range.  The single-dose and steady-state pharmacokinetic parameters
of empagliflozin were similar, suggesting linear pharmacokinetics
with respect to time.
                        Administration of 25 mg empagliflozin after intake of a high-fat
and high-calorie meal resulted in slightly lower exposure; AUC decreased
by approximately 16% and Cmax decreased by
approximately 37%, compared to fasted condition.  The observed effect
of food on empagliflozin pharmacokinetics was not considered clinically
relevant and empagliflozin may be administered with or without food.
                        
                           Distribution
                           
The apparent steady-state volume of distribution was
estimated to be 73.8 L based on a population pharmacokinetic analysis.
 Following administration of an oral [14C]-empagliflozin solution to healthy subjects, the red blood cell
partitioning was approximately 36.8% and plasma protein binding was
86.2%.
                        
                           Metabolism
                           
No major metabolites of empagliflozin were detected in
human plasma and the most abundant metabolites were three glucuronide
conjugates (2-O-, 3-O-, and 6-O-glucuronide).  Systemic exposure of
each metabolite was less than 10% of total drug-related material.
 In vitro studies suggested that the primary route
of metabolism of empagliflozin in humans is glucuronidation by the
uridine 5'-diphospho-glucuronosyltransferases UGT2B7, UGT1A3, UGT1A8,
and UGT1A9.
                        
                           Elimination
                           
The apparent terminal elimination
half-life of empagliflozin was estimated to be 12.4 h and apparent
oral clearance was 10.6 L/h based on the population pharmacokinetic
analysis.  Following once-daily dosing, up to 22% accumulation, with
respect to plasma AUC, was observed at steady-state, which was consistent
with empagliflozin half-life.  Following administration of an oral
[14C]-empagliflozin solution to healthy
subjects, approximately 95.6% of the drug-related radioactivity was
eliminated in feces (41.2%) or urine (54.4%).  The majority of drug-related
radioactivity recovered in feces was unchanged parent drug and approximately
half of drug-related radioactivity excreted in urine was unchanged
parent drug.
                        
                           Metformin hydrochloride
                           

                           Absorption
                           
The absolute bioavailability of a metformin hydrochloride
500-mg tablet given under fasting conditions is approximately 50%
to 60%. Studies using single oral doses of metformin tablets 500 mg
to 1500 mg, and 850 mg to 2550 mg, indicate that there is a lack of
dose proportionality with increasing doses, which is due to decreased
absorption rather than an alteration in elimination.
                        Food decreases the extent of and slightly
delays the absorption of metformin, as shown by approximately a 40%
lower Cmax, a 25% lower AUC, and a 35 minute
prolongation of time to peak plasma concentration (Tmax) following administration of a single 850 mg tablet of metformin
with food, compared to the same tablet strength administered fasting.
 The clinical relevance of these decreases is unknown.
                        
                           Distribution
                           
The apparent volume of distribution (V/F) of metformin
following single oral doses of immediate-release metformin hydrochloride
tablets 850 mg averaged 654±358 L. Metformin is negligibly bound to
plasma proteins, in contrast to SUs, which are more than 90% protein
bound. Metformin partitions into erythrocytes, most likely as a function
of time. At usual clinical doses and dosing schedules of metformin
tablets, steady-state plasma concentrations of metformin are reached
within 24 to 48 hours and are generally <1 mcg/mL. During controlled
clinical trials of metformin, maximum metformin plasma levels did
not exceed 5 mcg/mL, even at maximum doses.
                        
                           Metabolism
                           
Intravenous single-dose studies in normal subjects demonstrate that
metformin is excreted unchanged in the urine and does not undergo
hepatic metabolism (no metabolites have been identified in humans)
nor biliary excretion.
                        
                           Elimination
                           
Renal clearance is
approximately 3.5 times greater than creatinine clearance, which indicates
that tubular secretion is the major route of metformin elimination.
Following oral administration, approximately 90% of the absorbed drug
is eliminated via the renal route within the first 24 hours, with
a plasma elimination half-life of approximately 6.2 hours. In blood,
the elimination half-life is approximately 17.6 hours, suggesting
that the erythrocyte mass may be a compartment of distribution.
                        
                           Specific Populations
                           

                           Renal Impairment
                           

                           SYNJARDY:  Studies characterizing the pharmacokinetics of
empagliflozin and metformin after administration of SYNJARDY in renally
impaired patients have not been performed.  Since metformin is contraindicated
in patients with renal impairment, use of SYNJARDY is also contraindicated
in patients with renal impairment (serum creatinine levels greater
than or equal to 1.5 mg/dL for males or 1.4 mg/dL for females, or
eGFR less than 45 mL/min/1.73 m2) [see Contraindications (4) and Warnings
and Precautions (5.3)].
                        
                           Empagliflozin:  In patients with mild (eGFR: 60 to less than 90 mL/min/1.73 m2), moderate (eGFR: 30 to less than 60 mL/min/1.73
m2), and severe (eGFR: less than 30 mL/min/1.73
m2) renal impairment and subjects with
kidney failure/end stage renal disease (ESRD) patients, AUC of empagliflozin
increased by approximately 18%, 20%, 66%, and 48%, respectively, compared
to subjects with normal renal function.  Peak plasma levels of empagliflozin
were similar in subjects with moderate renal impairment and kidney
failure/ESRD compared to patients with normal renal function.  Peak
plasma levels of empagliflozin were roughly 20% higher in subjects
with mild and severe renal impairment as compared to subjects with
normal renal function.  Population pharmacokinetic analysis showed
that the apparent oral clearance of empagliflozin decreased with a
decrease in eGFR leading to an increase in drug exposure.  However,
the fraction of empagliflozin that was excreted unchanged in urine,
and urinary glucose excretion, declined with decrease in eGFR.
                        
                           Metformin hydrochloride:
 In patients with decreased renal function (based on measured
creatinine clearance), the plasma and blood half-life of metformin
is prolonged and the renal clearance is decreased in proportion to
the decrease in creatinine clearance [see Contraindications
(4) and Warnings and Precautions (5.3)].
                        
                           Hepatic Impairment
                           

                           SYNJARDY:  Studies characterizing the
pharmacokinetics of empagliflozin and metformin after administration
of SYNJARDY in hepatically impaired patients have not been performed.
 However, use of metformin alone in patients with hepatic impairment
has been associated with some cases of lactic acidosis.  Therefore,
use of SYNJARDY is not recommended in patients with hepatic impairment [see Warnings and Precautions (5.4)].
                        
                           Empagliflozin:  In subjects with mild, moderate, and severe
hepatic impairment according to the Child-Pugh classification, AUC
of empagliflozin increased by approximately 23%, 47%, and 75%, and
Cmax increased by approximately 4%, 23%, and
48%, respectively, compared to subjects with normal hepatic function.
                        
                           Metformin hydrochloride:
 No pharmacokinetic studies of metformin have been conducted
in patients with hepatic impairment.
                        
                           Effects of Age, Body Mass Index,
Gender, and Race
                           

                           Empagliflozin:  Based on the population PK analysis, age, body mass index (BMI),
gender and race (Asians versus primarily Whites) do not have a clinically
meaningful effect on pharmacokinetics of empagliflozin [see
Use in Specific Populations (8.5)].
                        
                           Metformin
hydrochloride:  Metformin pharmacokinetic parameters did
not differ significantly between normal subjects and patients with
type 2 diabetes mellitus when analyzed according to gender. Similarly,
in controlled clinical studies in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus,
the antihyperglycemic effect of metformin was comparable in males
and females.
                        No studies
of metformin pharmacokinetic parameters according to race have been
performed. In controlled clinical studies of metformin in patients
with type 2 diabetes mellitus, the antihyperglycemic effect was comparable
in Caucasians (n=249), Blacks (n=51), and Hispanics (n=24).
                        
                           Geriatric
                           

                           SYNJARDY:  Studies characterizing the
pharmacokinetics of empagliflozin and metformin after administration
of SYNJARDY in geriatric patients have not been performed [see Warnings and Precautions (5.2, 5.3) and Use in Specific Populations
(8.5)].
                        
                        
                           Empagliflozin:  Age did
not have a clinically meaningful impact on the pharmacokinetics of
empagliflozin based on a population pharmacokinetic analysis [see Use in Specific Populations (8.5)].
                        
                        
                           Metformin hydrochloride:  Limited data from controlled pharmacokinetic
studies of metformin in healthy elderly subjects suggest that total
plasma clearance of metformin is decreased, the half-life is prolonged,
and Cmax is increased, compared with healthy
young subjects. From these data, it appears that the change in metformin
pharmacokinetics with aging is primarily accounted for by a change
in renal function.
                        
                           Pediatric
                           
Studies characterizing
the pharmacokinetics of empagliflozin or metformin after administration
of SYNJARDY in pediatric patients have not been performed.
                        
                           Drug Interactions
                           
Pharmacokinetic drug interaction studies with SYNJARDY
have not been performed; however, such studies have been conducted
with the individual components empagliflozin and metformin.
                        
                           Empagliflozin
                           

                           In vitro Assessment of Drug Interactions:  In
vitro data suggest that the primary route of metabolism of
empagliflozin in humans is glucuronidation by the uridine 5'-diphospho-glucuronosyltransferases
UGT2B7, UGT1A3, UGT1A8, and UGT1A9.  Empagliflozin does not inhibit,
inactivate, or induce CYP450 isoforms.  Empagliflozin also does not
inhibit UGT1A1.  Therefore, no effect of empagliflozin is anticipated
on concomitantly administered drugs that are substrates of the major
CYP450 isoforms or UGT1A1.  The effect of UGT induction (e.g., induction
by rifampicin or any other UGT enzyme inducer) on empagliflozin exposure
has not been evaluated.
                        Empagliflozin is a substrate for P-glycoprotein (P-gp) and breast
cancer resistance protein (BCRP), but it does not inhibit these efflux
transporters at therapeutic doses. Based on in vitro studies, empagliflozin is considered unlikely to cause interactions
with drugs that are P-gp substrates.  Empagliflozin is a substrate
of the human uptake transporters OAT3, OATP1B1, and OATP1B3, but not
OAT1 and OCT2.  Empagliflozin does not inhibit any of these human
uptake transporters at clinically relevant plasma concentrations and,
therefore, no effect of empagliflozin is anticipated on concomitantly
administered drugs that are substrates of these uptake transporters.
                        
                           In vivo Assessment of
Drug Interactions:  No dose adjustment of empagliflozin is
recommended when coadministered with commonly prescribed medicinal
products based on results of the described pharmacokinetic studies.
 Empagliflozin pharmacokinetics were similar with and without coadministration
of metformin, glimepiride, pioglitazone, sitagliptin, linagliptin,
warfarin, verapamil, ramipril, simvastatin, hydrochlorothiazide, and
torsemide in healthy volunteers (see Figure 1).  The observed increases
in overall exposure (AUC) of empagliflozin following coadministration
with gemfibrozil, rifampicin, or probenecid are not clinically relevant.
 In subjects with normal renal function, coadministration of empagliflozin
with probenecid resulted in a 30% decrease in the fraction of empagliflozin
excreted in urine without any effect on 24-hour urinary glucose excretion.
 The relevance of this observation to patients with renal impairment
is unknown.
                        
                           Figure
1  Effect of Various Medications on the Pharmacokinetics of Empagliflozin
as Displayed as 90% Confidence Interval of Geometric Mean AUC and
 Cmax Ratios [reference lines indicate 100%
(80% - 125%)]
                        
                        
                        
                           aempagliflozin,
50 mg, once daily; bempagliflozin, 25 mg,
single dose; cempagliflozin, 25 mg, once
daily; dempagliflozin, 10 mg, single dose
                        Empagliflozin had no clinically
relevant effect on the pharmacokinetics of metformin, glimepiride,
pioglitazone, sitagliptin, linagliptin, warfarin, digoxin, ramipril,
simvastatin, hydrochlorothiazide, torsemide, and oral contraceptives
when coadministered in healthy volunteers (see Figure 2).
                        
                           Figure 2  Effect of Empagliflozin
on the Pharmacokinetics of Various Medications as Displayed as 90%
Confidence Interval of Geometric Mean AUC and Cmax Ratios [reference lines indicate 100% (80% - 125%)]
                        
                        
                        
                           aempagliflozin,
50 mg, once daily; bempagliflozin, 25 mg,
once daily; cempagliflozin, 25 mg, single
dose; dadministered as simvastatin; eadministered as warfarin racemic mixture; fadministered as Microgynon®; gadministered as ramipril
                        
                           Metformin hydrochloride
                        
                        



                     



                     
                     
                        
                           Figure 1
                           
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           Figure 2
                           
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         