
               
               
               7  DRUG
INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              Cationic drugs eliminated by renal tubular secretion:  May reduce metformin elimination. Use with caution. (7.2)
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 Drug Interactions with Empagliflozin
                     
                        
                           Diuretics
                           
Coadministration of
empagliflozin with diuretics resulted in increased urine volume and
frequency of voids, which might enhance the potential for volume depletion [see Warnings and Precautions (5.2)].
                        
                           Insulin or Insulin Secretagogues
                           
Coadministration
of empagliflozin with insulin or insulin secretagogues increases the
risk for hypoglycemia [see Warnings and Precautions (5.5)].
                        
                        
                           Positive Urine Glucose Test
                           
Monitoring glycemic control with urine glucose tests
is not recommended in patients taking SGLT2 inhibitors as SGLT2 inhibitors
increase urinary glucose excretion and will lead to positive urine
glucose tests.  Use alternative methods to monitor glycemic control.
                        
                           Interference with 1,5-anhydroglucitol
(1,5-AG) Assay
                           
Monitoring glycemic control with
1,5-AG assay is not recommended as measurements of 1,5-AG are unreliable
in assessing glycemic control in patients taking SGLT2 inhibitors.
 Use alternative methods to monitor glycemic control.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 Drug Interactions with Metformin Hydrochloride
                     
                        
                           Cationic Drugs
                           
Cationic drugs (e.g., amiloride, digoxin, morphine, procainamide,
quinidine, quinine, ranitidine, triamterene, trimethoprim, or vancomycin)
that are eliminated by renal tubular secretion theoretically have
the potential for interaction with metformin by competing for common
renal tubular transport systems.  Although such interactions remain
theoretical (except for cimetidine), careful patient monitoring and
dose adjustment of SYNJARDY and/or the interfering drug is recommended
in patients who are taking cationic medications that are excreted
via the proximal renal tubular secretory system [see Warnings
and Precautions (5.3) and Clinical
Pharmacology (12.3)].
                        
                        
                           Carbonic Anhydrase Inhibitors
                           
Topiramate or other carbonic anhydrase inhibitors (e.g.,
zonisamide, acetazolamide or dichlorphenamide) frequently decrease
serum bicarbonate and induce non-anion gap, hyperchloremic metabolic
acidosis.  Concomitant use of these drugs may induce metabolic acidosis.
 Use these drugs with caution in patients treated with SYNJARDY, as
the risk of lactic acidosis may increase [see Warnings and
Precautions (5.1) and Clinical Pharmacology
(12.3)].
                        
                        
                           Drugs Affecting Glycemic Control
                           
Certain drugs tend to produce hyperglycemia and may lead
to loss of glycemic control.  These drugs include the thiazides and
other diuretics, corticosteroids, phenothiazines, thyroid products,
estrogens, oral contraceptives, phenytoin, nicotinic acid, sympathomimetics,
calcium channel blocking drugs, and isoniazid.  When such drugs are
administered to a patient receiving SYNJARDY, the patient should be
closely observed to maintain adequate glycemic control [see
Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].  When such drugs are withdrawn from a patient receiving SYNJARDY,
the patient should be observed closely for hypoglycemia.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         