
                     
                     
                     Drug Interactions
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Anticoagulants (oral)
                           
                           
                              Due to the potential inhibition of vitamin K activity by propylthiouracil, the activity of oral anticoagulants (e.g., warfarin) may be increased; additional monitoring of PT/INR should be considered, especially before surgical procedures.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Beta-adrenergic blocking agents
                           
                           
                              Hyperthyroidism may cause an increased clearance of beta blockers with a high extraction ratio. A reduced dose of beta-adrenergic blockers may be needed when a hyperthyroid patient becomes euthyroid.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Digitalis Glycosides
                           
                           
                              Serum digitalis levels may be increased when hyperthyroid patients on a stable digitalis glycoside regimen become euthyroid; a reduced dosage of digitalis glycosides may be needed.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Theophylline
                           
                           
                              Theophylline clearance may decrease when hyperthyroid patients on a stable theophylline regimen become euthyroid; a reduced dose of theophylline may be needed.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Carcinogenesis, Mutagenesis, Impairment of Fertility
                           
                           
                              Laboratory animals treated with propylthiouracil for > 1 year have demonstrated thyroid hyperplasia and carcinoma formation1. Such animal findings are seen with continuous suppression of thyroid function by sufficient doses of a variety of antithyroid agents, as well as in dietary iodine deficiency, subtotal thyroidectomy, and implantation of autonomous thyrotropic hormone - secreting pituitary tumors. Pituitary adenomas have also been described.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Pregnancy
                           
                           
                              
                                 Pregnancy Category D. SEE WARNINGS.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Nursing Mothers
                           
                           
                              Propylthiouracil is transferred to breasdt milk to a small extent and therefore likely results in clinically insignificant doses to the suckling infant. One one study, nine lactating women were administered 400 mg of propylthiouracil by mouth. The mean amount of propylthiouracil excreted during 4 hours after drug administration was 0.025% of the administered dose.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Pediatric Use
                           
                           
                              Post-marketing reports of severe liver injury including hepatic failure requiring liver transplantation or resulting in death have been reported in the pediatric population. No such reports have been observed with methimazole. As such, propylthiouracil is not recommended for use in the pediatric population except in rare instances in which methimazole is not well-tolerated and surgery or radioactive iodine therapy are not appropriate.
                              When used in children, parents and patients should be informed of the risk of liver failure. If patients taking propylthiouracil develop tiredness, nausea, anorexia, fever, pharyngitis, or malaise, propylthiouracil should be discontinued immediately by the patient, a physician should be contacted, and a white blood cell count, liver function tests, and transaminase levels obtained.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               