
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              •Inhibition of 11ß-Hydroxysteroid Dehydrogenase Type 1: May require the initiation of glucocorticoid replacement therapy. Patients treated with glucocorticoid replacement for previously diagnosed hypoadrenalism may require an increase in their maintenance doses (7.1)
                           
                              •Glucocorticoid Replacement: Should be carefully adjusted (7.2)
                           
                              •Cytochrome P450-Metabolized Drugs: Monitor carefully if used with somatropin (7.3)
                           
                              •Oral Estrogen: Larger doses of somatropin may be required in women (7.4)
                           
                              •Insulin and/or Oral/Injectable Hypoglycemic Agents: May require adjustment (7.5)
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 Inhibition of 11ß-Hydroxysteroid Dehydrogenase Type 1 (11ßHSD-1)
                     
                        The microsomal enzyme 11ß-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 1 (11βHSD-1) is required for conversion of cortisone to its active metabolite, cortisol, in hepatic and adipose tissue. GH and somatropin inhibit 11βHSD-1. Consequently, individuals with untreated GHD have relative increases in 11βHSD-1 and serum cortisol. Introduction of somatropin treatment may result in inhibition of 11βHSD-1 and reduced serum cortisol concentrations. As a consequence, previously undiagnosed central (secondary) hypoadrenalism may be unmasked and glucocorticoid replacement may be required in patients treated with somatropin. In addition, patients treated with glucocorticoid replacement for previously diagnosed hypoadrenalism may require an increase in their maintenance or stress doses following initiation of somatropin treatment; this may be especially true for patients treated with cortisone acetate and prednisone since conversion of these drugs to their biologically active metabolites is dependent on the activity of 11ßHSD-1.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 Pharmacologic Glucocorticoid Therapy and Supraphysiologic Glucocorticoid Treatment
                     
                        Pharmacologic glucocorticoid therapy and supraphysiologic glucocorticoid treatment may attenuate the growth promoting effects of somatropin in children. Therefore, glucocorticoid replacement dosing should be carefully adjusted in children receiving concomitant somatropin and glucocorticoid treatments to avoid both hypoadrenalism and an inhibitory effect on growth.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3 Cytochrome P450-Metabolized Drugs
                     
                        Limited published data indicate that somatropin treatment increases cytochrome P450 (CYP450)- mediated antipyrine clearance in man. These data suggest that somatropin administration may alter the clearance of compounds known to be metabolized by CYP450 liver enzymes (e.g., corticosteroids, sex steroids, anticonvulsants, cyclosporine). Careful monitoring is advisable when somatropin is administered in combination with other drugs known to be metabolized by CYP450 liver enzymes. However, formal drug interaction studies have not been conducted.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4 Oral Estrogen
                     
                        Because oral estrogens may reduce the serum IGF-1 response to somatropin treatment, girls and women receiving oral estrogen replacement may require greater somatropin dosages [see Dosage and Administration (2.2)
                           ].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.5 Insulin and/or Oral/Injectable Hypoglycemic Agents
                     
                        In patients with diabetes mellitus requiring drug therapy, the dose of insulin and/or oral/injectable agent may require adjustment when somatropin therapy is initiated [see Warnings and Precautions (5.4)
                           ].
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         