
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  Mechanism of Action
                  Metformin is an antihyperglycemic agent which improves glucose tolerance in patients with type 2 diabetes, lowering both basal and postprandial plasma glucose. Its pharmacologic mechanisms of action are different from other classes of oral antihyperglycemic agents. Metformin decreases hepatic glucose production, decreases intestinal absorption of glucose, and improves insulin sensitivity by increasing peripheral glucose uptake and utilization. Unlike sulfonylureas, metformin does not produce hypoglycemia in either patients with type 2 diabetes or normal subjects (except in special circumstances, see PRECAUTIONS) and does not cause hyperinsulinemia. With metformin therapy, insulin secretion remains unchanged while fasting insulin levels and day-long plasma insulin response may actually decrease.
                  Pharmacokinetics
                  Absorption and Bioavailability
                  The absolute bioavailability of a Metformin Hydrochloride 500 mg tablet given under fasting conditions is approximately 50% to 60%. Studies using single oral doses of Metformin Hydrochloride 500 mg to 1500 mg, and 850 mg to 2550 mg, indicate that there is a lack of dose proportionality with increasing doses, which is due to decreased absorption rather than an alteration in elimination. Food decreases the extent of and slightly delays the absorption of metformin, as shown by approximately a 40% lower mean peak plasma concentration (Cmax), a 25% lower area under the plasma concentration versus time curve (AUC), and a 35-minute prolongation of time to peak plasma concentration (Tmax) following administration of a single 850 mg tablet of metformin with food, compared to the same tablet strength administered fasting. The clinical relevance of these decreases is unknown.
                  Distribution
                  The apparent volume of distribution (V/F) of metformin following single oral doses of Metformin Hydrochloride Tablets USP 850 mg averaged 654 ± 358 L. Metformin is negligibly bound to plasma proteins, in contrast to sulfonylureas, which are more than 90% protein bound. Metformin partitions into erythrocytes, most likely as a function of time. At usual clinical doses and dosing schedules of Metformin Hydrochloride Tablets USP, steady state plasma concentrations of metformin are reached within 24 to 48 hours and are generally <1 mcg/mL. During controlled clinical trials of Metformin Hydrochloride Tablets USP, maximum metformin plasma levels did not exceed 5 mcg/mL, even at maximum doses.
                  Metabolism and Elimination
                  Intravenous single-dose studies in normal subjects demonstrate that metformin is excreted unchanged in the urine and does not undergo hepatic metabolism (no metabolites have been identified in humans) nor biliary excretion. Renal clearance (see Table 1) is approximately 3.5 times greater than creatinine clearance, which indicates that tubular secretion is the major route of metformin elimination. Following oral administration, approximately 90% of the absorbed drug is eliminated via the renal route within the first 24 hours, with a plasma elimination half-life of approximately 6.2 hours. In blood, the elimination half-life is approximately 17.6 hours, suggesting that the erythrocyte mass may be a compartment of distribution.
                  Special Populations
                  Patients with Type 2 Diabetes
                  In the presence of normal renal function, there are no differences between single- or multiple-dose pharmacokinetics of metformin between patients with type 2 diabetes and normal subjects (see Table 1), nor is there any accumulation of metformin in either group at usual clinical doses.
                  Renal Insufficiency
                  In patients with decreased renal function (based on measured creatinine clearance), the plasma and blood half-life of metformin is prolonged and the renal clearance is decreased in proportion to the decrease in creatinine clearance. 
                  Hepatic Insufficiency
                  No pharmacokinetic studies of metformin have been conducted in patients with hepatic insufficiency.
                  Geriatrics
                  Limited data from controlled pharmacokinetic studies of Metformin Hydrochloride Tablets USP in healthy elderly subjects suggest that total plasma clearance of metformin is decreased, the half-life is prolonged, and Cmax is increased, compared to healthy young subjects. From these data, it appears that the change in metformin pharmacokinetics with aging is primarily accounted for by a change in renal function (see Table 1). Metformin Hydrochloride Tablets USP treatment should not be initiated in patients ≥80 years of age unless measurement of creatinine clearance demonstrates that renal function is not reduced (see WARNINGS and DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION).
                  Pediatrics
                  After administration of a single oral Metformin Hydrochloride 500 mg tablet with food, geometric mean metformin Cmax and AUC differed less than 5% between pediatric type 2 diabetic patients (12 to 16 years of age) and gender- and weight-matched healthy adults (20 to 45 years of age), all with normal renal function.
                  Gender
                  Metformin pharmacokinetic parameters did not differ significantly between normal subjects and patients with type 2 diabetes when analyzed according to gender (males = 19, females = 16). Similarly, in controlled clinical studies in patients with type 2 diabetes, the antihyperglycemic effect of Metformin Hydrochloride Tablets USP was comparable in males and females.
                  Race
                  No studies of metformin pharmacokinetic parameters according to race have been performed. In controlled clinical studies of Metformin Hydrochloride Tablets USP in patients with type 2 diabetes, the antihyperglycemic effect was comparable in whites (n=249), blacks (n=51), and Hispanics (n=24).
                  Clinical Studies
                  METFORMIN HYDROCHLORIDE TABLETS USP
                  In a double-blind, placebo-controlled, multicenter U.S. clinical trial involving obese patients with type 2 diabetes whose hyperglycemia was not adequately controlled with dietary management alone (baseline fasting plasma glucose [FPG] of approximately 240 mg/dL), treatment with Metformin Hydrochloride Tablets USP (up to 2550 mg/day) for 29 weeks resulted in significant mean net reductions in fasting and postprandial plasma glucose (PPG) and hemoglobin A1c (HbA1c) of 59 mg/dL, 83 mg/dL, and 1.8%, respectively, compared to the placebo group.
                  A 29-week, double-blind, placebo-controlled study of Metformin Hydrochloride Tablets USP and glyburide, alone and in combination, was conducted in obese patients with type 2 diabetes who had failed to achieve adequate glycemic control while on maximum doses of glyburide (baseline FPG of approximately 250 mg/dL). Patients randomized to the combination arm started therapy with Metformin Hydrochloride Tablets USP 500 mg and glyburide 20 mg. At the end of each week of the first four weeks of the trial, these patients had their dosages of Metformin Hydrochloride Tablets USP increased by 500 mg if they had failed to reach target fasting plasma glucose. After week four, such dosage adjustments were made monthly, although no patient was allowed to exceed Metformin Hydrochloride Tablets USP 2500 mg. Patients in the Metformin Hydrochloride Tablets USP only arm (metformin plus placebo) followed the same titration schedule. At the end of the trial, approximately 70% of the patients in the combination group were taking Metformin Hydrochloride Tablets USP 2000 mg/glyburide 20 mg or Metformin Hydrochloride Tablets USP 2500 mg/glyburide 20 mg. Patients randomized to continue on glyburide experienced worsening of glycemic control, with mean increases in FPG, PPG, and HbA1c of 14 mg/dL, 3 mg/dL, and 0.2%, respectively. In contrast, those randomized to Metformin Hydrochloride Tablets USP (up to 2500 mg/day) experienced a slight improvement, with mean reductions in FPG, PPG, and HbA1c of 1 mg/dL, 6 mg/dL, and 0.4%, respectively. The combination of Metformin Hydrochloride Tablets USP and glyburide was effective in reducing FPG, PPG, and HbA1c levels by 63 mg/dL, 65 mg/dL, and 1.7%, respectively. Compared to results of glyburide treatment alone, the net differences with combination treatment were -77 mg/dL, - 68 mg/dL, and -1.9%, respectively .
                  
                  
                     SEE THE MANUFACTURER'S COMPLETE INFORMATION HERE INCLUDING  STUDY RESULTS:
                  
                  
                     http://dailymed.nlm.nih.gov/dailymed/drugInfo.cfm?setid=ab2084b3-eb1b-4c52-9196-76a43f280961
                  
                  
                     
                  
                  
               
               
            
         