
                     
                     
                     Drug Interactions
                     
                        The following drug interactions were observed in some patients undergoing treatment with oral allopurinol. Although the pattern of use for oral allopurinol includes longer term therapy, particularly for gout and renal calculi, the experience gained may be relevant.
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Mercaptopurine/Azathioprine
                           
                           
                              Allopurinol inhibits the enzymatic oxidation of mercaptopurine and azathioprine to 6-thiouric acid. This oxidation, which is catalyzed by xanthine oxidase, inactivates mercaptopurine. Therefore, the concomitant administration of 300 to 600 mg of oral allopurinol per day will require a reduction in dose to approximately one-third to one-fourth of the usual dose of mercaptopurine or azathioprine. Subsequent adjustment of doses of mercaptopurine or azathioprine should be made on the basis of therapeutic response and the appearance of toxic effects.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Dicumarol
                           
                           
                              It has been reported that allopurinol prolongs the half-life of the anticoagulant, dicumarol. Consequently, prothrombin time should be reassessed periodically in patients receiving both drugs. The clinical basis of this drug interaction has not been established.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Uricosuric Agents
                           
                           
                              Since the excretion of oxypurinol is similar to that of urate, uricosuric agents, which increase the excretion of urate, are also likely to increase the excretion of oxypurinol. As a result, the concomitant administration of uricosuric agents decreases the inhibition of xanthine oxidase by oxypurinol and increases the urinary excretion of uric acid.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Thiazide Diuretics
                           
                           
                              Reports that the concomitant administration of allopurinol and thiazide diuretics contributed to increased allopurinol toxicity were reviewed; a causal mechanism or cause-and-effect relationship was not found. Renal function should be monitored in patients on thiazide diuretics and allopurinol (see WARNINGS).
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Ampicillin/Amoxicillin
                           
                           
                              An increase in the frequency of skin rash has been reported among patients receiving ampicillin or amoxicillin concurrently with allopurinol compared to patients who are not receiving both drugs. The cause of this reaction has not been established.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Cytotoxic Agents
                           
                           
                              Enhanced bone marrow suppression by cyclophosphamide and other cytotoxic agents has been reported among patients with neoplastic disease, except leukemia, in the presence of allopurinol. However, in a well-controlled study of patients with lymphoma on combination therapy, allopurinol did not increase the marrow toxicity of patients treated with cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, bleomycin, procarbazine, and/or mechlorethamine.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Chlorpropamide
                           
                           
                              The half-life of chlorpropamide in the plasma may be prolonged by allopurinol, since allopurinol and chlorpropamide may compete for excretion in the renal tubule. The risk of hypoglycemia secondary to this mechanism may be increased if allopurinol and chlorpropamide are given concomitantly in the presence of renal insufficiency.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Cyclosporine
                           
                           
                              Reports indicate that cyclosporine levels may be increased during concomitant treatment with ALOPRIM (allopurinol sodium) for Injection. Monitoring of cyclosporine levels and possible adjustment of cyclosporine dosage should be considered when these drugs are co-administered.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Drug/Laboratory Test Interactions
                           
                           
                              Allopurinol is not known to alter the accuracy of laboratory tests.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               