
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        Mechanism of Action
                     
                     
                        The mechanism of the effects of cilostazol on the symptoms of intermittent claudication is not fully understood.  Cilostazol  and several of its metabolities are cyclic AMP (cAMP) phosphodiesterase III inhibitors (PDE III inhibitors), inhibiting phosphodiesterase activity and suppressing cAMP degradation with a resultant increase in cAMP in platelets and blood vessels, leading to inhibition of platelet aggregation and vasodilation, respectively.
                        Cilostazol reversibly inhibits platelet aggregation induced by a variety of stimuli, including thrombin, ADP, collagen, arachidonic acid, epinephrine, and shear stress.  Effects on circulating plasma lipids have been examined in patients taking cilostazol .  After 12 weeks, as compared to placebo, cilostazol 100 mg b.i.d. produced a reduction in triglycerides of 29.3 mg/dL (15%) and an increase in HDL-cholesterol of 4.0 mg/dL (≡ 10%).
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           Cardiovascular Effects
                        
                     
                     
                        Cilostazol affects both vascular beds and cardiovascular function.  It produces non-homogeneous dilation of vascular beds, with greater dilation in femoral beds than in vertebral, carotid or superior mesenteric arteries.  Renal arteries were not responsive to the effects of cilostazol.
                        In dogs or cynomolgous monkeys, cilostazol increased heart rate, myocardial contractile force, and coronary blood flow as well as ventricular automaticity, as would be expected for a PDE III inhibitor.  Left ventricular contractility was increased at doses required to inhibit platelet aggregation.  A-V conduction was accelerated.  In humans, heart rate increased in a dose-proportional manner by a mean of 5.1 and 7.4 beats per minute in patients treated with 50 and 100 mg b.i.d., respectively.  In 264 patients evaluated with Holter monitors, numerically more cilostazol-treated patients had increases in ventricular premature beats and non-sustained ventricular tachycardia events than did placebo-treated patients; the increases were not dose-related.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        Pharmacokinetics
                     
                     
                        Cilostazol is absorbed after oral administration. A high fat meal increases absorption, with an approximately 90% increase in Cmax and a 25% increase in AUC. Absolute bioavailability is not known. Cilostazol is extensively metabolized by hepatic cytochrome P-450 enzymes, mainly 3A4, and, to a lesser extent, 2C19, with metabolites largely excreted in urine. Two metabolites are active, with one metabolite appearing to account for at least 50% of the pharmacologic (PDE III inhibition) activity after administration of cilostazol.   Pharmacokinetics are approximately dose proportional. Cilostazol and its active metabolites have apparent elimination half-lives of about 11 to 13 hours. Cilostazol and its active metabolites accumulate about 2-fold with chronic administration and reach steady state blood levels within a few days. The pharmacokinetics of cilostazol and its two major active metabolites were similar in healthy normal subjects and patients with intermittent claudication due to peripheral arterial disease (PAD).
                        The mean ± SEM plasma concentration-time profile at steady state after multiple dosing of cilostazol tablets100 mg b.i.d. is shown below:
                        
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           Graph - Plasma Concentration Time profile
                           
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        Distribution
                     
                     
                        
                           Plasma Protein and Erythrocyte Binding:

                           Cilostazol is 95% to 98% protein bound, predominantly to albumin.  The mean percent binding for 3,4-dehydro-cilostazol is 97.4% and for 4'-trans-hydroxy-cilostazol is 66%.  Mild hepatic impairment did not affect protein binding.  The free fraction of cilostazol was 27% higher in subjects with renal impairment than in normal volunteers.  The displacement of cilostazol from plasma proteins by erythromycin, quinidine, warfarin, and omeprazole was not clinically significant.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        Metabolism and Excretion
                     
                     
                        Cilostazol is elminated predominately by metabolism and subsequent urinary excretion of metabolites.  Based on in vitro studies, the primary isoenzymes involved in cilostazol's metabolism are CYP3A4 and, to a lesser extent, CYP2C19.  The enzyme responsible for metabolism of 3,4-dehydro-cilostazol, the most active of the metabolites,is unknown.
                        Following oral administration of 100 mg radiolabeled cilostazol, 56% of the total analytes in plasma was cilostazol, 15% was 3,4-dehydro-cilostazol (4 to 7 times as active as cilostazol), and 4% was 4'-trans-hydroxy-cilostazol (one fifth as active as cilostazol). The primary route of elimination was via the urine (74%), with the remainder excreted in feces (20%).  No measurable amount of unchanged cilostazol was excreted in the urine, and less than 2% of the dose was excreted as 3,4-dehydro-cilostazol. About 30% of the dose was excreted in urine as 4'-trans-hydroxy-cilostazol.  The remainder was excreted as other metabolites, none of which exceeded 5%.  There was no evidence of induction of hepatic microenzymes.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         