
               
               
               7	DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
                  In clinical trials, concurrent administration of DULERA and other drugs, such as short-acting beta2-agonist and intranasal corticosteroids have not resulted in an increased frequency of adverse drug reactions. No formal drug interaction studies have been performed with DULERA. The drug interactions of the combination are expected to reflect those of the individual components.
               
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           Strong cytochrome P450 3A4 inhibitors (e.g., ritonavir): Use with caution. May cause increased systemic corticosteroid effects. (7.1)
                           Adrenergic agents: Use with caution. Additional adrenergic drugs may potentiate sympathetic effects. (7.2)
                           Xanthine derivatives and diuretics: Use with caution. May potentiate ECG changes and/or hypokalemia. (7.3, 7.4)
                           MAO inhibitors, tricyclic antidepressants, macrolides, and drugs that prolong QTc interval: Use with extreme caution. May potentiate effect on the cardiovascular system. (7.5)
                           Beta-blockers: Use with caution and only when medically necessary. May decrease effectiveness and produce severe bronchospasm. (7.6)
                           Halogenated hydrocarbons: There is an elevated risk of arrhythmias in patients receiving concomitant anesthesia with halogenated hydrocarbons. (7.7)
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1	Inhibitors of Cytochrome P450 3A4
                     
                        The main route of metabolism of corticosteroids, including mometasone furoate, a component of DULERA, is via cytochrome P450 (CYP) isoenzyme 3A4 (CYP3A4). After oral administration of ketoconazole, a strong inhibitor of CYP3A4, the mean plasma concentration of orally inhaled mometasone furoate increased. Concomitant administration of CYP3A4 inhibitors may inhibit the metabolism of, and increase the systemic exposure to, mometasone furoate. Caution should be exercised when considering the coadministration of DULERA with long-term ketoconazole and other known strong CYP3A4 inhibitors (e.g., ritonavir, atazanavir, clarithromycin, indinavir, itraconazole, nefazodone, nelfinavir, saquinavir, telithromycin) [see Warnings and Precautions (5.8) and Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2	Adrenergic Agents
                     
                        If additional adrenergic drugs are to be administered by any route, they should be used with caution because the pharmacologically predictable sympathetic effects of formoterol, a component of DULERA, may be potentiated.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3	Xanthine Derivatives
                     
                        Concomitant treatment with xanthine derivatives may potentiate any hypokalemic effect of formoterol, a component of DULERA.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4	Diuretics
                     
                        Concomitant treatment with diuretics may potentiate the possible hypokalemic effect of adrenergic agonists. The ECG changes and/or hypokalemia that may result from the administration of non-potassium-sparing diuretics (such as loop or thiazide diuretics) can be acutely worsened by beta-agonists, especially when the recommended dose of the beta-agonist is exceeded. Although the clinical significance of these effects is not known, caution is advised in the coadministration of DULERA with non-potassium-sparing diuretics.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.5	Monoamine Oxidase Inhibitors, Tricyclic Antidepressants, and Drugs Known to Prolong the QTc Interval
                     
                        DULERA should be administered with caution to patients being treated with monoamine oxidase inhibitors, tricyclic antidepressants, macrolides, or drugs known to prolong the QTc interval or within 2 weeks of discontinuation of such agents, because the action of formoterol, a component of DULERA, on the cardiovascular system may be potentiated by these agents. Drugs that are known to prolong the QTc interval have an increased risk of ventricular arrhythmias.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.6	Beta-Adrenergic Receptor Antagonists
                     
                        Beta-adrenergic receptor antagonists (beta-blockers) and formoterol may inhibit the effect of each other when administered concurrently. Beta-blockers not only block the therapeutic effects of beta2-agonists, such as formoterol, a component of DULERA, but may produce severe bronchospasm in patients with asthma. Therefore, patients with asthma should not normally be treated with beta-blockers. However, under certain circumstances, e.g., as prophylaxis after myocardial infarction, there may be no acceptable alternatives to the use of beta-blockers in patients with asthma. In this setting, cardioselective beta-blockers could be considered, although they should be administered with caution.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.7	Halogenated Hydrocarbons
                     
                        There is an elevated risk of arrhythmias in patients receiving concomitant anesthesia with halogenated hydrocarbons.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         