
                     
                     
                     
                        Drug Interactions
                     
                     
                        
                           ACE-inhibitors: Reports suggest that NSAIDs may diminish the antihypertensive effect of ACE-inhibitors. This interaction should be given consideration in patients taking NSAIDs concomitantly with ACE-inhibitors.
        

 
                        
                           Antacids and 
                           Sucralfate
                           : Concomitant administration of some antacids (magnesium oxide or aluminum hydroxide) and sucralfate can delay the absorption of naproxen.
        

 
                        
                           Aspirin: When naproxen as naproxen sodium is administered with aspirin, its protein binding is reduced, although the clearance of free naproxen sodium is not altered. The clinical significance of this interaction is not known; however, as with other NSAIDs, concomitant administration of naproxen and naproxen sodium and aspirin is not generally recommended because of the potential of increased adverse effects.
        

 
                        
                           Cholestyramine
                           : As with other NSAIDs, concomitant administration of cholestyramine can delay the absorption of naproxen.
        

 
                        
                           Diuretics: Clinical studies, as well as post marketing observations, have shown that naproxen sodium can reduce the natriuretic effect-of furosemide and thiazides in some patients. This response has been attributed to inhibition of renal prostaglandin synthesis. During concomitant therapy with NSAIDs, the patient should be observed closely for signs of renal failure (see 
         
 
  
                              WARNINGS, Renal Effects
                           ), as well as to assure diuretic efficacy.
        

 
                        
                           Lithium: NSAIDs have produced an elevation of plasma lithium levels and a reduction in renal lithium clearance. The mean minimum lithium concentration increased 15% and the renal clearance was decreased by approximately 20%. These effects have been attributed to inhibition of renal prostaglandin synthesis by the NSAID. Thus, when NSAIDs and lithium are administered concurrently, subjects should be observed carefully for signs of lithium toxicity.
        

 
                        
                           Methotrexate
                           : NSAIDs have been reported to competitively inhibit methotrexate accumulation in rabbit kidney slices. Naproxen, naproxen sodium and other nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs have been reported to reduce the tubular secretion of methotrexate in an animal model. This may indicate that they could enhance the toxicity of methotrexate. Caution should be used when NSAIDs are administered concomitantly with methotrexate.
        

 
                        
                           Warfarin
                           : The effects of warfarin and NSAIDs on GI bleeding are synergistic, such that users of both drugs together have a risk of serious GI bleeding higher than users of either drug alone. No significant interactions have been observed in clinical studies with naproxen and coumarin-type anticoagulants. However, caution is advised since interactions have been seen with other nonsteriodal agents of this class. The free fraction of warfarin may increase substantially in some subjects and naproxen interferes with platelet function.
        

 
                     
                     
                  
               