
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        The mechanism of action by which gabapentin exerts its analgesic
                           action is unknown but in animal models of analgesia, gabapentin prevents
                           allodynia (pain-related behavior in response to a normally innocuous
                           stimulus) and hyperalgesia (exaggerated response to painful stimuli).
                           Gabapentin prevents pain-related responses in several models of
                           neuropathic pain in rats and mice (e.g., spinal nerve ligation models,
                           spinal cord injury model, acute herpes zoster infection model).
                           Gabapentin also decreases pain-related responses after peripheral
                           inflammation (carrageenan footpad test, late phase of formulin test), but
                           does not alter immediate pain-related behaviors (rat tail flick test,
                           formalin footpad acute phase). The relevance of these models to human
                           pain is not known.
                        Gabapentin is structurally related to the neurotransmitter GABA
                           (gamma-aminobutyric acid), but it does not modify GABA or
                              GABA radioligand binding, it is not converted
                           metabolically into GABA or a GABA agonist, and it is not an inhibitor of
                           GABA uptake or degradation. In radioligand binding assays at
                           concentrations up to 100 μM, gabapentin did not exhibit affinity for a
                           number of other receptor sites, including benzodiazepine, glutamate,
                           N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA), quisqualate, kainate, strychnine-insensitive
                           or strychnine-sensitive glycine; alpha 1, alpha 2, or beta adrenergic;
                           adenosine A1 or A2; cholinergic, muscarinic, or nicotinic; dopamine D1 or
                           D2; histamine H1; serotonin S1 or S2; opiate mu, delta, or kappa;
                           cannabinoid 1; voltage-sensitive calcium channel sites labeled with
                           nitrendipine or diltiazem; or at voltage-sensitive sodium channel sites
                           labeled with batrachotoxinin A20-alpha-benzoate. Gabapentin did not alter
                           the cellular uptake of dopamine, noradrenaline, or serotonin.
                                    A
                           B
                        
                        studies with radiolabeled
                           gabapentin have revealed a gabapentin binding site in areas of rat brain
                           including neocortex and hippocampus. A high-affinity binding protein in
                           animal brain tissue has been identified as an auxiliary subunit of
                           voltage-activated calcium channels. However, functional correlates of
                           gabapentin binding, if any, remain to be elucidated. It is hypothesized
                           that gabapentin antagonizes thrombospondin binding to α2δ-1 as a receptor
                           involved in excitatory synapse formation and suggested that gabapentin
                           may function therapeutically by blocking new synapse
                        formation.
                                    In vitro
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        No pharmacodynamic studies have been conducted with
                        GRALISE.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        
                           Absorption and
                           Bioavailability
                        
                        Gabapentin is absorbed from the proximal small bowel by a
                           saturable L-amino transport system. Gabapentin bioavailability is not
                           dose proportional; as the dose is increased, bioavailability decreases.
                        When GRALISE (1800 mg once daily) and gabapentin immediate
                           release (600 mg three times a day) were administered with high fat meals
                           (50% of calories from fat), GRALISE has a higher C and
                           lower AUC at steady state compared to gabapentin immediate release
                           (Table 5). Time to reach maximum plasma concentration (T )
                           for GRALISE is 8 hours, which is about 4-6 hours longer compared to
                           gabapentin immediate release.
                                    max
                           max
                        
                        


                        


Do not use GRALISE interchangeably with other gabapentin products
                           because of differing pharmacokinetic profiles that affect frequency of
                           administration.
                        GRALISE should be taken with evening meals. If it is taken on an
                           empty stomach, the bioavailability will be substantially lower.
                        Administration of GRALISE with food increases the rate and extent
                           of absorption of gabapentin compared to the fasted state. C of gabapentin increases 33-84% and AUC of gabapentin increases 33-118%
                           with food depending on the fat content of the meal. GRALISE should be
                           taken with food.
                                    max
                        
                        
                           

                           Distribution
                        
                        Gabapentin is less than 3% bound to plasma proteins. After 150 mg
                           intravenous administration, the mean ± SD volume of distribution is 58 ±
                           6 L.
                        
                           

                           Metabolism and Excretion
                        
                        Gabapentin is eliminated by renal excretion as unchanged drug.
                           Gabapentin is not appreciably metabolized in humans. In patients with
                           normal renal function given gabapentin immediate release 1200 to
                           3000 mg/day, the drug elimination half-life (t ) was 5 to
                           7 hours. Elimination kinetics do not change with dose level or multiple
                           doses.
                                    1/2
                        
                        Gabapentin elimination rate constant, plasma clearance, and renal
                           clearance are directly proportional to creatinine clearance. In elderly
                           patients and patients with impaired renal function, plasma clearance is
                           reduced. Gabapentin can be removed from plasma by hemodialysis.
                        Dosage adjustment in patients with compromised renal function is
                           necessary. In patients undergoing hemodialysis, GRALISE should not be
                           administered .
                                    [see Dosage and Administration
                                 ( )]
                                        2.2
                           
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.4 Special Populations
                     
                          As
                           renal function decreases, renal and plasma clearances and the apparent
                           elimination rate constant decrease, while C and
                           t increase.
                                    Renal Insufficiency:
                           max
                           1/2
                        
                        In patients (N=60) with creatinine clearance of at least 60, 30
                           to 59, or less than 30 mL/min, the median renal clearance rates for a
                           400 mg single dose of gabapentin immediate release were 79, 36, and
                           11 mL/min, respectively, and the median t values were 9.2,
                           14, and 40 hours, respectively.
                                    1/2
                        
                        Dosage adjustment is necessary in patients with impaired renal
                           function .
                                    [see Dosage and Administration
                                 ( )]
                                        2.2
                           
                        
                          In a study in
                           anuric adult subjects (N=11), the apparent elimination half-life of
                           gabapentin on nondialysis days was about 132 hours; during dialysis the
                           apparent half-life of gabapentin was reduced to 3.8 hours. Hemodialysis
                           thus has a significant effect on gabapentin elimination in anuric
                           subjects. GRALISE should not be administered in patients undergoing
                           hemodialysis. Alternative formulations of gabapentin products should be
                           considered in patients undergoing hemodialysis.
                                    Hemodialysis:
                        
                          Apparent oral and
                           renal clearances of gabapentin decrease with increasing age, although
                           this may be related to the decline in renal function with age. Reductions
                           in gabapentin dose should be made in patients with age-related
                           compromised renal function .
                                    Elderly:
                           [see Dosage and
                              Administration ( )]
                                        2.2
                           
                        
                          Because
                           gabapentin is not metabolized, studies have not been conducted in
                           patients with hepatic impairment.
                                    Hepatic Impairment:
                        
                          The
                           pharmacokinetics of GRALISE have not been studied in patients less than
                           18 years of age.
                                    Pediatrics:
                        
                          Although no formal
                           study has been conducted to compare the pharmacokinetics of gabapentin in
                           men and women, it appears that the pharmacokinetic parameters for males
                           and females are similar and there are no significant gender differences.
                                    Gender:
                        
                          Pharmacokinetic
                           differences due to race have not been studied. Because gabapentin is
                           primarily renally excreted and there are no important racial differences
                           in creatinine clearance, pharmacokinetic differences due to race are not
                           expected.
                                    Race:
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         