
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                            Antihypertensives: Possible additive hypotensive effects. (7.2)
                            Ergotamine: increased bioavailability of ergotamine. Avoid concomitant use (7.3)
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 PDE-5-Inhibitors and sGC-Stimulators
                     
                        Nitrolingual Pumpspray is contraindicated in patients who are using a selective inhibitor of cyclic guanosine monophosphate (cGMP)-specific phosphodiesterase type 5 (PDE5). PDE5 inhibitors such as avanafil, sildenafil, vardenafil, and tadalafil have been shown to potentiate the hypotensive effects of organic nitrates.
                        Do not use Nitrolingual Pumpspray in patients who are taking the soluble guanylate cyclase (sGC) stimulator riociguat. Concomitant use can cause hypotension.
                        The time course and dose dependence of these interactions have not been studied, and use within a few days of one another cannot be recommended. Appropriate supportive care for the severe hypotension has not been studied, but it seems reasonable to treat this as a nitrate overdose, with elevation of the extremities and with central volume expansion.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 Antihypertensives
                     
                        Patients receiving antihypertensive drugs, beta-adrenergic blockers, and nitrates should be observed for possible additive hypotensive effects. Marked orthostatic hypotension has been reported when calcium channel blockers and organic nitrates were used concomitantly.
                        Beta-adrenergic blockers blunt the reflex tachycardia produced by nitroglycerin without preventing its hypotensive effects. If beta-blockers are used with nitroglycerin in patients with angina pectoris, additional hypotensive effects may occur.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3 Ergotamine
                     
                        Oral administration of nitroglycerin markedly decreases the first-pass metabolism of dihydroergotamine and subsequently increases its oral bioavailability. Ergotamine is known to precipitate angina pectoris. Therefore, patients receiving sublingual nitroglycerin should avoid ergotamine and related drugs or be monitored for symptoms of ergotism if this is not possible.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         