
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           Pharmacokinetics and Metabolism — After intramuscular
injection of quinidine gluconate,
peak serum levels of quinidine are
achieved in a little less than two hours. This time to peak levels is identical
to the time measured when quinidine salts are administered orally.
                        The volume of
distribution of quinidine is
typically 2–3 L/kg in healthy young adults, but this may be reduced
to as little as 0.5 L/kg in patients with congestive heart failure, or increased
to 3–5 L/kg in patients with cirrhosis of the liver. At concentrations
of 2–5 mg/L (6.5–16.2 μmol/L), the fraction of quinidine bound
to plasma proteins (mainly to α1–acid glycoprotein
and to albumin) is 80–88% in adults and older children, but it is lower
in pregnant women, and in infants and neonates it may be as low as 50–70%.
Because α1–acid glycoprotein levels are increased
in response to stress, serum levels of total quinidine may
be greatly increased in settings such as acute myocardial infarction, even
though the serum content of unbound (active) drug may remain normal. Protein
binding is also increased in chronic renal failure, but binding abruptly descends
toward or below normal when heparin is administered for hemodialysis.
                        Quinidine clearance
typically proceeds at 3–5 mL/min/kg in adults, but clearance in pediatric
patients may be twice or three times as rapid. The elimination half–life
is about 6–8 hours in adults and 3–4 hours in pediatric patients. Quinidine clearance
is unaffected by hepatic cirrhosis, so the increased volume of distribution
seen in cirrhosis leads to a proportionate increase in the elimination half–life.
                        Most quinidine is
eliminated hepatically via the action of cytochrome P450IIIA4; there are several
different hydroxylated metabolites, and some of these have antiarrhythmic
activity.
                        The most important
of quinidine's
metabolites is 3–hydroxy–quinidine (3HQ),
serum levels of which can approach those of quinidine in
patients receiving conventional doses of quinidine gluconate. The volume of distribution of 3HQ appears to be larger than that of quinidine,
and the elimination half–life of 3HQ is about 12 hours.
                        As measured by
antiarrhythmic effects in animals, by QTc prolongation
in human volunteers, or by various in vitro techniques, 3HQ has at least half the
antiarrhythmic activity of the parent compound, so it may be responsible for
a substantial fraction of the effect of quinidine gluconate in chronic use.
                        When the urine pH is less than 7, about 20% of administered quinidine appears
unchanged in the urine, but this fraction drops to as little as 5% when the
urine is more alkaline. Renal clearance involves both glomerular filtration
and active tubular secretion, moderated by (pH–dependent) tubular reabsorption.
The net renal clearance is about 1 mL/min/kg in healthy adults.
                        When renal function
is taken into account, quinidine clearance is apparently independent of patient age.
                        Assays of serum quinidine levels
are widely available, but the results of modern assays may not be consistent
with results cited in the older medical literature. The serum levels of quinidine cited
in this package insert are those derived from specific assays, using either
benzene extraction or (preferably) reverse–phase high–pressure
liquid chromatography. In matched samples, older assays might unpredictably
have given results that were as much as two or three times higher. A typical
"therapeutic" concentration range is 2–6 mg/L (6.2 – 18.5 μmol/L).
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           Mechanisms of Action — In patients with malaria, quinidine acts
primarily as an intraerythrocytic schizonticide, with little effect upon sporozoites
or upon pre–erythrocytic parasites. Quinidine is gametocidal to Plasmodium
vivax and P. malariae, but not to P.
falciparum.
                        In cardiac muscle and in Purkinje fibers, quinidine depresses
the rapid inward depolarizing sodium current, thereby slowing phase–0
depolarization and reducing the amplitude of the action potential without
affecting the resting potential. In normal Purkinje fibers, it reduces the
slope of phase–4 depolarization, shifting the threshold voltage upward
toward zero. The result is slowed conduction and reduced automaticity in all
parts of the heart, with increase of the effective refractory period relative
to the duration of the action potential in the atria, ventricles, and Purkinje
tissues. Quinidine also raises the fibrillation thresholds of the atria and ventricles, and it raises
the ventricular defibrillation threshold as well. Quinidine's actions fall into class Ia in the Vaughan–Williams classification.
                        By slowing conduction and prolonging the effective refractory period, quinidine can
interrupt or prevent reentrant arrhythmias and arrhythmias due to increased automaticity, including atrial flutter, atrial fibrillation, and paroxysmal supraventricular tachycardia.
                        In patients with the sick sinus syndrome, quinidine can
cause marked sinus node depression and bradycardia. In most patients, however,
use of quinidine is associated with an increase in sinus rate.
                        Quinidine prolongs the QT interval in a dose–related fashion. This may lead
to increased ventricular automaticity and polymorphic ventricular tachycardias,
including torsades de pointes (see
                            Warnings).
                        In addition, quinidine has anticholinergic activity, it has negative inotropic activity, and it acts
peripherally as an α–adrenergic antagonist (that is, as a vasodilator).
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         