
               
               
               
                  12  CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY

               
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                     
                        Although the precise mechanism of action of rivastigmine is unknown, it is thought to exert its therapeutic effect by enhancing cholinergic function. This is accomplished by increasing the concentration of acetylcholine through reversible inhibition of its hydrolysis by cholinesterase. The effect of rivastigmine may lessen as the disease process advances and fewer cholinergic neurons remain functionally intact. There is no evidence that rivastigmine alters the course of the underlying dementing process.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                        
                     
                     
                        After a 6-mg oral dose of rivastigmine in humans, anticholinesterase activity is present in cerebrospinal fluid for about 10 hours, with a maximum inhibition of about 60% 5 hours after dosing.
                        
                           In vitro and in vivo studies demonstrate that the inhibition of cholinesterase by rivastigmine is not affected by the concomitant administration of memantine, an N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor antagonist.  
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           Absorption
                        
                        After the initial application of Rivastigmine Patch, there is a lag time of 0.5 to 1 hour in the absorption of rivastigmine. Concentrations then rise slowly typically reaching a maximum after 8 hours, although maximum values (Cmax) can also occur later (at 10 to 16 hours). After the peak, plasma concentrations slowly decrease over the remainder of the 24-hour period of application. At steady state, trough levels are approximately 60% to 80% of peak levels.
                        Rivastigmine Patch 9.5 mg/24 hours gave exposure approximately the same as that provided by an oral dose of 6 mg twice daily (i.e., 12 mg/day). Inter-subject variability in exposure was lower (43% to 49%) for the Rivastigmine Patch formulation as compared with the oral formulations (73% to 103%). Fluctuation (between Cmax and Cmin) is less for Rivastigmine Patch than for the oral formulation of rivastigmine.
                        Figure 2 displays rivastigmine plasma concentrations over 24 hours for the 3 available patch strengths.
                        
                           Figure 2: Rivastigmine Plasma Concentrations Following Dermal 24-Hour Patch Application
                        
                        
                           
                        
                        
                           
                        
                        Over a 24-hour dermal application, approximately 50% of the drug content of the patch is released from the system.
                        Exposure (AUC∞) to rivastigmine (and metabolite NAP266-90) was highest when the patch was applied to the upper back, chest, or upper arm. Two other sites (abdomen and thigh) could be used if none of the three other sites is available, but the practitioner should be aware that the rivastigmine plasma exposure associated with these sites was approximately 20 to 30% lower.
                        There was no relevant accumulation of rivastigmine or the metabolite NAP226-90 in plasma in patients with Alzheimer’s disease with daily dosing.
                        The pharmacokinetic profile of rivastigmine transdermal patches was comparable in patients with Alzheimer’s disease and in patients with dementia associated with Parkinson’s disease.
                        
                           Distribution 
                        
                        
                           
         Rivastigmine is weakly bound to plasma proteins (approximately 40%) over the therapeutic range. It readily crosses the blood-brain barrier, reaching CSF peak concentrations in 1.4 to 2.6 hours. It has an apparent volume of distribution in the range of 1.8 to 2.7 L/kg.
                        
                        
                           Metabolism 
                           
                        
                        
                           Rivastigmine is extensively metabolized primarily via cholinesterase-mediated hydrolysis to the decarbamylated metabolite NAP226-90. In vitro, this metabolite shows minimal inhibition of acetylcholinesterase (<10%). Based on evidence from in vitro and animal studies, the major cytochrome P450 isoenzymes are minimally involved in rivastigmine metabolism.
                        The metabolite-to-parent AUC∞ ratio was about 0.7 after Rivastigmine Patch application versus 3.5 after oral administration, indicating that much less metabolism occurred after dermal treatment. Less NAP226-90 is formed following patch application, presumably because of the lack of presystemic (hepatic first pass) metabolism. Based on in vitro studies, no unique metabolic routes were detected in human skin.
                        
                        
                           Elimination
         
                        
                        Renal excretion of the metabolites is the major route of elimination. Unchanged rivastigmine is found in trace amounts in the urine.  Following administration of 14C-rivastigmine, renal elimination was rapid and essentially complete (>90%) within 24 hours. Less than 1% of the administered dose is excreted in the feces. The apparent elimination half-life in plasma is approximately 3 hours after patch removal. Renal clearance was approximately 2.1 to 2.8 L/hr.
                        
                        
                           
                        
                        
                           Age
                           
                           
Age had no impact on the exposure to rivastigmine in Alzheimer’s disease patients treated with Rivastigmine Patch. 
                        
                        
                           Gender or Race
                           
No specific pharmacokinetic study was conducted to investigate the effect of gender and race on the disposition of Rivastigmine Patch. A population pharmacokinetic analysis of oral rivastigmine indicated that neither gender (n=277 males and 348 females) nor race (n=575 Caucasian, 34 Black, 4 Asian, and 12 Other) affected clearance of the drug. Similar results were seen with analyses of pharmacokinetic data obtained after the administration of Rivastigmine Patch.
                        
                        
                           Body Weight 
                        
                        A relationship between drug exposure at steady state (rivastigmine and metabolite NAP226-90) and body weight was observed in Alzheimer’s dementia patients. Rivastigmine exposure is higher in subjects with low body weight. Compared to a patient with a body weight of 65 kg, the rivastigmine steady-state concentrations in a patient with a body weight of 35 kg would be approximately doubled, while for a patient with a body weight of 100 kg the concentrations would be approximately halved [see Dosage and Administration (
                           
                              2.2
                           
                           )].
                        
                        
                           Renal Impairment 
                        
                        No study was conducted with Rivastigmine Patch in subjects with renal impairment. Based on population analysis creatinine clearance did not show any clear effect on steady state concentrations of rivastigmine or its metabolite. 
                        
                        
                           Hepatic Impairment  
                        No pharmacokinetic study was conducted with Rivastigmine Patch in subjects with hepatic impairment. Following a single 3-mg dose, mean oral clearance of rivastigmine was 60% lower in hepatically impaired patients (n=10, biopsy proven) than in healthy subjects (n=10). After multiple 6-mg twice a day oral dosing, the mean clearance of rivastigmine was 65% lower in mild (n=7, Child-Pugh score 5 to 6) and moderate (n=3, Child-Pugh score 7 to 9) hepatically impaired patients (biopsy proven, liver cirrhosis) than in healthy subjects (n=10). [see Dosage and Administration (
                           2.2
                           ), Specific Populations (8.6)].
                        
                        
                           Smoking 
                        
                        
                           Following oral rivastigmine administration (up to 12 mg/day) with nicotine use, population pharmacokinetic analysis showed increased oral clearance of rivastigmine by 23% (n=75 smokers and 549 nonsmokers).
                        
                        
                           Drug Interaction Studies 
                        
                        No specific interaction studies have been conducted with Rivastigmine Patch. Information presented below is from studies with oral rivastigmine.
                        
                        
                           Effect of Rivastigmine on the Metabolism of Other Drugs
                        
                        
                           Rivastigmine is primarily metabolized through hydrolysis by esterases. Minimal metabolism occurs via the major cytochrome P450 isoenzymes. Based on in vitro studies, no pharmacokinetic drug interactions with drugs metabolized by the following isoenzyme systems are expected: CYP1A2, CYP2D6, CYP3A4/5, CYP2E1, CYP2C9, CYP2C8, CYP2C19, or CYP2B6.
                        No pharmacokinetic interaction was observed between rivastigmine taken orally and digoxin, warfarin, diazepam or fluoxetine in studies in healthy volunteers. The increase in prothrombin time induced by warfarin is not affected by administration of rivastigmine.
                        
                        
                           Effect of Other Drugs on the Metabolism of Rivastigmine 
                        
                        Drugs that induce or inhibit CYP450 metabolism are not expected to alter the metabolism of rivastigmine.
                        Population pharmacokinetic analysis with a database of 625 patients showed that the pharmacokinetics of rivastigmine taken orally were not influenced by commonly prescribed medications such as antacids (n=77), antihypertensives (n=72), beta-blockers (n=42), calcium channel blockers (n=75), antidiabetics (n=21), nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (n=79), estrogens (n=70), salicylate analgesics (n=177), antianginals (n=35), and antihistamines (n=15).
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         