
               
               
               Clinical Pharmacology
               
                  Following a single dose of two minocycline hydrochloride capsules, 100 mg administered to 18 normal fasting adult volunteers, maximum serum concentrations were attained in 1 to 4 hours (average 2.1 hours) and ranged from 2.1 to 5.1 mcg/mL (average 3.5 mcg/mL). The serum half-life in the normal volunteers ranged from 11.1 to 22.1 hours (average 15.5 hours).
                  When minocycline hydrochloride capsules were given concomitantly with a high-fat meal, which included dairy products, the extent of absorption of minocycline hydrochloride capsules was unchanged compared to dosing under fasting conditions. The mean Tmax was delayed by one hour when administered with food, compared to dosing under fasting conditions. Minocycline hydrochloride capsules may be administered with or without food.
                  In previous studies with other minocycline dosage forms, the minocycline serum half-life ranged from 11 to 16 hours in 7 patients with hepatic dysfunction, and from 18 to 69 hours in 5 patients with renal dysfunction. The urinary and fecal recovery of minocycline when administered to 12 normal volunteers was one-half to one-third that of other tetracyclines.
                  Microbiology
                  The tetracyclines are primarily bacteriostatic and are thought to exert their antimicrobial effect by the inhibition of protein synthesis. The tetracyclines, including minocycline, have a similar antimicrobial spectrum of activity against a wide range of gram-positive and gram-negative organisms. Cross-resistance of these organisms to tetracycline is common.
                  Minocycline has been shown to be active against most strains of the following microorganisms, both in vitro and in clinical infections as described in the INDICATIONS AND USAGE section:
                  GRAM-POSITIVE BACTERIA
                  Because many strains of the following gram-positive microorganisms have been shown to be resistant to tetracyclines, culture and susceptibility testing are especially recommended. Tetracycline antibiotics should not be used for streptococcal diseases unless the organism has been demonstrated to be susceptible. Tetracyclines are not the drug of choice in the treatment of any type of staphylococcal infection.
Bacillus anthracis1
Listeria monocytogenes1
Staphylococcus aureus
Streptococcus pneumoniae
                  GRAM-NEGATIVE BACTERIA
                  Bartonella bacilliformis
Brucella species
Calymmatobacterium granulomatis
Campylobacter fetus
Francisella tularensis
Haemophilus ducreyi
Vibrio cholerae
Yersinia pestis
                  Because many strains of the following groups of gram-negative microorganisms have been shown to be resistant to tetracyclines, culture and susceptibility tests are especially recommended.
                  Acinetobacter species
Enterobacter aerogenes
Escherichia coli
Haemophilus influenzae
Klebsiella species
Neisseria gonorrhoeae1
Neisseria meningitidis1
Shigella species
                  "OTHER" MICROORGANISMS
                  Actinomyces species1
Borrelia recurrentis
Chlamydia psittaci
Chlamydia trachomatis
Clostridium species1
Entamoeba species
Fusobacterium nucleatum subspecies fusiforme1
Mycobacterium marinum
Mycoplasma pneumoniae
Propionibacterium acnes
Rickettsiae
Treponema pallidum subspecies pallidum1
Treponema pallidum subspecies pertenue1
Ureaplasma urealyticum
                  1 When penicillin is contraindicated, tetracyclines are alternative drugs in the treatment of infections caused by the cited microorganisms.
                  Susceptibility Tests
                  Susceptibility testing should be performed with tetracycline since it predicts susceptibility to minocycline. However, certain organisms (e.g., some staphylococci, and Acinetobacter species) may be more susceptible to minocycline and doxycycline than to tetracycline.
                  Dilution techniques
                  Quantitative methods are used to determine antimicrobial minimal inhibitory concentrations (MICs). These MICs provide estimates of the susceptibility of bacteria to antimicrobial compounds. The MICs should be determined using a standardized procedure. Standardized procedures are based on a dilution method (Ref1, Ref3) (broth or agar) or equivalent with standardized inoculum concentrations and standardized concentrations of tetracycline powder.
                  
                  
                     Please view the manufacturer's complete drug information at the FDA site for all testing values:
                  
                  
                     http://dailymed.nlm.nih.gov/dailymed/lookup.cfm?setid=9013ca48-15f2-43cd-a51d-91cf65c72a7c
                  
               
               
            
         