
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        The precise mechanism by which VIMPAT exerts its antiepileptic effects in humans remains to be fully elucidated. In vitro electrophysiological studies have shown that lacosamide selectively enhances slow inactivation of voltage-gated sodium channels, resulting in stabilization of hyperexcitable neuronal membranes and inhibition of repetitive neuronal firing.
                        Lacosamide binds to collapsin response mediator protein-2 (CRMP-2), a phosphoprotein which is mainly expressed in the nervous system and is involved in neuronal differentiation and control of axonal outgrowth. The role of CRMP-2 binding in seizure control is unknown.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        A pharmacokinetic-pharmacodynamic (efficacy) analysis was performed based on the pooled data from the 3 efficacy trials for partial-onset seizures. Lacosamide exposure is correlated with the reduction in seizure frequency. However, doses above 400 mg/day do not appear to confer additional benefit in group analyses.
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Cardiac Electrophysiology
                           
                              Electrocardiographic effects of VIMPAT were determined in a double-blind, randomized clinical pharmacology trial of 247 healthy subjects. Chronic oral doses of 400 and 800 mg/day were compared with placebo and a positive control (400 mg moxifloxacin). VIMPAT did not prolong QTc interval and did not have a dose-related or clinically important effect on QRS duration. VIMPAT produced a small, dose-related increase in mean PR interval. At steady-state, the time of the maximum observed mean PR interval corresponded with tmax. The placebo-subtracted maximum increase in PR interval (at tmax) was 7.3 ms for the 400 mg/day group and 11.9 ms for the 800 mg/day group. For patients who participated in the controlled trials, the placebo-subtracted mean maximum increase in PR interval for a 400 mg/day VIMPAT dose was 3.1 ms in patients with partial-onset seizures and 9.4 ms for patients with diabetic neuropathy.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        The pharmacokinetics of VIMPAT have been studied in healthy adult subjects (age range 18 to 87), adults with partial-onset seizures, adults with diabetic neuropathy, and subjects with renal and hepatic impairment.
                        VIMPAT is completely absorbed after oral administration with negligible first-pass effect with a high absolute bioavailability of approximately 100%. The maximum lacosamide plasma concentrations occur approximately 1 to 4 hour post-dose after oral dosing, and elimination half-life is approximately 13 hours. Steady state plasma concentrations are achieved after 3 days of twice daily repeated administration. Pharmacokinetics of VIMPAT are dose proportional (100-800 mg) and time invariant, with low inter- and intra-subject variability. Compared to lacosamide the major metabolite, O-desmethyl metabolite, has a longer Tmax (0.5 to 12 hours) and elimination half-life (15-23 hours).
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Absorption and Bioavailability
                           
                              VIMPAT is completely absorbed after oral administration. The oral bioavailability of VIMPAT tablets is approximately 100%. Food does not affect the rate and extent of absorption.
                              After intravenous administration, Cmax is reached at the end of infusion. The 30- and 60-minute intravenous infusions are bioequivalent to the oral tablet.
                              In a trial comparing the oral tablet with and an oral solution containing 10 mg/mL lacosamide, bioequivalence between both formulations was shown.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Distribution
                           
                              The volume of distribution is approximately 0.6 L/kg and thus close to the volume of total body water. VIMPAT is less than 15% bound to plasma proteins.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Metabolism and Elimination
                           
                              VIMPAT is primarily eliminated from the systemic circulation by renal excretion and biotransformation.
                              After oral and intravenous administration of 100 mg [14C]-lacosamide approximately 95% of radioactivity administered was recovered in the urine and less than 0.5% in the feces. The major compounds excreted were unchanged lacosamide (approximately 40% of the dose), its O-desmethyl metabolite (approximately 30%), and a structurally unknown polar fraction (~20%). The plasma exposure of the major human metabolite, O-desmethyl-lacosamide, is approximately 10% of that of lacosamide. This metabolite has no known pharmacological activity.
                              Lacosamide is a CYP2C19 substrate. The relative contribution of other CYP isoforms or non-CYP enzymes in the metabolism of lacosamide is not clear. The elimination half-life of the unchanged drug is approximately 13 hours and is not altered by different doses, multiple dosing or intravenous administration.
                              There is no enantiomeric interconversion of lacosamide.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Special Populations
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Renal impairment
                                 
                                    Lacosamide and its major metabolite are eliminated from the systemic circulation primarily by renal excretion.
                                    The AUC of VIMPAT was increased approximately 25% in mildly (CLCR 50-80 mL/min) and moderately (CLCR 30-50 mL/min) and 60% in severely (CLCR≤30mL/min) renally impaired patients compared to subjects with normal renal function (CLCR>80mL/min), whereas Cmax was unaffected. No dose adjustment is considered necessary in mildly and moderately renal impaired subjects. A maximum dose of 300 mg/day is recommended for patients with severe renal impairment (CLCR≤30mL/min) and in patients with endstage renal disease. VIMPAT is effectively removed from plasma by hemodialysis. Following a 4-hour hemodialysis treatment, AUC of VIMPAT is reduced by approximately 50%. Therefore dosage supplementation of up to 50% following hemodialysis should be considered. In all renal impaired patients, the dose titration should be performed with caution. [see Dosage and Administration (2.3)
                                       ]
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Hepatic impairment
                                 
                                    Lacosamide undergoes metabolism. Subjects with moderate hepatic impairment (Child-Pugh B) showed higher plasma concentrations of lacosamide (approximately 50-60% higher AUC compared to healthy subjects). The dose titration should be performed with caution in patients with hepatic impairment. A maximum dose of 300 mg/day is recommended for patients with mild or moderate hepatic impairment.
                                    Patients with mild to moderate hepatic impairment should be observed closely during dose titration. A maximum dose of 300 mg/day is recommended for patients with mild to moderate hepatic impairment. The pharmacokinetics of lacosamide have not been evaluated in severe hepatic impairment. VIMPAT use is not recommended in patients with severe hepatic impairment. [see Dosage and Administration (2.3)
                                       ] Patients with co-existing hepatic and renal impairment should be monitored closely during dose titration.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Geriatric
                                 
                                    In the elderly (>65 years), dose and body-weight normalized AUC and Cmax is about 20% increased compared to young subjects (18-64 years). This may be related to body weight and decreased renal function in elderly subjects. Dose reduction is not considered to be necessary.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Pediatric Patients
                                 
                                    Pharmacokinetics of VIMPAT have not been studied in pediatric patients.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Gender
                                 
                                    VIMPAT clinical trials indicate that gender does not have a clinically relevant influence on the pharmacokinetics of VIMPAT.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Race
                                 
                                    There are no clinically relevant differences in the pharmacokinetics of VIMPAT between Asian, Black, and Caucasian subjects.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           CYP2C19 Polymorphism
                           
                              There are no clinically relevant differences in the pharmacokinetics of VIMPAT between CYP2C19 poor metabolizers and extensive metabolizers. Results from a trial in poor metabolizers (PM) (N=4) and extensive metabolizers (EM) (N=8) of cytochrome P450 (CYP) 2C19 showed that lacosamide plasma concentrations were similar in PMs and EMs, but plasma concentrations and the amount excreted into urine of the O-desmethyl metabolite were about 70% reduced in PMs compared to EMs.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Drug interactions
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 In Vitro Assessment of Drug Interactions
                                 
                                    
                                       In vitro metabolism studies indicate that lacosamide does not induce the enzyme activity of drug metabolizing cytochrome P450 isoforms CYP1A2, 2B6, 2C9, 2C19 and 3A4. Lacosamide did not inhibit CYP 1A1, 1A2, 2A6, 2B6, 2C8, 2C9, 2D6, 2E1, 3A4/5 at plasma concentrations observed in clinical studies.
                                    In vitro data suggest that lacosamide has the potential to inhibit CYP2C19 at therapeutic concentrations. However, an in vivo study with omeprazole did not show an inhibitory effect on omeprazole pharmacokinetics.
                                    Lacosamide was not a substrate or inhibitor for P-glycoprotein.
                                    Lacosamide is a CYP2C19 substrate. The relative contribution of other CYP isoforms or non-CYP enzymes in the metabolism of lacosamide is not clear.
                                    Since <15% of lacosamide is bound to plasma proteins, a clinically relevant interaction with other drugs through competition for protein binding sites is unlikely.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 In Vivo Assessment of Drug Interactions
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Drug interaction studies with AEDs
                                    
                                    
                                       Effect of VIMPAT on concomitant AEDs: VIMPAT 400 mg/day had no influence on the pharmacokinetics of 600 mg/day valproic acid and 400 mg/day carbamazepine in healthy subjects.
                                    The placebo-controlled clinical studies in patients with partial-onset seizures showed that steady-state plasma concentrations of levetiracetam, carbamazepine, carbamazepine epoxide, lamotrigine, topiramate, oxcarbazepine monohydroxy derivative (MHD), phenytoin, valproic acid, phenobarbital, gabapentin, clonazepam, and zonisamide were not affected by concomitant intake of VIMPAT at any dose.
                                    
                                       Effect of concomitant AEDs on VIMPAT: Drug-drug interaction studies in healthy subjects showed that 600 mg/day valproic acid had no influence on the pharmacokinetics of 400 mg/day VIMPAT. Likewise, 400 mg/day carbamazepine had no influence on the pharmacokinetics of VIMPAT in a healthy subject study. Population pharmacokinetics results in patients with partial-onset seizures showed small reductions (15% to 20% lower) in lacosamide plasma concentrations when VIMPAT was coadministered with carbamazepine, phenobarbital or phenytoin.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Drug-drug interaction studies with other drugs
                                    
                                    
                                       Digoxin
                                    
                                    There was no effect of VIMPAT (400 mg/day) on the pharmacokinetics of digoxin (0.5 mg once daily) in a study in healthy subjects.
                                    
                                       Metformin
                                    
                                    There were no clinically relevant changes in metformin levels following coadministration of VIMPAT (400 mg/day).
                                    Metformin (500 mg three times a day) had no effect on the pharmacokinetics of VIMPAT (400 mg/day).
                                    
                                       Omeprazole
                                    
                                    Omeprazole is a CYP2C19 substrate and inhibitor.
                                    There was no effect of VIMPAT (600 mg/day) on the pharmacokinetics of omeprazole (40 mg single dose) in healthy subjects. The data indicated that lacosamide had little in vivo inhibitory or inducing effect on CYP2C19.
                                    Omeprazole at a dose of 40 mg once daily had no effect on the pharmacokinetics of VIMPAT (300 mg single dose). However, plasma levels of the O-desmethyl metabolite were reduced about 60% in the presence of omeprazole.
                                    
                                       Oral Contraceptives
                                    
                                    There was no influence of VIMPAT (400 mg/day) on the pharmacodynamics and pharmacokinetics of an oral contraceptive containing 0.03 mg ethinylestradiol and 0.15 mg levonorgestrel in healthy subjects, except that a 20% increase in ethinylestradiol Cmax was observed.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         