
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY:
               Chlorpheniramine maleate competitively antagonizes most of the smooth muscle stimulating actions of histamine 
on the H1 receptors of the GI tract, uterus, large blood vessels, and bronchial muscle. It also antagonizes the action 
of histamine that results in increased capillary permeability and the formation of edema. Chlorpheniramine maleate 
is an alkylamine-type antihistamine. This group of antihistamines are among the most active histamine antagonists 
and are generally effective in relatively low doses. They thereby prevent, but do not reverse, responses mediated by 
histamine alone. The anticholinergic actions of most antihistamines provide a drying effect on the nasal mucosa. 
These drugs are not so prone to produce drowsiness and are among the most suitable agents for daytime use, but 
a significant proportion of patients do experience this effect.

                  
Methscopolamine Nitrate is one of the principal anticholinergic/antispasmodic components of belladonna alkaloids 
that exhibits antisecretory activity. Methscopolamine inhibits the muscarinic actions of acetylcholine on structures 
innervated by postganglionic cholinergic nerves: smooth muscle, cardiac muscle, sinoatrial and atrioventricular nodes, 
and exocrine glands. In general, the smaller doses of anticholinergics inhibit salivary and bronchial secretions, sweating, 
and accommodation; cause dilation of the pupil; and may affect the heart rate.

                  
Pseudoephedrine hydrochloride is an oral sympathomimetic amine that acts as a decongestant to respiratory tract 
mucous membranes. While its vasoconstrictor action is similar to that of ephedrine, pseudoephedrine has less pressor 
effect in normotensive adults. Serum half-life for pseudoephedrine is 6 to 8 hours. Acidic urine is associated with faster 
elimination of the drug. About one-half of the administered drug is excreted in the urine.

               
               
            
         