
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           Inhibition of 11 β-Hydroxysteroid Dehydrogenase Type 1: May require the initiation of glucocorticoid replacement therapy. Patients treated with glucocorticoid replacement for previously diagnosed hypoadrenalism may require an increase in their maintenance doses (7.1, 7.2).
                           Glucocorticoid replacement: Should be carefully adjusted (7.2).
                           Cytochrome P450 - Metabolized Drugs: Monitor carefully if used with somatropin (7.3).
                           Oral estrogen: Larger doses of somatropin may be required in women (7.4).
                           Insulin and/or other hypoglycemic agents: May require adjustment (7.5).
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1	11 β-Hydroxysteroid Dehydrogenase Type 1 (11βHSD-1)
                     
                        The microsomal enzyme 11βHSD-1 is required for conversion of cortisone to its active metabolite, cortisol, in hepatic and adipose tissue.  Growth hormone (GH) and somatropin inhibit 11βHSD-1.  Consequently, individuals with untreated GH deficiency have relative increases in 11βHSD-1 and serum cortisol.  Introduction of somatropin treatment may result in inhibition of 11βHSD-1 and reduced serum cortisol concentrations.  As a consequence, previously undiagnosed central (secondary) hypoadrenalism may be unmasked and glucocorticoid replacement may be required in patients treated with somatropin.  In addition, patients treated with glucocorticoid replacement for previously diagnosed hypoadrenalism may require an increase in their maintenance or stress doses following initiation of somatropin treatment; this may be especially true for patients treated with cortisone acetate and prednisone since conversion of these drugs to their biologically active metabolites is dependent on the activity of 11βHSD-1.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2	Pharmacologic Glucocorticoid Therapy and Supraphysiologic Glucocorticoid Treatment
                     
                        Pharmacologic glucocorticoid therapy and supraphysiologic glucocorticoid treatment may attenuate the growth-promoting effects of somatropin in children.  Therefore, glucocorticoid replacement therapy should be carefully adjusted in children with concomitant GH and glucocorticoid deficiency to avoid both hypoadrenalism and an inhibitory effect on growth.
                        The use of Nutropin AQ in patients with Chronic Kidney Disease (CKD) requiring glucocorticoid therapy has not been evaluated.  Concomitant glucocorticoid therapy may inhibit the growth promoting effect of Nutropin AQ.  Therefore, if glucocorticoid replacement is required for CKD, the glucocorticoid dose should be carefully adjusted to avoid an inhibitory effect on growth.  In the clinical trials there was no evidence of drug interactions with Nutropin and commonly used drugs used in the management of CKD. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3	Cytochrome P450 (CYP450)-Metabolized Drugs
                     
                        Limited published data indicate that somatropin treatment increases CYP450-mediated antipyrine clearance in man.  These data suggest that somatropin administration may alter the clearance of compounds known to be metabolized by CYP450 liver enzymes (e.g., corticosteroids, sex steroids, anticonvulsants, cyclosporine).  Careful monitoring is advisable when somatropin is administered in combination with other drugs known to be metabolized by CYP450 liver enzymes.  However, formal drug interaction studies have not been conducted. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4	Oral Estrogen 
                     
                        Because oral estrogens may reduce insulin-like growth factor (IGF-1) response to somatropin treatment, girls and women receiving oral estrogen replacement may require greater somatropin dosages [see Dosage and Administration (2.2)].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.5	Insulin and/or Oral/Injectable Hypoglycemic Agents
                     
                        In patients with diabetes mellitus requiring drug therapy, the dose of insulin and/or oral/injectable hypoglycemic agents may require adjustment when somatropin therapy is initiated [see Warnings and Precautions (5.4)].
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         