
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1	Mechanism of Action
                     
                        STRIBILD is a fixed-dose combination of antiviral drugs elvitegravir (boosted by the CYP3A inhibitor cobicistat), emtricitabine, and tenofovir DF [see Microbiology (12.4)].
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           Effects on Electrocardiogram
                        
                        Thorough QT studies have been conducted for elvitegravir and cobicistat. The effect of the other two components, tenofovir and emtricitabine, or the combination regimen STRIBILD on the QT interval is not known.
                        The effect of multiple doses of elvitegravir 125 and 250 mg (0.83 and 1.67 times the dose in STRIBILD)  (coadministered with 100 mg RTV to boost the blood levels of elvitegravir) on QTc interval was evaluated in a randomized, placebo- and active-controlled (moxifloxacin 400 mg) parallel group thorough QT study in 126 healthy subjects. In a study with demonstrated ability to detect small effects, the upper bound of the one-sided 95% confidence interval for the largest placebo adjusted, baseline-corrected QTc based on Fridericia's correction method (QTcF) was below 10 msec. In this study, there was no clinically relevant prolongation of the QTc interval.
                        The effect of a single dose of cobicistat 250 mg and 400 mg (1.67 and 2.67 times the dose in STRIBILD) on QTc interval was evaluated in a randomized, placebo- and active-controlled (moxifloxacin 400 mg) four-period crossover thorough QT study in 48 healthy subjects. In a study with demonstrated ability to detect small effects, the upper bound of the one-sided 95% confidence interval for the largest placebo adjusted, baseline-corrected QTc based on individual correction method (QTc) was below 10 msec, the threshold for regulatory concern. Prolongation of the PR interval was noted in subjects receiving cobicistat in the same study. The maximum mean (95% upper confidence bound) difference in PR from placebo after baseline-correction was 9.5 (12.1) msec for 250 mg dose and 20.2 (22.8) for 400 mg dose cobicistat. Because the 150 mg cobicistat dose used in the STRIBILD fixed-dose combination tablet is lower than the lowest dose studied in the thorough QT study, it is unlikely that treatment with STRIBILD will result in clinically relevant PR prolongation.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        
                           
                               
                              Absorption and Bioavailability
                              

                              

                           
                           
                               
                              STRIBILD
                              : Following oral administration of STRIBILD with food in HIV-1 infected subjects, peak plasma concentrations were observed 4 hours post-dose for elvitegravir, 3 hours post-dose for cobicistat, 3 hours post-dose for emtricitabine, and 2 hours for tenofovir following the conversion of tenofovir DF (see Table 7 for additional pharmacokinetic parameters).
                           
                               
                              


                           



                           
                               
                              Effect of Food on Oral Absorption
                           
                           
                               Relative to fasting conditions, the administration of single dose STRIBILD with a light meal (~373 kcal, 20% fat) increased the mean systemic exposure of elvitegravir and tenofovir by 34% and 24%, respectively. The alterations in mean systemic exposures of cobicistat and emtricitabine were not clinically significant.

                              

                           
                           
                               Relative to fasting conditions, the administration of single dose STRIBILD with a high fat meal (~ 800 kcal, 50% fat) increased the mean systemic exposure of elvitegravir and tenofovir by 87% and 23%, respectively. The alterations in mean systemic exposures of cobicistat and emtricitabine were not clinically significant.

                              

                           
                           
                               STRIBILD should be taken with food.

                              

                           
                           
                               
                              Distribution
                           
                           
                               
                              Elvitegravir: Elvitegravir is 98–99% bound to human plasma proteins and binding is independent of drug concentration over the range of 1 ng per mL to 1.6 micrograms per mL. The mean blood-to-plasma ratio was 0.73.

                              

                           
                           
                               
                              Cobicistat: Cobicistat is 97–98% bound to human plasma proteins and the mean blood-to-plasma ratio was approximately 0.5.

                              

                           
                           
                               
                              Emtricitabine:  
                              In vitro binding of emtricitabine to human plasma proteins is less than 4% and is independent of drug concentration over the range of 0.02–200 micrograms per mL.

                              

                           
                           
                               
                              Tenofovir Disoproxil Fumarate:  
                              In vitro binding of tenofovir to human plasma proteins is less than 0.7% and is independent of concentration over the range of 0.01–25 micrograms per mL.
                           
                               
                              Metabolism
                           
                           
                               
                              Elvitegravir: The majority of elvitegravir metabolism is mediated by CYP3A enzymes. Elvitegravir also undergoes glucuronidation via UGT1A1/3 enzymes.

                              

                           
                           
                               
                              Cobicistat: Cobicistat is metabolized by CYP3A and to a minor extent by CYP2D6 enzymes and does not undergo glucuronidation.

                              

                           
                           
                               Emtricitabine and tenofovir are not significantly metabolized.

                              

                           
                           
                               
                              Elimination
                           
                           
                               
                              Elvitegravir: The median terminal plasma half-life of elvitegravir following administration of STRIBILD is approximately 12.9 hours. After single dose administration of [14C] elvitegravir (coadministered with 100 mg RTV), 94.8% and 6.7% of the administered dose was excreted in feces and urine, respectively.

                              

                           
                           
                               
                              Cobicistat: The median terminal plasma half-life of cobicistat following administration of STRIBILD is approximately 3.5 hours. With single dose administration of [14C] cobicistat after multiple dosing of cobicistat for six days, 86.2% and 8.2% of the administered dose was excreted in feces and urine, respectively.

                              

                           
                           
                               Emtricitabine and tenofovir are primarily excreted in the urine by a combination of glomerular filtration and active tubular secretion.

                              

                           
                        
                        
                           Special Populations
                           

                           

                        
                        
                           
                               
                              Patients with Renal Impairment
                           
                           
                               
                              Elvitegravir and cobicistat: A study of the pharmacokinetics of cobicistat-boosted elvitegravir was performed in healthy subjects and subjects with severe renal impairment (estimated creatinine clearance less than 30 mL per min). No clinically relevant differences in elvitegravir or cobicistat pharmacokinetics were observed between healthy subjects and subjects with severe renal impairment.

                              

                           
                           
                               
                              Emtricitabine and Tenofovir Disoproxil Fumarate: The pharmacokinetics of emtricitabine and tenofovir are altered in subjects with estimated creatinine clearance below 50 mL per min or with end stage renal disease requiring dialysis [see Warnings and Precautions (5.3) and Use in Specific Populations (8.6)].

                                 

                              
                           
                           
                               
                              Patients with Hepatic Impairment
                           
                           
                               
                              Elvitegravir and cobicistat: A study of the pharmacokinetics of cobicistat-boosted elvitegravir was performed in healthy subjects and subjects with moderate hepatic impairment. No clinically relevant differences in elvitegravir or cobicistat pharmacokinetics were observed between subjects with moderate hepatic impairment (Child-Pugh Class B) and healthy subjects. No dosage adjustment of elvitegravir or cobicistat is necessary for patients with mild to moderate hepatic impairment. The effect of severe hepatic impairment (Child-Pugh Class C) on the pharmacokinetics of elvitegravir or cobicistat has not been studied [see Use in Specific Populations (8.7)].

                                 

                              
                           
                           
                               
                              Emtricitabine: The pharmacokinetics of emtricitabine has not been studied in subjects with hepatic impairment; however, emtricitabine is not significantly metabolized by liver enzymes, so the impact of liver impairment should be limited.

                              

                           
                           
                               
                              Tenofovir Disoproxil Fumarate: The pharmacokinetics of tenofovir following a 300 mg dose of VIREAD has been studied in healthy subjects with moderate to severe hepatic impairment. No clinically relevant differences in tenofovir pharmacokinetics were observed between subjects with hepatic impairment and healthy subjects.

                              

                           
                           
                               
                              Hepatitis B and/or Hepatitis C Virus Co-infection
                           
                           
                               
                              Elvitegravir: Limited data from population pharmacokinetic analysis (N=24) indicated that hepatitis B and/or C virus infection had no clinically relevant effect on the exposure of cobicistat-boosted elvitegravir.

                              

                           
                           
                               
                              Cobicistat: There were insufficient pharmacokinetic data in the clinical trials to determine the effect of hepatitis B and/or C virus infection on the pharmacokinetics of cobicistat.

                              

                           
                           
                               
                              Emtricitabine and Tenofovir: Pharmacokinetics of emtricitabine and tenofovir DF have not been fully evaluated in subjects coinfected with hepatitis B and/or C virus.

                              

                           
                           
                               
                              Race
                           
                           
                               
                              Elvitegravir: Population pharmacokinetic analysis of elvitegravir in HIV-1 infected subjects indicated that race had no clinically relevant effect on the exposure of cobicistat-boosted elvitegravir.

                              

                           
                           
                               
                              Cobicistat: Population pharmacokinetics analysis of cobicistat in HIV-1 infected subjects indicated that race had no clinically relevant effect on the exposure of COBI.

                              

                           
                           
                               
                              Emtricitabine: No pharmacokinetic differences due to race have been identified following the administration of EMTRIVA.

                              

                           
                           
                               
                              Tenofovir Disoproxil Fumarate: There were insufficient numbers from racial and ethnic groups other than Caucasian to adequately determine potential pharmacokinetic differences among these populations following the administration of VIREAD.

                              

                           
                           
                               
                              Gender
                           
                           
                               No clinically relevant pharmacokinetic differences have been observed between men and women for cobicistat-boosted elvitegravir, emtricitabine and tenofovir DF.

                              

                           
                           
                               
                              Pediatric Patients
                           
                           
                               Emtricitabine has been studied in pediatric subjects from 3 months to 17 years of age. Tenofovir DF has been studied in pediatric subjects from 2 years to less than 18 years of age. The pharmacokinetics of elvitegravir or cobicistat in pediatric subjects have not been established [see Use in Specific Populations (8.4)].

                                 

                              
                           
                           
                               
                              Geriatric Patients 
                           
                           
                               Pharmacokinetics of elvitegravir, cobicistat, emtricitabine and tenofovir have not been fully evaluated in elderly (65 years of age and older) patients [see Use in Specific Populations (8.5)]. 
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           Assessment of Drug Interactions
                        
                        [see also Contraindications (4) and Drug Interactions (7)]
                        The drug-drug interaction studies described in Tables 8 and 9 were conducted with STRIBILD, elvitegravir (coadministered with cobicistat or RTV), or cobicistat administered alone.
                        As STRIBILD is indicated for use as a complete regimen for the treatment of HIV-1 infection and should not be administered with other antiretroviral medications, information regarding drug-drug interactions with other antiretrovirals agents is not provided [see Warnings and Precautions (5.4)].
                        
                        The effects of coadministered drugs on the exposure of elvitegravir are shown in Table 8. The effects of elvitegravir or cobicistat on the exposure of coadministered drugs are shown in Table 9. For information regarding clinical recommendations, see 
                              Drug Interactions (7)
                           .
                        



                     



                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.4    Microbiology
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           Mechanism of Action
                        
                        
                           
                               
                              Elvitegravir: Elvitegravir inhibits the strand transfer activity of HIV-1 integrase (integrase strand transfer inhibitor; INSTI), an HIV-1 encoded enzyme that is required for viral replication. Inhibition of integrase prevents the integration of HIV-1 DNA into host genomic DNA, blocking the formation of the HIV-1 provirus and propagation of the viral infection. Elvitegravir does not inhibit human topoisomerases I or II.

                              

                           
                           
                               
                              Cobicistat: Cobicistat is a selective, mechanism-based inhibitor of cytochromes P450 of the CYP3A subfamily. Inhibition of CYP3A-mediated metabolism by cobicistat enhances the systemic exposure of CYP3A substrates, such as elvitegravir, where bioavailability is limited and half-life is shortened by CYP3A-dependent metabolism.

                              

                           
                           
                               
                              Emtricitabine: Emtricitabine, a synthetic nucleoside analog of cytidine, is phosphorylated by cellular enzymes to form emtricitabine 5'-triphosphate. Emtricitabine 5'-triphosphate inhibits the activity of the HIV-1 RT by competing with the natural substrate deoxycytidine 5'-triphosphate and by being incorporated into nascent viral DNA which results in chain termination. Emtricitabine 5'-triphosphate is a weak inhibitor of mammalian DNA polymerases α, β, ε, and mitochondrial DNA polymerase γ.

                              

                           
                           
                               
                              Tenofovir DF: Tenofovir DF is an acyclic nucleoside phosphonate diester analog of adenosine monophosphate. Tenofovir DF requires initial diester hydrolysis for conversion to tenofovir and subsequent phosphorylations by cellular enzymes to form tenofovir diphosphate. Tenofovir diphosphate inhibits the activity of HIV-1 RT by competing with the natural substrate deoxyadenosine 5'-triphosphate and, after incorporation into DNA, by DNA chain termination. Tenofovir diphosphate is a weak inhibitor of mammalian DNA polymerases α, β, and mitochondrial DNA polymerase γ.
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           Antiviral Activity in Cell Culture
                        
                        
                           
                               
                              Elvitegravir, Cobicistat, Emtricitabine, and Tenofovir DF: The triple combination of elvitegravir, emtricitabine, and tenofovir was not antagonistic in cell culture combination antiviral activity assays and was not affected by the addition of cobicistat.

                              

                           
                           
                               
                              Elvitegravir: The antiviral activity of elvitegravir against laboratory and clinical isolates of HIV-1 was assessed in T lymphoblastoid cell lines, monocyte/macrophage cells, and primary peripheral blood lymphocytes. The 50% effective concentrations (EC50) ranged from 0.02 to 1.7 nM. Elvitegravir displayed antiviral activity in cell culture against HIV-1 clades A, B, C, D, E, F, G, and O (EC50 values ranged from 0.1 to 1.3 nM) and activity against HIV-2 (EC50 value of 0.53 nM). Elvitegravir did not show inhibition of replication of HBV or HCV in cell culture.

                              

                           
                           
                               
                              Cobicistat: Cobicistat has no detectable antiviral activity in cell culture against HIV-1, HBV, or HCV and does not antagonize the antiviral activity of elvitegravir, emtricitabine, or tenofovir.

                              

                           
                           
                               
                              Emtricitabine: The antiviral activity of emtricitabine against laboratory and clinical isolates of HIV-1 was assessed in T lymphoblastoid cell lines, the MAGI-CCR5 cell line, and primary peripheral blood mononuclear cells. The EC50 values for emtricitabine were in the range of 0.0013–0.64 micromolar. Emtricitabine displayed antiviral activity in cell culture against HIV-1 clades A, B, C, D, E, F, and G (EC50 values ranged from 0.007–0.075 micromolar) and showed strain specific activity against HIV-2 (EC50 values ranged from 0.007–1.5 micromolar).

                              

                           
                           
                               
                              Tenofovir DF: The antiviral activity of tenofovir against laboratory and clinical isolates of HIV-1 was assessed in T lymphoblastoid cell lines, primary monocyte/macrophage cells and peripheral blood lymphocytes. The EC50 values for tenofovir were in the range of 0.04–8.5 micromolar. Tenofovir displayed antiviral activity in cell culture against HIV-1 clades A, B, C, D, E, F, G, and O (EC50 values ranged from 0.5–2.2 micromolar) and showed strain specific activity against HIV-2 (EC50 values ranged from 1.6–5.5 micromolar).
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           Resistance
                        
                        
                           
                               
                              In Cell Culture:
                              

                              Elvitegravir: HIV-1 isolates with reduced susceptibility to elvitegravir have been selected in cell culture. Reduced susceptibility to elvitegravir was associated with the primary integrase substitutions T66A/I, E92G/Q, S147G, and Q148R. Additional integrase substitutions observed in cell culture selection included D10E, S17N, H51Y, F121Y, S153F/Y, E157Q, D232N, R263K, and V281M.

                              

                              

                           
                           
                               
                              Emtricitabine and Tenofovir DF: HIV-1 isolates with reduced susceptibility to emtricitabine or tenofovir have been selected in cell culture. Reduced susceptibility to emtricitabine was associated with M184V/I substitutions in HIV-1 RT. HIV-1 isolates selected by tenofovir expressed a K65R substitution in HIV-1 RT and showed a 2–4 fold reduction in susceptibility to tenofovir.

                              

                           
                           
                               
                              In Clinical Studies:
                              

                              In Treatment-Naïve HIV-1-Infected Adult Subjects: In Studies 102 and 103 [see Clinical Studies (14)], the development of one or more primary substitutions associated with resistance to elvitegravir (T66A/I/K, E92G/Q, T97A, S147G, Q148H/K/R, and N155H), emtricitabine, and/or tenofovir was observed in 53% (16/30) of the STRIBILD-treatment failure subjects with evaluable genotypic resistance data who received at least 8 weeks of STRIBILD and had HIV-1 RNA greater than 400 copies per mL at Week 96 or at the time of early study drug discontinuation. The most common substitutions that emerged were M184V/I (N=15) in HIV-1 RT and the primary elvitegravir resistance-associated substitutions, E92Q (N=9), N155H (N=5), Q148R (N=3), and T66I (N=2) in integrase; K65R in RT was also detected (N=5). In virus isolates harboring the observed primary elvitegravir resistance substitutions, additional substitutions in integrase were detected including H51Y, L68I/V, G70R, I73V, G140C, S153A and E157Q. All subjects with evaluable data for RT and IN and who developed integrase substitutions associated with elvitegravir resistance (N=13) also developed the M184I/V RT substitutions, conferring reduced susceptibility to both elvitegravir and emtricitabine. In phenotypic analyses, HIV-1 isolates expressing M184V/I RT substitutions showed reduced susceptibility to emtricitabine (42- to greater than 152-fold); those expressing the primary elvitegravir resistance-associated integrase substitutions showed reduced susceptibility to elvitegravir (6- to greater than 198-fold); and those expressing the K65R RT substitution showed reduced susceptibility to tenofovir (0.8- to 1.6-fold), compared to wild-type reference HIV-1.
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           Cross Resistance
                        
                        
                           
                               STRIBILD-treatment failure subject isolates exhibited varying degrees of cross resistance within the INSTI and NRTI drug classes depending on the specific substitutions observed. These isolates remained susceptible to all NNRTIs and protease inhibitors.

                              

                           
                           
                               
                              Elvitegravir: Cross-resistance has been observed among INSTIs. Elvitegravir-resistant viruses showed varying degrees of cross-resistance in cell culture to raltegravir depending on the type and number of substitutions in HIV-1 integrase. Of the primary elvitegravir resistance-associated substitutions tested (T66A/I/K, E92G/Q, T97A, S147G, Q148H/K/R, and N155H), all but three (T66I, E92G, and S147G) conferred greater than 1.5-fold reduced susceptibility to raltegravir (above the biological cutoff for raltegravir) when introduced individually into a wild-type virus by site-directed mutagenesis. Of the primary raltegravir resistance-associated substitutions (Y143C/H/R, Q148H/K/R, and N155H), all but Y143C/H conferred greater than 2.5-fold reductions in susceptibility to elvitegravir (above the biological cutoff for elvitegravir).

                              

                           
                           
                               
                              Emtricitabine: Cross-resistance has been observed among NRTIs. Emtricitabine-resistant isolates harboring an M184V/I substitution in HIV-1 RT were cross-resistant to lamivudine. HIV-1 isolates containing the K65R RT substitution, selected in vivo by abacavir, didanosine, and tenofovir, demonstrated reduced susceptibility to inhibition by emtricitabine.

                              

                           
                           
                               
                              Tenofovir DF: Cross-resistance has been observed among NRTIs. The K65R substitution in HIV-1 RT selected by tenofovir is also selected in some HIV-1-infected patients treated with abacavir or didanosine. HIV-1 isolates with the K65R substitution also showed reduced susceptibility to emtricitabine and lamivudine. Therefore, cross-resistance among these NRTIs may occur in patients whose virus harbors the K65R substitution. HIV-1 isolates from patients (N=20) whose HIV-1 expressed a mean of 3 zidovudine-associated RT amino acid substitutions (M41L, D67N, K70R, L210W, T215Y/F, or K219Q/E/N) showed a 3.1-fold decrease in the susceptibility to tenofovir. Subjects whose virus expressed an L74V RT substitution without zidovudine resistance-associated substitutions (N=8) had reduced response to VIREAD. Limited data are available for patients whose virus expressed a Y115F substitution (N=3), Q151M substitution (N=2), or T69 insertion (N=4) in HIV-1 RT, all of whom had a reduced response in clinical trials.
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         