
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           CNS depressants: Increased risk of additive CNS depression. Use with caution in reduced dosages. (7.1)
                           Anticholinergics: Additive risk of urinary retention and paralytic ileus. (7.3)
                           Antidepressants: May cause excessive sedation, acute hypotension and excessive anticholinergic effects. Codeine sulfate should not be used in patients taking MAOIs or within 14 days of stopping such treatment. (7.4)
                           CYP2D6 inhibitors and CYP3A4 inhibitors and inducers: Concomitant use of cytochrome P450 2D6 and 3A4 enzyme inducers or inhibitors may result in an altered response to codeine. Monitor analgesic activity and adverse drug reactions. (7.5)
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 Central Nervous System (CNS) Depressants
                     
                        Concurrent use of other opioids, antihistamines, antipsychotics, antianxiety agents, or other CNS depressants (including sedatives, hypnotics, general anesthetics, antiemetics, phenothiazines, or other tranquilizers or alcohol) concomitantly with codeine sulfate may result in additive CNS depression, respiratory depression, hypotension, profound sedation, or coma. Use codeine sulfate with caution and in reduced dosages in patients taking these agents.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 Mixed Agonist/Antagonist Opioid Analgesics
                     
                        Do not administer mixed agonist/antagonist analgesics (i.e., pentazocine, nalbuphine, and butorphanol) to patients who have received or are receiving a course of therapy with a pure opioid agonist analgesic such as codeine sulfate. In these patients, mixed agonist/antagonist analgesics may reduce the analgesic effect and/or may precipitate withdrawal symptoms.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3 Anticholinergics
                     
                        Anticholinergics or other medications with anticholinergic activity when used concurrently with opioid analgesics may result in increased risk of urinary retention and/or severe constipation, which may lead to paralytic ileus.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4 Antidepressants
                     
                        Use of monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs) or tricyclic antidepressants with codeine sulfate may increase the effect of either the antidepressant or codeine. MAOIs markedly potentiate the action of morphine, the major metabolite of codeine. Codeine should not be used in patients taking MAOIs or within 14 days of stopping such treatment.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.5 CYP2D6 and CYP3A4 Inhibitors and Inducers
                     
                        Codeine is metabolized by the cytochrome P450 2D6 and 3A4 isoenzymes [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)]. Patients taking CYP2D6 inhibitors or CYP3A4 inhibitors or inducers may demonstrate an altered response to codeine, therefore analgesic activity should be monitored.
                        Inhibitors of CYP2D6 or CYP3A4: Since the CYP2D6 and CYP3A4 isoenzymes play a major role in the metabolism of codeine, drugs that inhibit CYP3A4 (e.g., macrolide antibiotics (e.g., erythromycin), azole-antifungal agents (e.g., ketoconazole), protease inhibitors (e.g., ritonavir)), or CYP2D6 activity (e.g., certain cardiovascular drugs including amiodarone and quinidine as well as polycyclic antidepressants), may cause decreased clearance of codeine which could lead to an increase in codeine plasma concentrations. If coadministration with codeine sulfate oral solution is necessary, caution is advised when initiating therapy with, currently taking, or discontinuing CYP450 inhibitors. Evaluate these patients at frequent intervals and consider dose adjustments until stable drug effects are achieved. [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)]
                        
                        Inducers of CYP3A4: CYP450 inducers, such as rifampin, carbamazepine, and phenytoin, may induce the metabolism of codeine and, therefore, may cause increased clearance of the drug which could lead to a decrease in codeine plasma concentrations, lack of efficacy or, possibly, development of an abstinence syndrome in a patient who had developed physical dependence to codeine. If co-administration with codeine sulfate oral solution is necessary, caution is advised when initiating therapy with, currently taking, or discontinuing CYP3A4 inducers. Evaluate these patients at frequent intervals and consider dose adjustments until stable drug effects are achieved.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.6 Drug-Laboratory Test Interaction
                     
                        Codeine may cause an elevation of plasma amylase and lipase due to the potential of codeine to produce spasm of the sphincter of Oddi. Determination of these enzyme levels may be unreliable for some time after an opiate agonist has been given.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         