
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY

               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action

                     
                         Azithromycin is a macrolide antibiotic [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.4)].

                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics

                     
                         The plasma concentration of azithromycin following ocular administration of AzaSite (azithromycin ophthalmic solution) in humans is unknown. Based on the proposed dose of one drop to each eye (total dose of 100 mcL or 1 mg) and exposure information from systemic administration, the systemic concentration of azithromycin following ocular administration is estimated to be below quantifiable limits (≤10 ng/mL) at steady-state in humans, assuming 100% systemic availability.

                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.4 Microbiology

                     
                         Azithromycin acts by binding to the 50S ribosomal subunit of susceptible microorganisms and interfering with microbial protein synthesis.

                         Azithromycin has been shown to be active against most isolates of the following microorganisms, both in vitro and clinically in conjunctival infections [see Indications and Usage (1)].

                        
                           
                               
CDC coryneform group G* 

                           
                               

                              Haemophilus influenzae
                           
                           
                               

                              Staphylococcus aureus
                           
                           
                               

                              Streptococcus mitis group

                           
                               

                              Streptococcus pneumoniae
                           
                           
                               
* Efficacy for this organism was studied in fewer than 10 infections.
                           
                        
                         The following in vitro data are also available, but their clinical significance in ophthalmic infections is unknown. The safety and effectiveness of AzaSite in treating ophthalmological infections due to these microorganisms have not been established.

                         The following microorganisms are considered susceptible when evaluated using systemic break points. However, a correlation between the in vitro systemic breakpoint and ophthalmological efficacy has not been established. This list of microorganisms is provided as an aid only in assessing the potential treatment of conjunctival infections. Azithromycin exhibits in vitro minimal inhibitory concentrations (MICs) of equal or less (systemic susceptible breakpoint) against most (≥90%) of isolates of the following ocular pathogens:

                        
                           
                               

                              Chlamydia pneumoniae
                           
                           
                               

                              Chlamydia trachomatis
                           
                           
                               

                              Legionella pneumophila
                           
                           
                               

                              Moraxella catarrhalis
                           
                           
                               

                              Mycoplasma hominis
                           
                           
                               

                              Mycoplasma pneumoniae
                           
                           
                               

                              Neisseria gonorrhoeae
                           
                           
                               

                              Peptostreptococcus species

                           
                               
Streptococci (Groups C, F, G) 

                           
                               

                              Streptococcus pyogenes
                           
                           
                               

                              Streptococcus agalactiae
                           
                           
                               

                              Ureaplasma urealyticum
                           
                           
                               
Viridans group streptococci

                        
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         