
                     
                     
                     Drug Interactions
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Cholestyramine and Charcoal
                           
                              Administration of cholestyramine or activated charcoal in patients (n=13) and volunteers (n=96) resulted in a rapid and significant decrease in plasma M1 (the active metabolite of leflunomide) concentration (see 
                                    PRECAUTIONS: General: 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Need for Drug Elimination
                                    
                                 ).
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Hepatotoxic Drugs
                           
                              Increased side effects may occur when leflunomide is given concomitantly with hepatotoxic substances. This is also to be considered when leflunomide treatment is followed by such drugs without a drug elimination procedure. In a small (n=30) combination study of leflunomide with methotrexate, a 2- to 3-fold elevation in liver enzymes was seen in 5 of 30 patients. All elevations resolved, 2 with continuation of both drugs and 3 after discontinuation of leflunomide. A >3-fold increase was seen in another 5 patients. All of these also resolved, 2 with continuation of both drugs and 3 after discontinuation of leflunomide. Three patients met “ACR criteria” for liver biopsy (1: Roegnik Grade I, 2: Roegnik Grade IIIa). No pharmacokinetic interaction was identified (see 
                                    CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
                                 ).
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           NSAIDs
                           
                              In in vitro studies, M1 was shown to cause increases ranging from 13 to 50% in the free fraction of diclofenac and ibuprofen at concentrations in the clinical range. The clinical significance of this finding is unknown; however, there was extensive concomitant use of NSAIDs in clinical studies and no differential effect was observed.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Tolbutamide
                           
                              In in vitro studies, M1 was shown to cause increases ranging from 13 to 50% in the free fraction of tolbutamide at concentrations in the clinical range. The clinical significance of this finding is unknown.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Rifampin
                           
                              Following concomitant administration of a single dose of leflunomide to subjects receiving multiple doses of rifampin, M1 peak levels were increased (~ 40%) over those seen when leflunomide was given alone. Because of the potential for leflunomide levels to continue to increase with multiple dosing, caution should be used if patients are to be receiving both leflunomide and rifampin.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Warfarin
                           
                              Increased INR (International Normalized Ratio) when leflunomide and warfarin were co-administered has been rarely reported.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               