
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        Naproxen is a non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID) with analgesic and antipyretic properties. The sodium salt of naproxen has been developed as a more rapidly absorbed formulation of naproxen for use as an analgesic. The mechanism of action of the naproxen anion, like that of other NSAIDs, is not completely understood but may be related to prostaglandin synthetase inhibition.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        Naproxen is rapidly and completely absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract with an in vivo bioavailability of 95%. The different dosage forms of naproxen are bioequivalent in terms of extent of absorption (AUC) and peak concentration (Cmax); however, the products do differ in their pattern of absorption. These differences between naproxen products are related to both the chemical form of naproxen used and its formulation. Even with the observed differences in pattern of absorption, the elimination half-life of naproxen is unchanged across products ranging from 12 to 17 hours. Steady-state levels of naproxen are reached in 4 to 5 days, and the degree of naproxen accumulation is consistent with this half-life. This suggests that the differences in pattern of release play only a negligible role in the attainment of steady-state plasma levels.
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Absorption
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Delayed Release
                                 
                                    Naproxen delayed-release tablets are designed with a pH-sensitive coating to provide a barrier to disintegration in the acidic environment of the stomach and to lose integrity in the more neutral environment of the small intestine. The enteric polymer coating selected for naproxen delayed-release tablets dissolves above pH 6. When naproxen delayed-release tablets were given to fasted subjects, peak plasma levels were attained about 4 to 6 hours following the first dose (range: 2 to 12 hours). An in vivo study in man using radiolabeled naproxen delayed-release tablets demonstrated that naproxen delayed-release tablets dissolve primarily in the small intestine rather than in the stomach, so the absorption of the drug is delayed until the stomach is emptied.
                                    When naproxen delayed-release tablets and naproxen tablets were given to fasted subjects (n = 24) in a crossover study following 1 week of dosing, differences in time to peak plasma levels (Tmax) were observed, but there were no differences in total absorption as measured by Cmax and AUC:
                                    


                                 



                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Antacid Effects
                                 
                                    When naproxen delayed-release tablets were given as a single dose with antacid (54 mEq buffering capacity), the peak plasma levels of naproxen were unchanged, but the time to peak was reduced (mean Tmax fasted 5.6 hours, mean Tmax with antacid 5 hours), although not significantly.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Food Effects
                                 
                                    When naproxen delayed-release tablets were given as a single dose with food, peak plasma levels in most subjects were achieved in about 12 hours (range: 4 to 24 hours). Residence time in the small intestine until disintegration was independent of food intake. The presence of food prolonged the time the tablets remained in the stomach, time to first detectable serum naproxen levels, and time to maximal naproxen levels (Tmax), but did not affect peak naproxen levels (Cmax).
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Distribution
                           
                              Naproxen has a volume of distribution of 0.16 L/kg. At therapeutic levels naproxen is greater than 99% albumin-bound. At doses of naproxen greater than 500 mg/day there is less than proportional increase in plasma levels due to an increase in clearance caused by saturation of plasma protein binding at higher doses (average trough Css 36.5, 49.2, and 56.4 mg/L with 500, 1000 and 1500 mg daily doses of naproxen, respectively). The naproxen anion has been found in the milk of lactating women at a concentration equivalent to approximately 1% of maximum naproxen concentration in plasma (see PRECAUTIONS,
                                     Nursing Mothers
                                 ).
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Metabolism
                           
                              Naproxen is extensively metabolized in the liver to 6-O-desmethyl naproxen, and both parent and metabolites do not induce metabolizing enzymes. Both naproxen and 6-O-desmethyl naproxen are further metabolized to their respective acylglucuronide conjugated metabolites.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Excretion
                           
                              The clearance of naproxen is 0.13 mL/min/kg. Approximately 95% of the naproxen from any dose is excreted in the urine, primarily as naproxen (< 1%), 6-O-desmethyl naproxen (< 1%) or their conjugates (66% to 92%). The plasma half-life of the naproxen anion in humans ranges from 12 to 17 hours. The corresponding half-lives of both naproxen's metabolites and conjugates are shorter than 12 hours, and their rates of excretion have been found to coincide closely with the rate of naproxen disappearance from the plasma. Small amounts, 3% or less of the administered dose, are excreted in the feces. In patients with renal failure metabolites may accumulate (see WARNINGS, 
                                    Renal Effects
                                 ).
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Special Populations
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Pediatric Patients
                                 
                                    In pediatric patients aged 5 to 16 years with arthritis, plasma naproxen levels following a 5 mg/kg single dose of naproxen suspension were found to be similar to those found in normal adults following a 500 mg dose. The terminal half-life appears to be similar in pediatric and adult patients. Pharmacokinetic studies of naproxen were not performed in pediatric patients younger than 5 years of age. Pharmacokinetic parameters appear to be similar following administration of naproxen suspension or tablets in pediatric patients. Naproxen delayed-release tablets have not been studied in subjects under the age of 18.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Geriatric Patients
                                 
                                    Studies indicate that although total plasma concentration of naproxen is unchanged, the unbound plasma fraction of naproxen is increased in the elderly, although the unbound fraction is < 1% of the total naproxen concentration. Unbound trough naproxen concentrations in elderly subjects have been reported to range from 0.12% to 0.19% of total naproxen concentration, compared with 0.05% to 0.075% in younger subjects. The clinical significance of this finding is unclear, although it is possible that the increase in free naproxen concentration could be associated with an increase in the rate of adverse events per a given dosage in some elderly patients.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Race
                                 
                                    Pharmacokinetic differences due to race have not been studied.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Hepatic Insufficiency
                                 
                                    Naproxen pharmacokinetics have not been determined in subjects with hepatic insufficiency.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Renal Insufficiency
                                 
                                    Naproxen pharmacokinetics have not been determined in subjects with renal insufficiency. Given that naproxen, its metabolites and conjugates are primarily excreted by the kidney, the potential exists for naproxen metabolites to accumulate in the presence of renal insufficiency. Elimination of naproxen is decreased in patients with severe renal impairment. Naproxen-containing products are not recommended for use in patients with moderate to severe and severe renal impairment (creatinine clearance < 30 mL/min) (see WARNINGS, 
                                          Renal Effects
                                       ).
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         