
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY

               
                  Tinzaparin sodium is a low molecular weight heparin with antithrombotic properties. Tinzaparin sodium inhibits reactions that lead to the clotting of blood including the formation of fibrin clots, both in vitro and in vivo.  It acts as a potent co-inhibitor of several activated coagulation factors, especially Factors Xa and IIa (thrombin). The primary inhibitory activity is mediated through the plasma protease inhibitor, antithrombin.

                  Bleeding time is usually unaffected by tinzaparin sodium. Activated partial thromboplastin time (aPTT) is prolonged by therapeutic doses of tinzaparin sodium used in the treatment of deep vein thrombosis (DVT).  Prothrombin time (PT) may be slightly prolonged with tinzaparin sodium treatment but usually remains within the normal range.  Neither aPTT nor PT can be used for therapeutic monitoring of tinzaparin sodium.

                  Neither unfractionated heparin nor tinzaparin sodium have intrinsic fibrinolytic activity; therefore, they do not lyse existing clots.  Tinzaparin sodium induces release of tissue factor pathway inhibitor, which may contribute to the antithrombotic effect.  Heparin is also known to have a variety of actions that are independent of its anticoagulant effects.  These include interactions with endothelial cell growth factors, inhibition of smooth muscle cell proliferation, activation of lipoprotein lipase, suppression of aldosterone secretion, and induction of platelet aggregation.

               
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Pharmacokinetics/Pharmacodynamics

                     
                        Anti-Xa and anti-IIa activities are the primary biomarkers for assessing tinzaparin sodium exposure because plasma concentrations of low molecular weight heparins cannot be measured directly.  Because of analytical assay limitations, anti-Xa activity is the more widely used biomarker.  The measurements of anti-Xa and anti-IIa activities in plasma serve as surrogates for the concentrations of molecules which contain the high-affinity binding site for antithrombin (anti-Xa and anti-IIa activities).  Monitoring patients based on anti-Xa activity is generally not advised.  The data are provided in Figure 1 and Table 2. below.

                        Studies with tinzaparin sodium in healthy volunteers and patients have been conducted with both fixed- and weight-adjusted dose administration.  Recommended therapy with tinzaparin sodium is based on weight-adjusted dosing (see 
                              DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION
                           ).

                        
                           Figure 1. Mean and Standard Deviation of Anti-Xa Activity Following SC Administration of a Single 4,500 IU* dose and Once Daily Multiple SC Dose of 175 IU/kg Tinzaparin Sodium to Healthy Volunteers

                        
                        

                        


                     



                     
                     
                        
                           Figure 1. Mean and Standard Deviation of Anti-Xa Activity Following SC Administration of a Single 4,500 IU* dose and Once Daily Multiple SC Dose of 175 IU/kg Tinzaparin Sodium to Healthy Volunteers
                           
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Absorption

                                 
                                    Plasma levels of anti-Xa activity increase in the first 2 to 3 hours following SC injection of tinzaparin sodium and reach a maximum within 4 to 5 hours.  Maximum concentrations (Cmax) of 0.25 and 0.87 IU/mL are achieved following a single SC fixed dose of 4,500 IU (approximately 64.3 IU/kg) and weight-adjusted dose of 175 IU/kg of tinzaparin sodium, respectively.  Based on the extent of absorption (AUC0‑∞), a comparison of 4,500 IU and 12,250 IU single doses indicates that increases in anti-Xa activity are greater than dose proportional relative to the increase in dose. Following a single SC injection of tinzaparin sodium, the mean anti-Xa to anti-IIa activity ratio, based on the area under the anti-Xa and anti-IIa time profiles, is 2.8 and is higher than that of unfractionated heparin (approximately 1.2).  The absolute bioavailability (following 4,500 IU SC and intravenous [IV] administrations) is 86.7% based on anti-Xa activity.

                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Distribution

                                 
                                    The volume of distribution of tinzaparin sodium ranges from 3.1 L to 5.0 L.  These values are similar in magnitude to blood volume, suggesting that the distribution of anti-Xa activity is limited to the central compartment.

                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Metabolism

                                 
                                    Low molecular weight heparins are partially metabolized by desulphation and depolymerization.

                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Elimination

                                 
                                    In healthy volunteers, the elimination half-life following SC administration of 4,500 IU or 175 IU/kg tinzaparin sodium is approximately 3-4 hours based on anti-Xa activity. Clearance following IV administration of 4,500 IU tinzaparin sodium is approximately 1.7 L/hr. The primary route of elimination is renal.  Anti-Xa activity did not accumulate with once daily dosing of 175 IU/kg for five days in healthy volunteers. (See Figure 1 and Table 2.)

                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Special Populations
									
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Population Pharmacokinetics

                                 
                                    Anti-Xa concentrations from approximately 180 patients receiving SC tinzaparin sodium once daily (175 IU/kg body weight) as the treatment of proximal DVT and approximately 240 patients undergoing elective hip replacement surgery receiving SC tinzaparin sodium once daily (~65 IU/kg body weight) were analyzed by population pharmacokinetic methods.  The results indicate that neither age nor gender significantly alter tinzaparin sodium clearance based on anti-Xa activity (see 
                                          PRECAUTIONS, General
                                       ).  However, a reduction in tinzaparin sodium clearance was observed in patients with impaired renal function (reduced calculated creatinine clearance) (see 
                                          Special Populations, Renal Impairment
                                       ).  Weight is also an important factor for the prediction of tinzaparin sodium clearance, consistent with the recommendation that INNOHEP® therapy be based on weight-adjusted dosing (see 
                                          DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION
                                       ).

                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Renal Impairment

                                 
                                    
                                       
                                       
                                       Population Pharmacokinetics

                                       
                                          In patients being treated with tinzaparin sodium (175 IU/kg) for DVT, a population pharmacokinetic (PK) analysis determined that tinzaparin sodium clearance based on anti-Xa activity was related to creatinine clearance calculated by the Cockroft Gault equation.  In this PK analysis, a reduction in tinzaparin sodium clearance in moderate (30-50 mL/min) and severe (<30 mL/min) renal impairment was observed.  Patients with severe renal impairment exhibited a 24% reduction in tinzaparin sodium clearance relative to patients with normal renal function (>80 mL/min).

                                       
                                       
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                       
                                       Hemodialysis Studies

                                       
                                          In a study of 12 chronic renal failure patients undergoing hemodialysis, anti-Xa clearance was reduced 28%, consistent with estimates from the population PK analyses.  In another study of 6 patients undergoing hemodialysis, the half-life of anti-Xa activity following a single IV dose of 75 IU/kg of tinzaparin sodium on an off-dialysis day was prolonged relative to that for healthy volunteers (5.2 versus 1.6 hours).

                                          
INNOHEP® may increase the risk for death, compared to unfractionated heparin (UFH), when administered to elderly patients with renal insufficiency (see

                                                WARNINGS
                                             
 and 

                                                PRECAUTIONS
                                             ).

                                       
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Hepatic Impairment

                                 
                                    No prospective studies have assessed tinzaparin sodium pharmacokinetics or pharmacodynamics in hepatically-impaired patients.  However, the hepatic route is not a major route of elimination of low molecular weight heparins (see 
                                          WARNINGS, Hemorrhage
                                       ).

                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Elderly

                                 
                                    
In a controlled clinical study of elderly patients with renal insufficiency, more patients died after INNOHEP® therapy, compared to patients who received therapy with UFH (see 
                                          WARNINGS
                                       
 and 

                                          PRECAUTIONS
                                       ).

                                    Since renal function declines with age, elimination of tinzaparin sodium may be reduced in elderly patients. In a prospective study of 30 elderly patients [6 men, 24 women; aged 87.0 ± 5.9 years; mean body weight 62.7 ± 14.6 kg; creatinine clearance 40.6 ± 15.3 mL/min (range 20-72)] treated with tinzaparin sodium 175 IU/kg once daily for ten days for acute venous thromboembolism, there was no accumulation of anti-Xa activity based on peak anti-Xa activity levels.

                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Obesity

                                 
                                    Based on the results of a prospective clinical study and the population PK analyses, weight-based dosing is appropriate for heavy/obese patients. Tinzaparin sodium PK parameters based on anti-Xa activity are independent of body weight and body mass index (BMI) when tinzaparin sodium is dosed on a weight basis at 175 IU/kg or 75 IU/kg.  In a prospective study of heavy/obese subjects (101 to 165 kg; BMI 26‑61 kg/m2), anti-Xa activity time profiles were similar to those in normal-weight volunteer studies. Data at the 175 IU/kg dose are shown in Figure 2. Clinical trial experience is limited in patients with a BMI >40 kg/m2.

                                    
                                       Figure 2 Mean and Standard Deviation of Anti-Xa Activity Following a Single SC Administration of 175 IU/kg Tinzaparin Sodium to Obese Subjects and Normal-Weight Volunteers

                                    
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Figure 2 Mean and Standard Deviation of Anti-Xa Activity Following a Single SC Administration of 175 IU/kg Tinzaparin Sodium to Obese Subjects and Normal-Weight Volunteers
                                       
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Pregnancy

                                 
                                    The disposition of INNOHEP® was studied in 54 pregnant patients in any trimester.  In this open-label, prospective, dose finding study, those treated with an INNOHEP® dose of 175 IU/kg had similar 24-hour anti-Xa curves at 28 (n=17) and 36 (n=20) weeks gestation.  The 175 IU/kg dose resulted in a mean anti-Xa level of 0.3 to 1.0 IU/mL 4 hours after administration.  Mean anti-Xa levels 4 hours post dose suggest that as pregnancy advances there is no clinically significant decrease in anti-Xa levels.  Pregnancy has little or no influence on the pharmacokinetics of INNOHEP® and no dosing adjustment is needed for pregnancy.  (See 
                                          Dosage And Administration
                                       .)  

                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         