
               
               
               7. DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           Due to CNS effects, use caution when administering with other centrally-acting drugs. Avoid alcohol. (7.1)
                           Due to hypotensive effects, hypotensive effects of other drugs with this potential may be enhanced. (7.2)
                           Effects of levodopa and dopamine agonists may be antagonized. (7.3)
                           Cimetidine and ranitidine increase the bioavailability of risperidone. (7.5)
                           Clozapine may decrease clearance of risperidone. (7.6)
                           Fluoxetine and paroxetine increase plasma concentrations of risperidone. (7.10)
                           Carbamazepine and other enzyme inducers decrease plasma concentrations of risperidone. (7.11)
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     7.1 Centrally-Acting Drugs and Alcohol
                     
                        Given the primary CNS effects of risperidone, caution should be used when RISPERIDONE is taken in combination with other centrally-acting drugs and alcohol.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     7.2 Drugs with Hypotensive Effects
                     
                        Because of its potential for inducing hypotension, RISPERIDONE may enhance the hypotensive effects of other therapeutic agents with this potential.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     7.3 Levodopa and Dopamine Agonists
                     
                        RISPERIDONE may antagonize the effects of levodopa and dopamine agonists.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     7.4 Amitriptyline
                     
                        Amitriptyline did not affect the pharmacokinetics of risperidone or risperidone and 9-hydroxyrisperidone combined.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     7.5 Cimetidine and Ranitidine
                     
                        Cimetidine and ranitidine increased the bioavailability of risperidone by 64% and 26%, respectively. However, cimetidine did not affect the AUC of risperidone and 9-hydroxyrisperidone combined, whereas ranitidine increased the AUC of risperidone and 9-hydroxyrisperidone combined by 20%.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     7.6 Clozapine
                     
                        Chronic administration of clozapine with RISPERIDONE may decrease the clearance of risperidone.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     7.7 Lithium
                     
                        Repeated oral doses of RISPERIDONE (3 mg twice daily) did not affect the exposure (AUC) or peak plasma concentrations (Cmax) of lithium (n=13).
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     7.8 Valproate
                     
                        Repeated oral doses of RISPERIDONE (4 mg once daily) did not affect the pre-dose or average plasma concentrations and exposure (AUC) of valproate (1000 mg/day in three divided doses) compared to placebo (n=21). However, there was a 20% increase in valproate peak plasma concentration (Cmax) after concomitant administration of RISPERIDONE.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     7.9 Digoxin
                     
                        RISPERIDONE (0.25 mg twice daily) did not show a clinically relevant effect on the pharmacokinetics of digoxin.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     7.10 Drugs That Inhibit CYP 2D6 and Other CYP Isozymes
                     
                        Risperidone is metabolized to 9-hydroxyrisperidone by CYP 2D6, an enzyme that is polymorphic in the population and that can be inhibited by a variety of psychotropic and other drugs [see CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY (12.3)]. Drug interactions that reduce the metabolism of risperidone to 9-hydroxyrisperidone would increase the plasma concentrations of risperidone and lower the concentrations of 9-hydroxyrisperidone. Analysis of clinical studies involving a modest number of poor metabolizers (n @ 70) does not suggest that poor and extensive metabolizers have different rates of adverse effects. No comparison of effectiveness in the two groups has been made.
                        
                           In vitro studies showed that drugs metabolized by other CYP isozymes, including 1A1, 1A2, 2C9, 2C19, and 3A4, are only weak inhibitors of risperidone metabolism.
                        Fluoxetine and Paroxetine
                        Fluoxetine (20 mg once daily) and paroxetine (20 mg once daily) have been shown to increase the plasma concentration of risperidone 2.5- to 2.8- fold and 3- to 9- fold, respectively. Fluoxetine did not affect the plasma concentration of 9-hydroxyrisperidone. Paroxetine lowered the concentration of 9-hydroxyrisperidone by about 10%. When either concomitant fluoxetine or paroxetine is initiated or discontinued, the physician should re-evaluate the dosing of RISPERIDONE. The effects of discontinuation of concomitant fluoxetine or paroxetine therapy on the pharmacokinetics of risperidone and 9-hydroxyrisperidone have not been studied.
                        Erythromycin
                        There were no significant interactions between RISPERIDONE and erythromycin.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     7.11 Carbamazepine and Other Enzyme Inducers
                     
                        Carbamazepine co-administration decreased the steady-state plasma concentrations of risperidone and 9-hydroxyrisperidone by about 50%. Plasma concentrations of carbamazepine did not appear to be affected. The dose of RISPERIDONE may need to be titrated accordingly for patients receiving carbamazepine, particularly during initiation or discontinuation of carbamazepine therapy. Co-administration of other known enzyme inducers (e.g., phenytoin, rifampin, and phenobarbital) with RISPERIDONE may cause similar decreases in the combined plasma concentrations of risperidone and 9-hydroxyrisperidone, which could lead to decreased efficacy of RISPERIDONE treatment.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     7.12 Drugs Metabolized by CYP 2D6
                     
                        
                           In vitro studies indicate that risperidone is a relatively weak inhibitor of CYP 2D6. Therefore, RISPERIDONE is not expected to substantially inhibit the clearance of drugs that are metabolized by this enzymatic pathway. In drug interaction studies, RISPERIDONE did not significantly affect the pharmacokinetics of donepezil and galantamine, which are metabolized by CYP 2D6.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         