
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Thyroid hormones exert their physiologic actions through control of DNA transcription and protein synthesis.  Triiodothyronine (T3) and levothyroxine (T4) diffuse into the cell nucleus and bind to thyroid receptor proteins attached to DNA.  This hormone nuclear receptor complex activates gene transcription and synthesis of messenger RNA and cytoplasmic proteins.
                        The physiological actions of thyroid hormones are produced predominantly by T3, the majority of which (approximately 80%) is derived from T4 by deiodination in peripheral tissues.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        Thyroid hormone synthesis and secretion is regulated by the hypothalamic pituitary-thyroid axis.  Thyrotropin releasing hormone (TRH) released from the hypothalamus stimulates secretion of thyrotropin stimulating hormone (TSH) from the anterior pituitary.  TSH, in turn, is the physiologic stimulus for the synthesis and secretion of thyroid hormones, T4 and T3, by the thyroid gland.  Circulating serum T3 and T4 levels exert a feedback effect on both TRH and TSH secretion.  When serum T3 and T4 levels increase, TRH and TSH secretion decrease. When thyroid hormone levels decrease, TRH and TSH secretion increases.  TSH is used for the diagnosis of hypothyroidism and evaluation of levothyroxine therapy adequacy with other laboratory and clinical data 
                              [see Dosage ( 2.1)].
                              There are drugs known to affect thyroid hormones and TSH by various mechanisms and those examples are diazepam, ethioamide, lovastatin, metoclopramide, 6-mercaptopurine, nitroprusside, perphenazine, and thiazide diuretics.  Some drugs may cause a transient decrease in TSH secretion without hypothyroidism and those drugs (dose) are dopamine (greater than 1 mcg per kg per min), glucocorticoids (hydrocortisone greater than 100 mg per day or equivalent) and octreotide (greater than 100 mcg per day).
                        Thyroid hormones regulate multiple metabolic processes and play an essential role in normal growth and development, and normal maturation of the central nervous system and bone.  The metabolic actions of thyroid hormones include augmentation of cellular respiration and thermogenesis, as well as metabolism of proteins, carbohydrates and lipids.  The protein anabolic effects of thyroid hormones are essential to normal growth and development.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        
                           
                              Absorption 
                           – Levothyroxine Sodium for Injection is administered via the intravenous route.  Following administration, the synthetic levothyroxine cannot be distinguished from the natural hormone that is secreted endogenously.  
                        
                           
                              Distribution –
                            Circulating thyroid hormones are greater than 99% bound to plasma proteins, including thyroxine binding globulin (TBG), thyroxine binding prealbumin (TBPA), and albumin (TBA), whose capacities and affinities vary for each hormone.  The higher affinity of both TBG and TBPA for T4 partially explains the higher serum levels, slower metabolic clearance, and longer half life of T4 compared to T3.  Protein bound thyroid hormones exist in reverse equilibrium with small amounts of free hormone.  Only unbound hormone is metabolically active.  Many drugs and physiologic conditions affect the binding of thyroid hormones to serum proteins 
                              [see Warnings and Precautions ( 5) and Drug Interactions ( 7)]
                           .   Thyroid hormones do not readily cross the placental barrier 
                              [see Warnings and Precautions ( 5) and Use in Specific Populations ( 8)].
                           
                        
                        
                           
                              Metabolism
                            – T4 is slowly eliminated.  The major pathway of thyroid hormone metabolism is through sequential deiodination.  Approximately eighty percent of circulating T3 is derived from peripheral T4 by monodeiodination.  The liver is the major site of degradation for both T4 and T3, with T4 deiodination also occurring at a number of additional sites, including the kidney and other tissues.  Approximately 80% of the daily dose of T4 is deiodinated to yield equal amounts of T3 and reverse T3 (r T3).  T3 and r T3 are further deiodinated to diiodothyronine.  Thyroid hormones are also metabolized via conjugation with glucuronides and sulfates and excreted directly into the bile and gut where they undergo enterohepatic recirculation.
                        
                           
                              Elimination 
                           – Thyroid hormones are primarily eliminated by the kidneys.  A portion of the conjugated hormone reaches the colon unchanged, where it is hydrolyzed and eliminated in feces as the free hormones.  Urinary excretion of T4 decreases with age.
                        
                           
                              Table 1:
                            Pharmacokinetic Parameters of Thyroid Hormones in Euthyroid Patients
                        


                        


T4:  Levothyroxine
                        T3:  Liothyronine
                        
                           1 3 to 4 days in hyperthyroidism, 9 to 10 days in hypothyroidism.
                        
                           2 Includes TBG, TBPA, and TBA.
                        
                           
                              Drug Interactions
                           
                        
                        A listing of drug interaction with T4 is provided in the following tables, although it may not be comprehensive due to the introduction of new drugs that interact with the thyroidal axis or the discovery of previously unknown interactions.  The prescriber should be aware of this fact and should consult appropriate reference sources (e.g., package inserts of newly approved drugs, medical literature) for additional information if a drug-drug interaction with levothyroxine is suspected.
                        
                           
                              Table 2:
                            Drugs That May Alter T4 and T3 Serum Transport Without Affecting free T4 Concentration (Euthyroidism)
                        


                        



                           
                              Table 3:
                             Drugs That May Alter Hepatic Metabolism of T4 (Hypothyroidism)
                        Potential impact: Stimulation of hepatic microsomal drug-metabolizing enzyme activity may cause increased hepatic degradation of levothyroxine, resulting in increased levothyroxine requirements.
                        


                        



                           
                              Table 4:
                             Drugs That May Decrease Conversion of T4 to T3
                        
                        Potential impact: Administration of these enzyme inhibitors decreases the peripheral conversion of T4 to T3, leading to decreased T3 levels.  However, serum T4 levels are usually normal but may occasionally be slightly increased.
                        


