
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Bedaquiline is a diarylquinoline antimycobacterial drug [see Microbiology (12.4)].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        Bedaquiline is primarily subjected to oxidative metabolism leading to the formation of N-monodesmethyl metabolite (M2). M2 is not thought to contribute significantly to clinical efficacy given its lower average exposure (23% to 31%) in humans and lower antimycobacterial activity (4-fold to 6-fold lower) compared to the parent compound. However, M2 plasma concentrations appeared to correlate with QT prolongation.
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Cardiac Electrophysiology
                              
                              In Study 1, the mean increases in QTcF, corrected using the Fridericia method, were greater in the SIRTURO treatment group compared to the placebo treatment group from the first week of treatment (9.9 ms at Week 1 for SIRTURO and 3.5 ms for placebo). The largest mean increase in QTcF during the 24 weeks of SIRTURO treatment was 15.7 ms compared to 6.2 ms with placebo treatment (at Week 18). After bedaquiline treatment ended, the QTcF gradually decreased, and the mean value was similar to that in the placebo group by study week 60.
                              In Study 3, where patients with no treatment options received other QT-prolonging drugs used to treat tuberculosis, including clofazimine, concurrent use with SIRTURO resulted in additive QTcF prolongation, proportional to the number of QT prolonging drugs in the treatment regimen. Patients taking SIRTURO alone with no other QT prolonging drug developed a mean QTcF increase over baseline of 23.7 ms with no QTcF segment duration in excess of 480 ms, whereas patients taking at least 2 other QT prolonging drugs developed a mean QTcF prolongation of 30.7 ms over baseline, and resulted in QTcF segment duration in excess of 500 ms in one patient. [See Warnings and Precautions (5.3)]
                              
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Absorption
                              
                              After oral administration of SIRTURO maximum plasma concentrations (Cmax) are typically achieved at approximately 5 hours post-dose. Cmax and the area under the plasma concentration-time curve (AUC) increased proportionally up to the highest doses studied [700 mg single-dose (1.75 times the 400 mg loading dose)] [see Dosage and Administration (2.3)]. Administration of SIRTURO with a standard meal containing approximately 22 grams of fat (558 total Kcal) increased the relative bioavailability by about 2-fold compared to administration under fasted conditions. Therefore, SIRTURO should be taken with food to enhance its oral bioavailability.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Distribution
                              
                              The plasma protein binding of bedaquiline is greater than 99.9%. The volume of distribution in the central compartment is estimated to be approximately 164 Liters.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Metabolism
                              
                              CYP3A4 was the major CYP isoenzyme involved in vitro in the metabolism of bedaquiline and the formation of the N-monodesmethyl metabolite (M2), which is 4 to 6-times less active in terms of antimycobacterial potency.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Elimination
                              
                              After reaching Cmax, bedaquiline concentrations decline tri-exponentially. The mean terminal elimination half-life of bedaquiline and the N-monodesmethyl metabolite (M2) is approximately 5.5 months. This long terminal elimination phase likely reflects slow release of bedaquiline and M2 from peripheral tissues.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Excretion
                              
                              Based on preclinical studies, bedaquiline is mainly eliminated in feces. The urinary excretion of unchanged bedaquiline was less than or equal to 0.001% of the dose in clinical studies, indicating that renal clearance of unchanged drug is insignificant.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Specific Populations
                              
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Hepatic Impairment: After single-dose administration of 400 mg SIRTURO to 8 patients with moderate hepatic impairment (Child-Pugh B), mean exposure to bedaquiline and M2 (AUC672h) was approximately 20% lower compared to healthy subjects. SIRTURO has not been studied in patients with severe hepatic impairment. [See Warnings and Precautions (5.3) and Use in Specific Populations (8.6)].
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Renal Impairment: SIRTURO has mainly been studied in patients with normal renal function. Renal excretion of unchanged bedaquiline is not substantial (less than or equal to 0.001%).
                                    In a population pharmacokinetic analysis of MDR-TB patients treated with SIRTURO 200 mg three times per week, creatinine clearance was not found to influence the pharmacokinetic parameters of bedaquiline. It is therefore not expected that mild or moderate renal impairment will have a clinically relevant effect on the exposure to bedaquiline. However, in patients with severe renal impairment or end-stage renal disease requiring hemodialysis or peritoneal dialysis bedaquiline concentrations may be increased due to alteration of drug absorption, distribution, and metabolism secondary to renal dysfunction. As bedaquiline is highly bound to plasma proteins, it is unlikely that it will be significantly removed from plasma by hemodialysis or peritoneal dialysis [see Use in Specific Populations (8.7)].
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Sex: In a population pharmacokinetic analysis of MDR-TB patients treated with SIRTURO no clinically relevant difference in exposure between men and women were observed.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Race/Ethnicity: In a population pharmacokinetic analysis of MDR-TB patients treated with SIRTURO, systemic exposure (AUC) to bedaquiline was found to be 34% lower in Black patients than in patients from other race categories. This lower exposure was not considered to be clinically relevant as no clear relationship between exposure to bedaquiline and response has been observed in clinical trials of MDR-TB. Furthermore, response rates were comparable in patients of different race categories that completed 24 weeks of bedaquiline treatment.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       HIV Co-infection: There are limited data on the use of SIRTURO in HIV co-infected patients [see Drug Interactions (7)].
                                    
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Geriatric Population: There are limited data on the use of SIRTURO in tuberculosis patients 65 years and older.
                                    In a population pharmacokinetic analysis of MDR-TB patients treated with SIRTURO, age was not found to influence the pharmacokinetics of bedaquiline.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Pediatric
                                        Population: The pharmacokinetics of SIRTURO in pediatric patients have not been evaluated.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Drug-Drug Interactions
                              
                              
                                 In vitro, bedaquiline does not significantly inhibit the activity of the following CYP450 enzymes that were tested: CYP1A2, CYP2A6, CYP2C8/9/10, CYP2C19, CYP2D6, CYP2E1, CYP3A4, CYP3A4/5 and CYP4A, and it does not induce CYP1A2, CYP2C9, CYP2C19, or CYP3A4 activities.
                              Bedaquiline is an in vitro substrate of CYP3A4, and because of this, the following clinical drug interaction studies were performed.
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Ketoconazole: Co-administration of multiple-dose bedaquiline (400 mg once daily for 14 days) and multiple-dose ketoconazole (once daily 400 mg for 4 days) in healthy subjects increased the AUC24h, Cmax and Cmin of bedaquiline by 22% [90% CI (12; 32)], 9% [90% CI (-2, 21)] and 33% [90% CI (24, 43)] respectively [see Drug Interactions (7.1) and (7.4)].
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Rifampin: In a drug interaction study of single-dose 300 mg bedaquiline and multiple-dose rifampin (once daily 600 mg for 21 days) in healthy subjects, the exposure (AUC) to bedaquiline was reduced by 52% [90% CI (-57; -46)] [see Drug Interactions (7.1)].
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Antimicrobial agents: The combination of multiple-dose bedaquiline 400 mg once daily with multiple-dose isoniazid/pyrazinamide (300 mg/2000 mg once daily) in healthy subjects did not result in clinically relevant changes in the exposure (AUC) to bedaquiline, isoniazid or pyrazinamide [see Drug Interactions (7.2)
                                       ].
                                    In a placebo-controlled study in patients with MDR-TB, no major impact of co-administration of bedaquiline on the pharmacokinetics of ethambutol, kanamycin, pyrazinamide, ofloxacin or cycloserine was observed.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Lopinavir/ritonavir: In a drug interaction study in healthy volunteers of single-dose bedaquiline (400 mg) and multiple-dose lopinavir (400 mg)/ritonavir (100 mg) given twice daily for 24 days, the mean AUC of bedaquiline was increased by 22% [90% CI (11; 34)] while the mean Cmax was not substantially affected [see Drug Interactions (7.3)].
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Nevirapine: Co-administration of multiple-dose nevirapine 200 mg twice daily for 4 weeks in HIV-infected patients with a single 400 mg dose of bedaquiline did not result in clinically relevant changes in the exposure to bedaquiline [see Drug Interactions (7.3)].
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Efavirenz: Co-administration of a single dose of bedaquiline 400 mg and efavirenz 600 mg daily for 27 days to healthy volunteers resulted in approximately a 20% decrease in the AUCinf of bedaquiline; the Cmax of bedaquiline was not altered. The AUC and Cmax of the primary metabolite of bedaquiline (M2) were increased by 70% and 80%, respectively. The effect of efavirenz on the pharmacokinetics of bedaquiline and M2 following steady-state administration of bedaquiline has not been evaluated [see Drug Interactions (7.3)].
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.4 Microbiology
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Mechanism of Action
                              
                              SIRTURO is a diarylquinoline antimycobacterial drug that inhibits mycobacterial ATP (adenosine 5'-triphosphate) synthase, by binding to subunit c of the enzyme that is essential for the generation of energy in M. tuberculosis.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Drug Resistance
                              
                              A potential for development of resistance to bedaquiline in M. tuberculosis exists. Modification of the atpE target gene, and/or upregulation of the MmpS5-MmpL5 efflux pump have been associated with increased bedaquiline MIC values in isolates of M. tuberculosis.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Cross-Resistance
                              
                              
                                 M. tuberculosis isolates from a clinical study in patients with MDR-TB that developed at least 4-fold increase in bedaquiline MIC were associated with upregulation of the MmpS5-MmpL5 efflux pump and were found to be cross-resistant to clofazimine.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Activity In Vitro and in Clinical Infections
                              
                              SIRTURO has been shown to be active in vitro and in clinical infections against most isolates of M. tuberculosis [see Indications and Usage (1)
                                  and 
                                    Clinical Studies (14)].
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Susceptibility Test Methods
                              
                              
                                 In vitro susceptibility tests should be performed according to published methods1,2, and a MIC value should be reported. However, no correlation was seen between the culture conversion rates at Week 24 and baseline MICs in clinical studies (Table 2) and susceptibility test interpretive criteria for bedaquiline cannot be established at this time. A specialist in drug-resistant TB should be consulted in evaluating therapeutic options.
                              When susceptibility testing is performed by resazurin microtiter assay (REMA, a broth microdilution method) or agar methods, a range of concentrations from 0.008 microgram per mL to 2.0 micrograms per mL should be assessed. The minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) should be determined as the lowest concentration of bedaquiline that results in complete inhibition of growth by agar methods or the lowest concentration of bedaquiline that prevents a visible change of resazurin color from blue to pink by a broth method (REMA). All assays should be performed in polystyrene plates or tubes. Löwenstein-Jensen (LJ) medium should not be used for the susceptibility test. Bedaquiline working solution should be prepared in dimethylsulfoxide (DMSO). An inoculum of approximately 105 colony forming units/mL should be used for both liquid and solid media.
                              The bedaquiline agar (left) and broth (REMA) (right) MIC distributions against clinical isolates resistant to isoniazid and rifampin from Studies 1, 2, and 3 are provided below.
                              


                              


MICs for baseline M. tuberculosis isolates from subjects in Studies 1 and 3 and their sputum culture conversion rates at Week 24 are shown in Table 2 below.
                              


                           



                           
                           
                              
                                 Figure 1
                                 
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Quality Control
                              
                              Susceptibility test procedures require the use of laboratory controls to monitor and ensure the accuracy and precision of testing. Assays using standard bedaquiline powder should provide the following range of MIC values shown in Table 3.
                              


