
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           Avoid use of strong and moderate CYP3A4 inducers with SIRTURO. (7.1, 7.3)
                           Avoid use for more than 14 consecutive days of systemic strong CYP3A4 inhibitors with SIRTURO unless the benefit outweighs the risk. Monitor for SIRTURO-related adverse reactions. (7.1)
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1	CYP3A4 Inducers/Inhibitors
                     
                        Bedaquiline exposure may be reduced during co-administration with inducers of CYP3A4 and increased during co-administration with inhibitors of CYP3A4.
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 CYP3A4 Inducers
                              
                              Due to the possibility of a reduction of the therapeutic effect of bedaquiline because of the decrease in systemic exposure, co-administration of strong CYP3A4 inducers, such as rifamycins (i.e., rifampin, rifapentine and rifabutin), or moderate CYP3A4 inducers should be avoided during treatment with SIRTURO [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 CYP3A4 inhibitors
                              
                              Due to the potential risk of adverse reactions to bedaquiline because of the increase in systemic exposure, prolonged co-administration of bedaquiline and strong CYP3A4 inhibitors, such as ketoconazole or itraconazole, for more than 14 consecutive days should be avoided unless the benefit outweighs the risk [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)]. Appropriate clinical monitoring for SIRTURO-related adverse reactions is recommended.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2	Other Antimicrobial Medications
                     
                        No dose-adjustment of isoniazid or pyrazinamide is required during co-administration with SIRTURO.
                        In a placebo-controlled clinical trial in patients with MDR-TB, no major impact of co-administration of SIRTURO on the pharmacokinetics of ethambutol, kanamycin, pyrazinamide, ofloxacin or cycloserine was observed.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3	Antiretroviral Medications
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Lopinavir/ritonavir
                              
                              Although clinical data in HIV/MDR-TB co-infected patients on the combined use of lopinavir (400 mg)/ritonavir (100 mg) with SIRTURO are not available, use SIRTURO with caution when co-administered with lopinavir/ritonavir and only if the benefit outweighs the risk [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Nevirapine
                              
                              No dosage adjustment of bedaquiline is required when co-administered with nevirapine [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Efavirenz
                              
                              Concomitant administration of bedaquiline and efavirenz, or other moderate CYP3A inducers, should be avoided [see Warnings and Precautions (5.4)].
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4	QT Interval Prolonging Drugs
                     
                        In a drug interaction study of bedaquiline and ketoconazole, a greater effect on QTc was observed after repeated dosing with bedaquiline and ketoconazole in combination than after repeated dosing with the individual drugs. Additive or synergistic QT prolongation was observed when bedaquiline was co-administered with other drugs that prolong the QT interval.
                        In Study 3, mean increases in QTc were larger in the 17 subjects who were taking clofazimine with bedaquiline at Week 24 (mean change from reference of 31.9 ms) than in subjects who were not taking clofazimine with bedaquiline at Week 24 (mean change from baseline of 12.3 ms). Monitor ECGs if SIRTURO is co-administered to patients receiving other drugs that prolong the QTc interval, and discontinue SIRTURO if evidence of serious ventricular arrhythmia or QTcF interval greater than 500 ms. [see Warnings and Precautions (5.2) and Clinical Pharmacology (12.2)].
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         