
               
               
               
                  7  DRUG INTERACTIONS 

               
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                            Mixed agonist/antagonist opioid analgesics: Avoid use with KADIAN because they may reduce analgesic effect of KADIAN or precipitate withdrawal symptoms. (5.11, 7.3)
                            Muscle relaxants: Avoid use with KADIAN because of increased risk of respiratory depression. (7.4)
                            Monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs): Avoid KADIAN in patients taking MAOIs or within 14 days of stopping such treatment. (7.5)
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                        7.1 Alcohol

                     
                     
                        Concomitant use of alcohol with KADIAN can result in an increase of morphine plasma levels and potentially fatal overdose of morphine. [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                        7.2 CNS Depressants

                     
                     
                        Concurrent use of KADIAN and other central nervous system (CNS) depressants (e.g. sedatives, hypnotics, general anesthetics, antiemetics, phenothiazines, other tranquilizers, and alcohol) can increase the risk of respiratory depression, hypotension, and profound sedation or coma. Monitor patients receiving CNS depressants and KADIAN for signs of respiratory depression and hypotension. When such combined therapy is contemplated, reduce the initial dose of one or both agents.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                        7.3 Mixed Agonist/Antagonist Opioid Analgesics

                     
                     
                        Mixed agonist/antagonist analgesics may reduce the analgesic effect of KADIAN and/or may precipitate withdrawal symptoms in these patients.  Avoid the use of agonist/antagonist analgesics (i.e., pentazocine, nalbuphine, butorphanol) in patients receiving KADIAN.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                        7.4 Muscle Relaxants

                     
                     
                        Opioids may enhance the neuromuscular blocking action of skeletal relaxants and produce an increased degree of respiratory depression.  Monitor patients receiving muscle relaxants and KADIAN for signs of respiratory depression that may be greater than otherwise expected.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                        7.5 Monoamine Oxidase Inhibitors (MAOIs)

                     
                     
                        The effects of morphine may be potentiated by MAOIs.  Monitor patients on concurrent therapy with an MAOI and KADIAN for increased respiratory and central nervous system depression. KADIAN should not be used in patients taking MAOIs or within 14 days of stopping such treatment.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                        7.6 Cimetidine

                     
                     
                        Cimetidine can potentiate morphine-induced respiratory depression. There is a report of confusion and severe respiratory depression when a patient undergoing hemodialysis was concurrently administered morphine and cimetidine.  Monitor patients for respiratory depression when KADIAN and cimetidine are used concurrently.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                        7.7 Diuretics

                     
                     
                        Morphine can reduce the efficacy of diuretics by inducing the release of antidiuretic hormone. Morphine may also lead to acute retention of urine by causing spasm of the sphincter of the bladder, particularly in men with enlarged prostates.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                        7.8 Anticholinergics

                     
                     
                        Anticholinergics or other drugs with anticholinergic activity when used concurrently with opioid analgesics may result in increased risk of urinary retention and/or severe constipation, which may lead to paralytic ileus.  Monitor patients for signs of urinary retention or reduced gastric motility when KADIAN is used concurrently with anticholinergic drugs.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                        7.9 P-Glycoprotein (PGP) Inhibitors

                     
                     
                        PGP inhibitors (e.g. quinidine) may increase the absorption/exposure of morphine by about two-fold.  Monitor patients for signs of respiratory and central nervous system depression when PGP inhibitors are used concurrently with KADIAN.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         