
               
               
               
                  7
                    
                  DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           If simvastatin is co-administered with amlodipine, do not exceed doses greater than 20 mg daily of simvastatin (7)
                           NSAIDS use may lead to increased risk of renal impairment and loss of anti-hypertensive effect (7)
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        7.1 Drug/Drug Interactions
                     
                     
                        No drug interaction studies have been conducted with Exforge and other drugs, although studies have been conducted with the individual amlodipine and valsartan components, as described below: 
                        
                           Studies with Amlodipine
                        
                        In clinical trials, amlodipine has been safely administered with thiazide diuretics, beta-blockers, angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors, long-acting nitrates, sublingual nitroglycerin, digoxin, warfarin, non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, antibiotics, and oral hypoglycemic drugs. 
                        
                           Cimetidine: Co-administration of amlodipine with cimetidine did not alter the pharmacokinetics of amlodipine. 
                        
                           Grapefruit juice: Co-administration of 240 mL of grapefruit juice with a single oral dose of amlodipine 10 mg in 20 healthy volunteers had no significant effect on the pharmacokinetics of amlodipine. 
                        
                           Maalox
                           
                              ®
                           
                            (antacid): Co-administration of the antacid Maalox with a single dose of amlodipine had no significant effect on the pharmacokinetics of amlodipine. 
                        
                           Sildenafil: A single 100 mg dose of sildenafil (Viagra®**) in subjects with essential hypertension had no effect on the pharmacokinetic parameters of amlodipine. When amlodipine and sildenafil were used in combination, each agent independently exerted its own blood pressure lowering effect. 
                        
                           Atorvastatin: Co-administration of multiple 10 mg doses of amlodipine with 80 mg of atorvastatin resulted in no significant change in the steady state pharmacokinetic parameters of atorvastatin. 
                        
                           Digoxin: Co-administration of amlodipine with digoxin did not change serum digoxin levels or digoxin renal clearance in normal volunteers. 
                        
                           Warfarin: Co-administration of amlodipine with warfarin did not change the warfarin prothrombin response time. 
                        
                           Simvastatin: Co-administration of multiple doses of 10 mg of amlodipine with 80 mg simvastatin resulted in a 77% increase in exposure to simvastatin compared to simvastatin alone.  Limit the dose of simvastatin in patients on amlodipine to 20 mg daily.
                        
                           Studies with Valsartan
                        
                        No clinically significant pharmacokinetic interactions were observed when valsartan was co-administered with amlodipine, atenolol, cimetidine, digoxin, furosemide, glyburide, hydrochlorothiazide, or indomethacin. The valsartan-atenolol combination was more antihypertensive than either component, but it did not lower the heart rate more than atenolol alone. 
                        
                           Warfarin: Co-administration of valsartan and warfarin did not change the pharmacokinetics of valsartan or the time-course of the anticoagulant properties of warfarin. 
                        
                           Non-Steroidal Anti-Inflammatory Agents including Selective Cyclooxygenase-2 Inhibitors (COX-2 Inhibitors)
                           :  In patients who are elderly, volume-depleted (including those on diuretic therapy), or with compromised renal function, co-administration of NSAIDs, including selective COX-2 inhibitors, with angiotensin II receptor antagonists, including valsartan, may result in deterioration of renal function, including possible acute renal failure.  These effects are usually reversible.  Monitor renal function periodically in patients receiving valsartan and NSAID therapy.  
                        The antihypertensive effect of angiotensin II receptor antagonists, including valsartan may be attenuated by NSAIDs including selective COX-2 inhibitors.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        7.2 CYP 450 Interactions
                     
                     
                        
                           In vitro metabolism studies indicate that CYP 450 mediated drug interactions between valsartan and co-administered drugs are unlikely because of low extent of metabolism [see Pharmacokinetics, Valsartan (12.3)].  As with other drugs that block angiotensin II or its effects, concomitant use of potassium sparing diuretics (e.g., spironolactone, triamterene, amiloride), potassium supplements, or salt substitutes containing potassium may lead to increases in serum potassium and in heart failure patients to increases in serum creatinine. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        7.3 
                        Transporters
                     
                     
                        The results from an in vitro study with human liver tissue indicate that valsartan is a substrate of the hepatic uptake transporter OATP1B1 and the hepatic efflux transporter MRP2.  Co-administration of inhibitors of the uptake transporter (rifampin, cyclosporine) or efflux transporter (ritonavir) may increase the systemic exposure to valsartan. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        7.4 Clinical Laboratory Findings
                     
                     
                        
                           Creatinine
                           :
                            In hypertensive patients, greater than 50% increases in creatinine occurred in 0.4% of patients receiving Exforge and 0.6% receiving placebo. In heart failure patients, greater than 50% increases in creatinine were observed in 3.9% of valsartan-treated patients compared to 0.9% of placebo-treated patients. In post-myocardial infarction patients, doubling of serum creatinine was observed in 4.2% of valsartan-treated patients and 3.4% of captopril-treated patients.
                        
                           Liver Function Tests
                           : Occasional elevations (greater than 150%) of liver chemistries occurred in Exforge-treated patients.
                        
                           Serum Potassium
                           : In hypertensive patients, greater than 20% increases in serum potassium were observed in 2.8% of Exforge-treated patients compared to 3.4% of placebo-treated patients. In heart failure patients, greater than 20% increases in serum potassium were observed in 10% of valsartan-treated patients compared to 5.1% of placebo-treated patients. 
                        
                           Blood Urea Nitrogen (BUN)
                           : In hypertensive patients, greater than 50% increases in BUN were observed in 5.5% of Exforge-treated patients compared to 4.7% of placebo-treated patients. In heart failure patients, greater than 50% increases in BUN were observed in 16.6% of valsartan-treated patients compared to 6.3% of placebo-treated patients. 
                        
                           Neutropenia:  Neutropenia was observed in 1.9% of patients treated with Diovan and 0.8% of patients treated with placebo.  
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         