
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
            CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGYPropoxyphene is a centrally acting narcotic analgesic agent. Equimolar doses of propoxyphene hydrochloride or napsylate providesimilar plasma concentrations. Following administration of 65, 130, or 195 mg of propoxyphene hydrochloride, the bioavailabilityof propoxyphene is equivalent to that of 100, 200, or 300 mg respectively of propoxyphene napsylate. Peak plasma concentrations ofpropoxyphene are reached in 2 to 2 1/2 hours. After a 100 mg oral dose of propoxyphene napsylate, peak plasma levels of 0.05 to 0.1mcg/mL are achieved. As shown in Figure 1, the napsylate salt tends to be absorbed more slowly than the hydrochloride. At or neartherapeutic doses, this absorption difference is small when compared with that among subjects and among doses.Figure 1. Mean plasma concentrations of propoxyphene in 8 human subjects following oral administration of 65 and 130 mg of thehydrochloride salt and 100 and 200 mg of the napsylate salt and in 7 given 195 mg of the hydrochloride and 300 mg of the napsylatesalt. page 2 of 8 Because of this several hundredfold difference in solubility, the absorption rate of very large doses of the napsylate salt is significantlylower than that of equimolar doses of the hydrochloride.Repeated doses of propoxyphene at 6-hour intervals lead to increasing plasma concentrations, with a plateau after the ninth dose at 48hours.Propoxyphene is metabolized in the liver to yield norpropoxyphene. Propoxyphene has a half-life of 6 to 12 hours, whereas that ofnorpropoxyphene is 30 to 36 hours.Norpropoxyphene has substantially less central-nervous-system-depressant effect than propoxyphene but a greater local anestheticeffect, which is similar to that of amitriptyline and antiarrhythmic agents, such as lidocaine and quinidine.In animal studies in which propoxyphene and norpropoxyphene were continuously infused in large amounts, intracardiacconduction time (PR and QRS intervals) was prolonged. Any intracardiac conduction delay attributable to high concentrations ofnorpropoxyphene may be of relatively long duration.ActionsPropoxyphene is a mild narcotic analgesic structurally related to methadone. The potency of propoxyphene napsylate is from twothirds to equal that of codeine.Propoxyphene napsylate and acetaminophen tablets provide the analgesic activity of propoxyphene napsylate and the antipyretic-analgesic activity of acetaminophen.The combination of propoxyphene and acetaminophen produces greater analgesia than that produced by either propoxyphene oracetaminophen administered alone.INDICATIONS AND USAGEThis product is indicated for the relief of mild to moderate pain, either when pain is present alone or when it is accompanied by fever.

               
               
            
         