


CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY




Pharmacodynamics
Ketorolac
                                    tromethamine is a nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID).
                                    Ketorolac tromethamine inhibits synthesis of prostaglandins and
                                    may be considered a peripherally acting analgesic. The
                                    biological activity of ketorolac tromethamine is associated with
                                    the S-form. Ketorolac tromethamine possesses no sedative or              anxiolytic properties.Pain relief
                                    was statistically different after ketorolac tromethamine dosing
                                    from that of placebo at 1/2 hour (the first time point at which
                                    it was measured) following the largest recommended doses of
                                    ketorolac tromethamine and by 1 hour following the smallest
                                    recommended doses. The peak analgesic effect occurred within 2       to 3 hours and was not statistically significantly different
                                    over the recommended dosage range of ketorolac tromethamine. The
                                    greatest difference between large and small doses of ketorolac
                                    tromethamine by either route was in the duration of
                                analgesia.






Pharmacokinetics
Ketorolac
                                    tromethamine is a racemic mixture of [-]S- and [+]R-enantiomeric
                                    forms, with the S-form having analgesic activity.




Comparison
                                        of IV, IM and Oral Pharmacokinetics
The
                                            pharmacokinetics of ketorolac tromethamine, following
                                            IV, IM and oral doses of ketorolac tromethamine are
                                            compared in Table 1. The extent of bioavailability
                                            following administration of the ORAL and IM forms of
                                            ketorolac tromethamine was equal to that following an IV                                         bolus.






Linear
                                        Kinetics
Following administration of single ORAL, IM or IV doses
                                            of ketorolac tromethamine in the recommended dosage
                                            ranges, the clearance of the racemate does not change.         This implies that the pharmacokinetics of ketorolac
                                            tromethamine in humans, following single or multiple IM,
                                            IV or recommended oral doses of ketorolac tromethamine,
                                            are linear. At the higher recommended doses, there is a
                                            proportional increase in the concentrations of free and
                                            bound racemate.






Binding and
                                        Distribution
The
                                            ketorolac tromethamine racemate has been shown to be
                                            highly protein bound (99%). Nevertheless, even plasma
                                            concentrations as high as 10 mcg/mL will only occupy
                                            approximately 5% of the albumin binding sites. Thus, the
                                            unbound fraction for each enantiomer will be constant
                                            over the therapeutic range. A decrease in serum albumin,
                                            however, will result in increased free drug
                                            concentrations.The
                                            mean apparent volume (Vß) of ketorolac
                                            tromethamine following complete distribution was
                                            approximately 13 liters. This parameter was determined
                                            from single-dose data.ß) of ketorolac
                                            tromethamine following complete distribution was
                                            approximately 13 liters. This parameter was determined
                                            from single-dose data.






Metabolism
Ketorolac tromethamine is largely metabolized in the
                                            liver. The metabolic products are hydroxylated and
                                            conjugated forms of the parent drug. The products of
                                            metabolism, and some unchanged drug, are excreted in the
                                            urine.






Clearance
                                        and Excretion
A
                                            single-dose study with 10 mg ketorolac tromethamine
                                            (n=9) demonstrated that the S-enantiomer is cleared
                                            approximately two times faster than the R-enantiomer and
                                            that the clearance was independent of the route of
                                            administration. This means that the ratio of S/R plasma
                                            concentrations decreases with time after each dose.
                                            There is little or no inversion of the R- to S-form in
                                            humans. The clearance of the racemate in normal
                                            subjects, elderly individuals and in hepatically and
                                            renally impaired patients is outlined in Table 2. The
                                            half-life of the ketorolac tromethamine S-enantiomer was
                                            approximately 2.5 hours (SD ± 0.4) compared with 5 hours
                                            (SD ± 1.7) for the R-enantiomer. In other studies, the
                                            half-life for the racemate has been reported to lie
                                            within the range of 5 to 6 hours.






Accumulation
Ketorolac tromethamine administered as an IV bolus
                                            every 6 hours for 5 days to healthy subjects (n=13),
                                            showed no significant difference in Cmax on
                                            Day 1 and Day 5. Trough levels averaged 0.29 mcg/mL (SD± 0.13) on Day 1 and 0.55 mcg/mL (SD ± 0.23) on Day 6.
                                            Steady state was approached after the fourth dose.max on
                                            Day 1 and Day 5. Trough levels averaged 0.29 mcg/mL (SD± 0.13) on Day 1 and 0.55 mcg/mL (SD ± 0.23) on Day 6.
                                            Steady state was approached after the fourth dose.Accumulation of ketorolac tromethamine has not been
                                            studied in special populations (elderly patients, renal
                                            failure patients or hepatic disease
                                        patients).






Kinetics in
                                        Special Populations




Elderly Patients:
Based on single-dose data only, the half-life
                                                  of the ketorolac tromethamine racemate increased                                                  from 5 to 7 hours in the elderly (65 to 78
                                                  years) compared with young healthy volunteers
                                                  (24 to 35 years) (see Table 2). There was little
                                                  difference in the Cmax for the two
                                                  groups (elderly, 2.52 mcg/mL ± 0.77; young, 2.99
                                                  mcg/mL ± 1.03) (see PRECAUTIONS--Use In The
                                                  Elderly).max for the two
                                                  groups (elderly, 2.52 mcg/mL ± 0.77; young, 2.99
                                                  mcg/mL ± 1.03) (see 






Renally Impaired Patients:
Based on single-dose data only, the mean
                                                  half-life of ketorolac tromethamine in renally
                                                  impaired patients is between 6 and 19 hours and
                                                  is dependent on the extent of the impairment.
                                                  There is poor correlation between creatinine
                                                  clearance and total ketorolac tromethamine
                                                  clearance in the elderly and populations with
                                                  renal impairment (r=0.5).In
                                                  patients with renal disease, the AUC∞
                                                  of each enantiomer increased by approximately
                                                  100% compared with healthy volunteers. The
                                                  volume of distribution doubles for the
                                                  S-enantiomer and increases by 1/5th for the
                                                  R-enantiomer. The increase in volume of
                                                  distribution of ketorolac tromethamine implies
                                                  an increase in unbound fraction.∞
                                                  of each enantiomer increased by approximately
                                                  100% compared with healthy volunteers. The
                                                  volume of distribution doubles for the
                                                  S-enantiomer and increases by 1/5th for the
                                                  R-enantiomer. The increase in volume of
                                                  distribution of ketorolac tromethamine implies
                                                  an increase in unbound fraction.The AUC∞-ratio of the ketorolac
                                                  tromethamine enantiomers in healthy subjects and
                                                  patients remained similar, indicating there was
                                                  no selective excretion of either enantiomer in
                                                  patients compared to healthy subjects (seeWARNINGS - Renal
                                                Effects).∞-ratio of the ketorolac
                                                  tromethamine enantiomers in healthy subjects and
                                                  patients remained similar, indicating there was
                                                  no selective excretion of either enantiomer in
                                                  patients compared to healthy subjects (see






Hepatic Effects:
There was no significant difference in                                   estimates of half-life, AUC∞ and
                                                  Cmax in 7 patients with liver
                                                  disease compared to healthy volunteers (seePRECAUTIONS - Hepatic Effects).∞ and
                                                  C%
                                                  Dose metabolized = <50%
                                                  Dose excreted in feces = 6%
                                                  Dose excreted in urine = 91%
                                                  Plasma protein binding = 99*
                                                  Derived from PO pharmacokinetic studies in 77
                                                  normal fasted volunteers†
                                                  Derived from IM pharmacokinetic studies in 54
                                                  normal volunteers‡Derived from IV pharmacokinetic studies in 24
                                                  normal volunteers§Mean value was simulated from observed plasma
                                                  concentration data and standard deviation was                                    simulated from percent coefficient of variation
                                                  for observed Cmax and Tmax
                                                  datamax and T||
                                                  Not applicable because 60 mg is only recommended
                                                  as a single dose1 Time-to-peak plasma
                                                  concentration1 Time-to-peak plasma
                                                  concentration2 Peak plasma concentration2 Peak plasma concentration3 Trough plasma concentration3 Trough plasma concentration4 Average plasma concentration4 Average plasma concentration5 Volume of distribution5 Volume of distribution1Estimated from 30 mg single IM
                                                  doses of ketorolac tromethamine1Estimated from 30 mg single IM
                                                  doses of ketorolac tromethamine2Estimated from 10 mg single
                                                  Oral doses of ketorolac tromethamine2Estimated from 10 mg single
                                                  Oral doses of ketorolac tromethamine3Liters/Hour/Kilogram3Liters/Hour/KilogramIV
                                                  Administration: In normal subjects (n=37), the
                                                  total clearance of 30 mg&
                                                  IV-administered ketorolac tromethamine was 0.030
                                                  (0.017-0.051) L/h/kg. The Terminal Half-Life was
                                                  5.6 (4-7.9) hours.











Clinical Studies
The
                                    analgesic efficacy of intramuscularly, intravenously and orally
                                    administered ketorolac tromethamine was investigated in two
                                    postoperative pain models: general surgery (orthopedic,         gynecologic and abdominal) and oral surgery (removal of impacted
                                    third molars). The studies were double-blind, single- and
                                    multiple-dose, parallel trial designs in patients with moderate
                                    to severe pain at baseline. Ketorolac Tromethamine Injection was
                                    compared as follows: IM to meperidine or morphine administered
                                    intramuscularly and IV to morphine administered either directly
                                    IV or through a PCA (Patient-Controlled Analgesia)
                                pump.




Short-Term
                                        Use (Up to 5 Days) Studies:
In
                                            the comparisons of intramuscular administration during
                                            the first hour, the onset of analgesic action was
                                            similar for ketorolac tromethamine and the narcotics,
                                            but the duration of analgesia was longer with ketorolac
                                            tromethamine than with the opioid comparators meperidine
                                            or morphine.Ina multi-dose, postoperative (general surgery)
                                            double-blind trial of ketorolac tromethamine 30 mg IM
                                            versus morphine 6 and 12 mg IM, each drug given on an“as needed” basis for up to 5 days, the overall
                                            analgesic effect of ketorolac tromethamine 30 mg IM was
                                            between that of morphine 6 and 12 mg. The majority of
                                            patients treated with either ketorolac tromethamine or
                                            morphine were dosed for up to 3 days; a small percentage
                                            of patients received 5 days of dosing.In
                                            clinical settings where perioperative morphine was
                                            allowed, ketorolac tromethamine 30 mg IV, given once or
                                            twice as needed, provided analgesia comparable to
                                            morphine 4 mg IV once or twice as needed. There was
                                            relatively limited experience with 5 consecutive days of
                                            ketorolac tromethamine IV use in controlled clinical
                                            trials, as most patients were given the drug for 3 days
                                            or less. The adverse events seen with IV-administered
                                            ketorolac tromethamine were similar to those observed
                                            with IM-administered ketorolac tromethamine, as would be
                                            expected based on the similar pharmacokinetics and                       bioequivalence (AUC, clearance, plasma half-life) of IV
                                            and IM routes of ketorolac tromethamine
                                        administration.






Clinical
                                        Studies With Concomitant Use of Opioids:
Clinical studies in postoperative pain management have
                                            demonstrated that Ketorolac Tromethamine Injection, when     used in combination with opioids, significantly reduced
                                            opioid consumption. This combination may be useful in
                                            the subpopulation of patients especially prone to
                                            opioid-related complications. Ketorolac tromethamine and
                                            narcotics should not be administered in the same
                                            syringe. In a postoperative study, where all patients
                                            received morphine by a PCA device, patients treated with
                                            ketorolac tromethamine IV as fixed intermittent boluses
                                            (e.g., 30 mg initial dose followed by 15 mg q3h),
                                            required significantly less morphine (26%) than the
                                            placebo group. Analgesia was significantly superior, at
                                            various postdosing pain assessment times, in the
                                            patients receiving ketorolac tromethamine IV plus PCA
                                            morphine as compared to patients receiving
                                            PCA-administered morphine alone.






Postmarketing Surveillance Study:
A
                                            large postmarketing observational, non-randomized study,
                                            involving approximately 10,000 patients receiving
                                            ketorolac tromethamine, demonstrated that the risk of
                                            clinically serious gastrointestinal (GI) bleeding was
                                            dose-dependent (see Tables 3A and 3B). This was
                                            particularly true in elderly patients who received an
                                            average daily dose greater than 60 mg/day of ketorolac
                                            tromethamine (Table 3A).





















