
               
               
               Drug Interactions
               
                  Codeine: 
                  In patients receiving MAO inhibitors, an initial small test dose is advisable to allow observation of any excessive narcotic effects or MAOI interaction.
                  Promethazine: 
                  
                     CNS depressants – Promethazine may increase, prolong, or intensify the sedative action of other central-nervous-system depressants, such as alcohol, sedatives/hypnotics (including barbiturates), narcotics, narcotic analgesics, general anesthetics, tricyclic antidepressants, and tranquilizers; therefore, such agents should be avoided or administered in reduced dosage to patients receiving promethazine HCl. When given concomitantly with promethazine, the dose of barbiturates should be reduced by at least one-half, and the dose of narcotics should be reduced by one-quarter to one-half. Dosage must be individualized. Excessive amounts of promethazine HCl relative to a narcotic may lead to restlessness and motor hyperactivity in the patient with pain; these symptoms usually disappear with adequate control of the pain.
                  
                     Epinephrine – Because of the potential for promethazine to reverse epinephrine’s vasopressor effect, epinephrine should NOT be used to treat hypotension associated with promethazine overdose.
                  
                     Anticholinergics – Concomitant use of other agents with anticholinergic properties should be undertaken with caution.
                  
                     Monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOI) – Drug interactions, including an increased incidence of extrapyramidal effects, have been reported when some MAOI and phenothiazines are used concomitantly.
               
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Drug/Laboratory Test Interactions
                     
                        Because narcotic analgesics may increase biliary tract pressure with resultant increases in plasma amylase or lipase levels, determination of these enzyme levels may be unreliable for 24 hours after a narcotic analgesic has been given
                        The following laboratory tests may be affected in patients who are receiving therapy with promethazine hydrochloride.
                        Pregnancy Tests: Diagnostic pregnancy tests based on immunological reactions between HCG and anti-HCG may result in false-negative or false-positive interpretations.
                        Glucose Tolerance Test: An increase in blood glucose has been reported in patients receiving promethazine.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Carcinogenesis, Mutagenesis, Impairment of Fertility
                     
                        Long-term animal studies have not been performed to assess the carcinogenic potential of codeine or of promethazine, nor are there other animal or human data concerning carcinogenicity, mutagenicity, or impairment of fertility with these agents. Codeine has been reported to show no evidence of carcinogenicity or mutagenicity in a variety of test systems, including the micronucleus and sperm abnormality assays and the Salmonella assay. Promethazine was nonmutagenic in the Salmonella test system of Ames.
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Pregnancy
                           
                              
                                 Teratogenic Effects – Pregnancy Category C
                              
                              
                                 Codeine: A study in rats and rabbits reported no teratogenic effect of codeine administered during the period of organogenesis in doses ranging from 5 to 120 mg/kg. In the rat, doses at the 120mg/ kg level, in the toxic range for the adult animal, were associated with an increase in embryo resorption at the time of implantation. In another study a single 100-mg/ kg dose of codeine administered to pregnant mice reportedly resulted in delayed ossification in the offspring.
                              There are no studies in humans, and the significance of these findings to humans, if any, is not known.
                              
                                 Promethazine: Teratogenic effects have not been demonstrated in ratfeeding studies at doses of 6.25 and 12.5 mg/kg of promethazine HCl. These doses are from approximately 2.1 to 4.2 times the maximum recommended total daily dose of promethazine for a 50kg subject, depending upon the indication for which the drug is prescribed. Daily doses of 25 mg/kg intraperitoneally have been found to produce fetal mortality in rats.
                              Specific studies to test the action of the drug on parturition, lactation, and development of the animal neonate were not done, but a general preliminary study in rats indicated no effect on these parameters. Although antihistamines have been found to produce fetal mortality in rodents, the pharmacological effects of histamine in the rodent do not parallel those in man. There are no adequate and wellcontrolled studies of promethazine in pregnant women.
                              Promethazine and codeine should be used during pregnancy only if the potential benefit justifies the potential risk to the fetus.
                              
                                 Nonteratogenic Effects: Dependence has been reported in newborns whose mothers took opiates regularly during pregnancy. Withdrawal signs include irritability, excessive crying, tremors, hyperreflexia, fever, vomiting, and diarrhea. Signs usually appear during the first few days of life.
                              Promethazine administered to a pregnant woman within two weeks of delivery may inhibit platelet aggregation in the newborn.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Labor and Delivery
                     
                        Narcotic analgesics cross the placental barrier. The closer to delivery and the larger the dose used, the greater the possibility of respiratory depression in the newborn. Narcotic analgesics should be avoided during labor if delivery of a premature infant is anticipated. If the mother has received narcotic analgesics during labor, newborn infants should be observed closely for signs of respiratory depression. Resuscitation may be required (see 
                              OVERDOSAGE
                           ).
                        Limited data suggest that use of promethazine hydrochloride during labor and delivery does not have an appreciable effect on the duration of labor or delivery and does not increase the risk of need for intervention in the newborn.
                        The effect of promethazine and/or codeine on later growth and development of the newborn is unknown.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Nursing Mothers
                     
                        It is not known whether promethazine is excreted in human milk.
                        Codeine is secreted into human milk. In women with normal codeine metabolism (normal CYP2D6 activity), the amount of codeine secreted into human milk is low and dose-dependent. Despite the common use of codeine products to manage postpartum pain, reports of adverse events in infants are rare. However, some women are ultra-rapid metabolizers of codeine. These women achieve higher-than-expected serum levels of codeine’s active metabolite, morphine, leading to higher-than-expected levels of morphine in breast milk and potentially dangerously high serum morphine levels in their breastfed infants. Therefore, maternal use of codeine can potentially lead to serious adverse reactions, including death, in nursing infants.
                        The risk of infant exposure to codeine and morphine through breast milk should be weighed against the benefits of breastfeeding for both the mother and baby. Caution should be exercised when codeine is administered to a nursing woman. If a codeine containing product is selected, the lowest dose should be prescribed for the shortest period of time to achieve the desired clinical effect. Mothers using codeine should be informed about when to receive immediate medical care and how to identify the signs and symptoms of neonatal toxicity, such as drowsiness or sedation, difficulty breastfeeding, breathing difficulties, and decreased tone, in their baby. Nursing mothers who are ultra-rapid metabolizers may also experience overdose symptoms such as extreme sleepiness, confusion or shallow breathing. Prescribers should closely monitor mother-infant pairs and notify treating pediatricians about the use of codeine during breastfeeding. (See 
                              WARNINGS - Death Related to Ultra-Rapid Metabolism of Codeine to Morphine).
                        Caution should be exercised when Promethazine Hydrochloride and Codeine Phosphate Syrup is administered to a nursing woman.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Pediatric Use
                     
                        
                           THE COMBINATION OF PROMETHAZINE HYDROCHLORIDE AND CODEINE PHOSPHATE IS CONTRAINDICATED IN PEDIATRIC PATIENTS LESS THAN 6 YEARS OF AGE, BECAUSE THE COMBINATION MAY CAUSE FATAL RESPIRATORY DEPRESSION IN THIS AGE POPULATION (see WARNINGS – Boxed Warning and Use in Pediatric Patients). 
                        Respiratory depression and death have occurred in children with obstructive sleep apnea who received codeine in the post-operative period following tonsillectomy and/or adenoidectomy and had evidence of being ultra-rapid metabolizers of codeine (i.e., multiple copies of the gene for cytochrome P450 isoenzyme CYP2D6 or high morphine concentrations). These children may be particularly sensitive to the respiratory depressant effects of codeine that has been rapidly metabolized to morphine. Codeine is contraindicated for post-operative pain management in these patients (see 
                              WARNINGS – Death Related to Ultra-Rapid Metabolism of Codeine to Morphine and CONTRAINDICATIONS).
                        The combination of promethazine hydrochloride and codeine phosphate should be used with caution in pediatric patients 6 years and older (see 
                              WARNINGS - Use in Pediatric Patients
                           ).
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Geriatric Use
                     
                        Clinical studies of Promethazine Hydrochloride and Codeine Phosphate Syrup did not include sufficient numbers of subjects aged 65 and over to determine whether they respond differently from younger subjects. Other reported clinical experience has not identified differences in responses between the elderly and younger patients. In general, dose selection for an elderly patient should be cautious, usually starting at the low end of the dosing range, reflecting the greater frequency of decreased hepatic, renal or cardiac function, and of concomitant disease or other drug therapy. 
                        Sedating drugs may cause confusion and over-sedation in the elderly; elderly patients generally should be started on low doses of Promethazine Hydrochloride and Codeine Phosphate Syrup and observed closely.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         