
                     
                     
                     Drug Interactions:
                     
                        
                           
                               Drugs with ototoxic potential (see 
                                 
                                    WARNINGS
                                 
                              ): Especially in the presence of impaired renal function, the use of parenterally administered bumetanide in patients to whom aminoglycoside antibiotics are also being given should be avoided, except in life-threatening conditions.
                           
                               Drugs with nephrotoxic potential: There has been no experience on the concurrent use of bumetanide with drugs known to have a nephrotoxic potential. Therefore, the simultaneous administration of these drugs should be avoided.
                           
                               Lithium: Lithium should generally not be given with diuretics (such as bumetanide) because they reduce its renal clearance and add a high risk of lithium toxicity.
                           
                               Probenecid: Pretreatment with probenecid reduces both the natriuresis and hyperreninemia produced by bumetanide. This antagonistic effect of probenecid on bumetanide natriuresis is not due to a direct action on sodium excretion but is probably secondary to its inhibitory effect on renal tubular secretion of bumetanide. Thus, probenecid should not be administered concurrently with bumetanide.
                           
                               Indomethacin: Indomethacin blunts the increases in urine volume and sodium excretion seen during bumetanide treatment and inhibits the bumetanide-induced increase in plasma renin activity. Concurrent therapy with bumetanide is thus not recommended.
                           
                               Antihypertensives: Bumetanide may potentiate the effect of various antihypertensive drugs, necessitating a reduction in the dosage of these drugs.
                           
                               Digoxin: Interaction studies in humans have shown no effect on digoxin blood levels.
                           
                               Anticoagulants: Interaction studies in humans have shown bumetanide to have no effect on warfarin metabolism or on plasma prothrombin activity.
                        
                     
                     
                  
               