
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              •Diuretics: Excessive drop in blood pressure (7.1) 
                           
                              •NSAIDS: Increased risk of renal impairment and loss of antihypertensive efficacy (7.3) 
                           
                              •Dual inhibition of the renin-angiotensin system: Increased risk of renal impairment, hypotension and hyperkalemia (7.4) 
                           
                              •Lithium: Symptoms of lithium toxicity (7.5) 
                           
                              •Gold: Nitritoid reactions have been reported (7.6) 
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 Diuretics
                     
                        Initiation of lisinopril in patients on diuretics may result in excessive reduction of blood pressure. The possibility of hypotensive effects with lisinopril can be minimized by either decreasing or discontinuing the diuretic or increasing the salt intake prior to initiation of treatment with lisinopril. If this is not possible, reduce the starting dose of lisinopril [see Dosage and Administration (2.2) and Warnings and Precautions (5.4)].
                        Lisinopril attenuates potassium loss caused by thiazide-type diuretics. Potassium-sparing diuretics (spironolactone, amiloride, triamterene, and others) can increase the risk of hyperkalemia. Therefore, if concomitant use of such agents is indicated, monitor the patient’s serum potassium frequently.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 Antidiabetics
                     
                        Concomitant administration of lisinopril and antidiabetic medicines (insulins, oral hypoglycemic agents) may cause an increased blood-glucose-lowering effect with risk of hypoglycemia.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3 Non-Steroidal Anti-Inflammatory Agents Including Selective Cyclooxygenase-2 Inhibitors (COX-2 Inhibitors)
                     
                        In patients who are elderly, volume-depleted (including those on diuretic therapy), or with compromised renal function, coadministration of NSAIDs, including selective COX-2 inhibitors, with ACE inhibitors, including lisinopril, may result in deterioration of renal function, including possible acute renal failure. These effects are usually reversible. Monitor renal function periodically in patients receiving lisinopril and NSAID therapy. 
                        The antihypertensive effect of ACE inhibitors, including lisinopril, may be attenuated by NSAIDs.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4 Dual Blockade of the Renin-Angiotensin System (RAS)
                     
                        Dual blockade of the RAS with angiotensin receptor blockers, ACE inhibitors, or aliskiren is associated with increased risks of hypotension, hyperkalemia, and changes in renal function (including acute renal failure) compared to monotherapy. 
                        The VA NEPHRON trial enrolled 1448 patients with type 2 diabetes, elevated urinary-albumin-to-creatinine ratio, and decreased estimated glomerular filtration rate (GFR 30 to 89.9 ml/min), randomized them to lisinopril or placebo on a background of losartan therapy and followed them for a median of 2.2 years. Patients receiving the combination of losartan and lisinopril did not obtain any additional benefit compared to monotherapy for the combined endpoint of decline in GFR, end state renal disease, or death, but experienced an increased incidence of hyperkalemia and acute kidney injury compared with the monotherapy group. 
                        In general, avoid combined use of RAS inhibitors. Closely monitor blood pressure, renal function and electrolytes in patients on lisinopril and other agents that affect the RAS. 
                        Do not coadminister aliskiren with lisinopril in patients with diabetes. Avoid use of aliskiren with lisinopril in patients with renal impairment (GFR <60 ml/min).
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.5 Lithium
                     
                        Lithium toxicity has been reported in patients receiving lithium concomitantly with drugs which cause elimination of sodium, including ACE inhibitors. Lithium toxicity was usually reversible upon discontinuation of lithium and the ACE inhibitor. Monitor serum lithium levels during concurrent use.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.6 Gold
                     
                        Nitritoid reactions (symptoms include facial flushing, nausea, vomiting and hypotension) have been reported rarely in patients on therapy with injectable gold (sodium aurothiomalate) and concomitant ACE inhibitor therapy including lisinopril.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         