
                     
                     
                     Drug Interactions 
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Theophylline
                           
                              Erythromycin use in patients who are receiving high doses of theophylline may be associated with an increase in serum theophylline levels and potential theophylline toxicity. In case of theophylline toxicity and/or elevated serum theophylline levels, the dose of theophylline should be reduced while the patient is receiving concomitant erythromycin therapy.
                              There have been published reports suggesting that when oral erythromycin is given concurrently with theophylline there is a significant decrease in erythromycin serum concentrations of approximately 35 percent. The mechanism by which this interaction occurs is unknown. The decrease in erythromycin concentrations due to co-administration of theophylline could result in subtherapeutic concentrations of erythromycin.
                              Hypotension, bradyarrhythmias, and lactic acidosis have been observed in patients receiving concurrent verapamil, belonging to the calcium channel blockers drug class.
                              Concomitant administration of erythromycin and digoxin has been reported to result in elevated digoxin serum levels.
                              There have been reports of increased anticoagulant effects when erythromycin and oral anticoagulants were used concomitantly. Increased anticoagulation effects due to interactions of erythromycin with oral anticoagulants may be more pronounced in the elderly.
                              Erythromycin is a substrate and inhibitor of the 3A isoform subfamily of the cytochrome P450 enzyme system (CYP3A). Co-administration of erythromycin and a drug primarily metabolized by CYP3A may be associated with elevations in drug concentrations that could increase or prolong both the therapeutic and adverse effects of the concomitant drug. Dosage adjustments may be considered, and when possible, serum concentrations of drugs primarily metabolized by CYP3A should be monitored closely in patients concurrently receiving erythromycin.
                              The following are examples of some clinically significant CYP3A based drug interactions. Interactions with other drugs metabolized by the CYP3A isoform are also possible. The following CYP3A based drug interactions have been observed with erythromycin products in post-marketing experience:
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Ergotamine/dihydroergotamine
                           
                              Post-marketing reports indicate that co-administration of erythromycin with ergotamine or dihydroergotamine has been associated with acute ergot toxicity characterized by vasospasm and ischemia of the extremities and other tissues including central nervous system. Concomitant administration of erythromycin with ergotamine or dihydroergotamine is contraindicated (see
                                     CONTRAINDICATIONS
                                 ).
                              Triazolobenzodiazepines (such as triazolam and alprazolam) and related benzodiazepines
                              Erythromycin has been reported to decrease the clearance of triazolam and midazolam, and thus, may increase the pharmacologic effect of these benzodiazepines.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           HMG-CoA Reductase Inhibitors
                           
                              Erythromycin has been reported to increase concentrations of HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors (for example, lovastatin and simvastatin). Rare reports of rhabdomyolysis have been reported in patients taking these drugs concomitantly.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Sildenafil (Viagra)
                           
                              Erythromycin has been reported to increase the systemic exposure (AUC) of sildenafil. Reduction of sildenafil dosage should be considered. (See Viagra package insert.)
                              There have been spontaneous or published reports of CYP3A based interactions of erythromycin with carbamazepine, cyclosporine, tacrolimus, alfentanil, disopyramide, bromocriptine, rifabutin, quinidine methylprednisolone, cilostazol, and vinblastine. 
                              Concomitant administration of erythromycin with cisapride, pimozide, astemizole, or terfenadine is contraindicated (see
                                     CONTRAINDICATIONS
                                 ).
                              In addition, there have been reports of interactions of erythromycin with drugs not thought to be metabolized by CYP3A, including hexobarbital, phenytoin, and valproate.
                              Erythromycin has been reported to significantly alter the metabolism of the nonsedating antihistamines terfenadine and astemizole when taken concomitantly. Rare cases of serious cardiovascular adverse events, including electrocardiographic QT/QTc interval prolongation, cardiac arrest, torsades de pointes, and other ventricular arrhythmias, have been observed (see
                                     CONTRAINDICATIONS
                                 ). In addition, deaths have been reported rarely with concomitant administration of terfenadine and erythromycin.
                              There have been post-marketing reports of drug interactions when erythromycin was co-administered with cisapride, resulting in QT prolongation, cardiac arrhythmias, ventricular tachycardia, ventricular fibrillation, and torsades de pointes, most likely due to the inhibition of hepatic metabolism of cisapride by erythromycin. Fatalities have been reported (see
                                     CONTRAINDICATIONS
                                 ).
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Colchicine
                           
                              Colchicine is a substrate for both CYP3A4 and the efflux transporter P-glycoprotein (P-gp). Erythromycin is considered a moderate inhibitor of CYP3A4. A significant increase in colchicine plasma concentration is anticipated when co-administered with moderate CYP3A4 inhibitors such as erythromycin. If co-administration of colchicine and erythromycin is necessary, the starting dose of colchicine may need to be reduced, and the maximum colchicine dose should be lowered. Patients should be monitored for clinical symptoms of colchicine toxicity (see
                                     WARNINGS
                                 ).
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               