
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  
               
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        The active moiety of fenofibrate is fenofibric acid. The pharmacological effects of fenofibric acid in both animals and humans have been extensively studied through oral administration of fenofibrate. 
                        The lipid-lowering effects of fenofibric acid seen in clinical practice have been explained in vivo in transgenic mice and in vitro in human hepatocyte cultures by the activation of peroxisome proliferator activated receptor α (PPARα). Through this mechanism, fenofibrate increases lipolysis and elimination of triglyceride-rich particles from plasma by activating lipoprotein lipase and reducing production of apoprotein C-III (an inhibitor of lipoprotein lipase activity). The resulting decrease in triglycerides produces an alteration in the size and composition of LDL from small, dense particles (which are thought to be atherogenic due to their susceptibility to oxidation) to large buoyant particles. These larger particles have a greater affinity for cholesterol receptors and are catabolized rapidly. Activation of PPARα also induces an increase in the synthesis of apoproteins A-I, A-II and HDL-cholesterol. 
                        Fenofibrate also reduces serum uric acid levels in hyperuricemic and normal individuals by increasing the urinary excretion of uric acid.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        A variety of clinical studies have demonstrated that elevated levels of total-C, DL-C, and Apo B, an LDL membrane complex, are associated with human atherosclerosis. Similarly, decreased levels of HDL-C and its transport complex, apolipoprotein A (Apo AI and Apo All) are associated with the development of atherosclerosis. Epidemiologic investigations have established that cardiovascular morbidity and mortality vary directly with the level of total-C, LDL-C, and triglycerides, and inversely with the level of HDL-C. The independent effect of raising HDL-C or lowering TG on the risk of cardiovascular morbidity and mortality has not been determined. 
                        Fenofibric acid, the active metabolite of fenofibrate, produces reductions in total cholesterol, LDL cholesterol, apolipoprotein B, total triglycerides, and triglyceride-rich lipoprotein in treated patients. In addition, treatment with fenofibrate results in increases in high density lipoprotein (HDL) and apoproteins Apo AI and Apo AII. 
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        Fenofibrate is a pro-drug of the active chemical moiety fenofibric acid.  Fenofibrate is converted by ester hydrolysis in the body to fenofibric acid which is the active constituent measurable in the circulation.  
                        • Absorption: 
                        
                        The absolute bioavailability of fenofibrate cannot be determined as the compound is virtually insoluble in aqueous media suitable for injection. However, fenofibrate is well absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract. Following oral administration in healthy volunteers, approximately 60% of a single dose of radio-labeled fenofibrate appeared in urine, primarily as fenofibric acid and its glucuronate conjugate, and 25% was excreted in the feces. Peak plasma levels of fenofibric acid from fenofibrate occur within 4 to 8 hours after administration. There was less than dose-proportional increase in the systemic exposure of fenofibric acid from 43 mg and 130 mg of fenofibrate under fasting conditions.   
                         Doses of three-capsules of 43 mg fenofibrate given concurrently were dose equivalent to single-capsule doses of 130 mg.   
                        The extent of absorption of fenofibric acid was unaffected when fenofibrate was taken either in fasted state or with a low-fat meal. However, the Cmax of fenofibrate increased in the presence of a low-fat meal. Tmax was unaffected in the presence of a low-fat meal. In the presence of a high-fat meal, there was a 26% increase in AUC and 108% increase in Cmax of fenofibric acid from fenofibrate relative to fasting state. 
                        
                           • Distribution: 
                        
                        
                           In healthy volunteers, steady-state plasma levels of fenofibric acid were shown to be achieved within a week of dosing and did not demonstrate accumulation across time following multiple dose administration. Serum protein binding was approximately 99% in normal and hyperlipidemic subjects. 
                        
                           • Metabolism: 
                        
                        
                           Following oral administration, fenofibrate is rapidly hydrolyzed by esterases to the active metabolite, fenofibric acid; no unchanged fenofibrate is detected in plasma. 
                        Fenofibric acid is primarily conjugated with glucuronic acid and then excreted in urine. A small amount of fenofibric acid is reduced at the carbonyl moiety to a benzhydrol metabolite which is, in turn, conjugated with glucuronic acid and excreted in urine.   
                         In vivo metabolism data indicate that neither fenofibrate nor fenofibric acid undergo oxidative metabolism (eg, cytochrome P450) to a significant extent.  
                        • Elimination: 
                        
                        After absorption, fenofibrate is mainly excreted in the urine in the form of metabolites, primarily fenofibric acid and fenofibric acid glucuronide. After administration of radiolabeled fenofibrate, approximately 60% of the dose appeared in the urine and 25% was excreted in the feces.   
                         Fenofibrate acid from fenofibrate is eliminated with a half-life of 23 hours, allowing once daily dosing.  
                        
                        
                           • Geriatrics: 
                        
                        
                           In elderly volunteers 77 to 87 years of age, the oral clearance of fenofibric acid following a single oral dose of fenofibrate was 1.2 L/h, which compares to 1.1 L/h in young adults. This indicates that a similar dosage regimen can be used in the elderly with normal renal function, without increasing accumulation of the drug or metabolites [see Dosage and Administration (2.4)  and Use in Special Populatios (8.5)].  
                        
                           • Pediatrics: 
                        
                        The pharmacokinetics of fenofibrate has not been studied in pediatric populations.  
                        
                        
                           • Gender: 
                        
                        No pharmacokinetic difference between males and females has been observed for fenofibrate.  
                        
                           • Race:
                        
                        
                           The influence of race on the pharmacokinetics of fenofibrate has not been studied; however, fenofibrate is not metabolized by enzymes known for exhibiting inter-ethnic variability.  
                        
                        
                           • Renal Impairment: 
                        
                        The pharmacokinetics of fenofibric acid was examined in patients with mild, moderate, and severe renal impairment. Patients with severe renal impairment (creatinine clearance [CrCl] ≤ 30 mL/min or estimated glomerular filtration rate [eGFR] < 30 mL/min/1.73m2) showed 2.7 fold increase in exposure for fenofibric acid and increased accumulation of fenofibric acid during chronic dosing compared to that of healthy subjects.   Patients with mild to moderate (CrCl 30 to 80 mL/min or eGFR 30 to 59 mL/min/1.73m2) renal impairment had similar exposure but an increase in the half-life for fenofibric acid compared to that of healthy subjects. Based on these findings, the use of fenofibrate should be avoided in patients who have severe renal impairment and dose reduction is required in patients having mild to moderate renal impairment [see Dosage and Administration (2.4)].  
                        
                        
                           • Hepatic Impairment: 
                        
                        
                           No pharmacokinetic studies have been conducted in patients having hepatic impairment.  
                        
                           • Drug-Drug Interactions: 
                        
                        
                           In vitro studies using human liver microsomes indicate that fenofibrate and fenofibric acid are not inhibitors of cytochrome (CYP) P450 isoforms CYP3A4, CYP2D6, CYP2E1, or CYP1A2. They are weak inhibitor of CYP2C8, CYP2C19 and CYP2A6, and mild-to-moderate inhibitors of CYP2C9 at therapeutic concentrations. 
                        Table 2 describes the effects of co-administered drugs on fenofibric acid systemic exposure. Table 3 describes the effects of co-administered fenofibric acid on exposure to other drugs. 
                        
                           Table 2 Effects of Co-Administered Drugs on Fenofibric Acid Systemic Exposure from Fenofibrate Administration
                        
                        


                        



                           1 TriCor (fenofibrate) oral tablet 
                        
                           2 TriCor (fenofibrate) oral micronized capsule 
                        
                           Table 3 Effects of Fenofibrate Co-Administration on Systemic Exposure of Other Drugs
                        
                        


                        



                           1 TriCor (fenofibrate) oral tablet 
                        
                        
                           2 TriCor (fenofibrate) oral micronized capsule 
                        
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         