
               
               
               12  CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1  Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Ipratropium bromide is an anticholinergic (parasympatholytic) agent which, based on animal studies, appears to inhibit vagally-mediated reflexes by antagonizing the action of acetylcholine, the transmitter agent released at the neuromuscular junctions in the lung. Anticholinergics prevent the increases in intracellular concentration of Ca++ which is caused by interaction of acetylcholine with the muscarinic receptors on bronchial smooth muscle.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2  Pharmacodynamics
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Cardiovascular effects
                              
                           
                           
                              At recommended doses, ipratropium bromide does not produce clinically significant changes in pulse rate or blood pressure.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Ocular effects
                              
                           
                           
                              In studies without a positive control, ipratropium bromide did not alter pupil size, accommodation, or visual acuity.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Mucociliary clearance and respiratory secretions
                              
                           
                           
                              Controlled clinical studies have demonstrated that ipratropium bromide does not alter either mucociliary clearance or the volume or viscosity of respiratory secretions.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3  Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        Following administration by oral inhalation from a metered dose inhaler, the majority of the delivered dose is deposited in the gastrointestinal tract and, to a lesser extent, in the lung, the intended site of action. Ipratropium bromide is a quaternary amine and hence is not readily absorbed into the systemic circulation either from the surface of the lung or from the gastrointestinal tract as confirmed by blood level and renal excretion studies.
                        The half-life of elimination is about 2 hours after inhalation or intravenous administration. Ipratropium bromide is minimally bound (0 to 9% in vitro) to plasma albumin and α1-acid glycoprotein. It is partially metabolized to inactive ester hydrolysis products. Following intravenous administration, approximately one-half of the dose is excreted unchanged in the urine.
                        A pharmacokinetic study with 29 chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) patients (48-79 years of age) demonstrated that mean peak plasma ipratropium concentrations of 59±20 pg/mL were obtained following a single administration of 4 inhalations of ATROVENT HFA (84 mcg). Plasma ipratropium concentrations declined to 24±15 pg/mL by six hours. When these patients were administered 4 inhalations QID (16 inhalations/day=336 mcg) for one week, the mean peak plasma ipratropium concentration increased to 82±39 pg/mL with a trough (6 hour) concentration of 28±12 pg/mL at steady state. 
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Specific Populations
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Geriatric Patients
                                    
                                    In the pharmacokinetic study with 29 COPD patients, a subset of 14 patients were > 65 years of age. Mean peak plasma ipratropium concentrations of 56±24 pg/mL were obtained following a single administration of 4 inhalations (21 mcg/puff) of ATROVENT HFA (84 mcg). When these 14 patients were administered 4 inhalations four times a day (16 inhalations/day) for one week, the mean peak plasma ipratropium concentration only increased to 84±50 pg/mL indicating that the pharmacokinetic behavior of ipratropium bromide in the geriatric population is consistent with younger patients.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Renally Impaired Patients
                                    
                                    The pharmacokinetics of ATROVENT HFA have not been studied in patients with renal insufficiency.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Hepatically Impaired Patients
                                    
                                    The pharmacokinetics of ATROVENT HFA have not been studied in patients with hepatic insufficiency.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Drug-Drug Interaction
                                    
                                    No specific pharmacokinetic studies were conducted to evaluate potential drug-drug interactions with other medications.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         