
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  Leuprolide acetate, an LH-RH agonist, acts as a potent inhibitor of gonadotropin secretion when given continuously and in therapeutic doses.  Animal and human studies indicate that following an initial stimulation of gonadotropins, chronic administration of leuprolide acetate results in suppression of ovarian and testicular steroidogenesis.  This effect is reversible upon discontinuation of drug therapy. Administration of leuprolide acetate has resulted in inhibition of the growth of certain hormone dependent tumors (prostatic tumors in Noble and Dunning male rats and DMBA-induced mammary tumors in female rats) as well as atrophy of the reproductive organs.
                  In humans, subcutaneous administration of single daily doses of leuprolide acetate results in an initial increase in circulating levels of luteinizing hormone (LH) and follicle stimulating hormone (FSH), leading to a transient increase in levels of the gonadal steroids (testosterone and dihydrotestosterone in males, and estrone and estradiol in pre-menopausal females).  However, continuous daily administration of leuprolide acetate results in decreased levels of LH and FSH.  In males, testosterone is reduced to castrate levels. In pre-menopausal females, estrogens are reduced to post-menopausal levels. These decreases occur within two to four weeks after initiation of treatment, and castrate levels of testosterone in prostatic cancer patients have been demonstrated for periods of up to five years.
                  Leuprolide acetate is not active when given orally.
               
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Pharmacokinetics
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Absorption 
                           
                           
                              Bioavailability by subcutaneous administration is comparable to that by intravenous administration.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Distribution 
                           
                           
                              The mean steady-state volume of distribution of leuprolide following intravenous bolus administration to healthy male volunteers was 27 L. In vitro binding to human plasma proteins ranged from 43% to 49%.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Metabolism 
                           
                           
                              In healthy male volunteers, a 1 mg bolus of leuprolide administered intravenously revealed that the mean systemic clearance was 7.6 L/h, with a terminal elimination half-life of approximately 3 hours based on a two compartment model. In rats and dogs, administration of 14C-labeled leuprolide was shown to be metabolized to smaller inactive peptides, a pentapeptide (Metabolite I), tripeptides (Metabolites II and III) and a dipeptide (Metabolite IV). These fragments may be further catabolized.
                              The major metabolite (M-I) plasma concentrations measured in 5 prostate cancer patients reached maximum concentration 2 to 6 hours after dosing and were approximately 6% of the peak parent drug concentration. One week after dosing, mean plasma M-I concentrations were approximately 20% of mean leuprolide concentrations.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Excretion 
                           
                           
                              Following administration of LUPRON DEPOT* 3.75 mg to 3 patients, less than 5% of the dose was recovered as parent and M-I metabolite in the urine.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Special Populations 
                           
                           
                              The pharmacokinetics of the drug in hepatically and renally impaired patients has not been determined. 
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Drug Interactions 
                           
                           
                              No pharmacokinetic-based drug-drug interaction studies have been conducted with leuprolide acetate. However, because leuprolide acetate is a peptide that is primarily degraded by peptidase and not by cytochrome P-450 enzymes as noted in specific studies, and the drug is only about 46% bound to plasma proteins, drug interactions would not be expected to occur.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         