
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  
                  
                     Pharmacokinetics:

                  
                  When
one gram dose of NORITATE cream,
1%, was applied in a single application to the face of 16 healthy
volunteers, low concentrations of metronidazole were detected in the
plasma of 7 of the volunteers. The mean ± SD Cmax
of metronidazole was 27.6 ± 7.3 ng/mL, which is
about 1% of the value reported for a single 250 mg oral dose of
metronidazole. The time to maximum plasma concentration (Tmax)
in the volunteers with detectable metronidazole was 8-12 hoursafter
topical application.

                     

                  
                  
                     Pharmacodynamics:

                  
                  The
mechanisms by which metronidazole acts in reducing inflammatory
lesions of rosacea are unknown.
                  
                     Clinical
Studies: 
                  
                  Safety
and efficacy of NORITATE were
evaluated in two randomized vehicle-controlled clinical studies for
the treatment of rosacea, which excluded patients who had nodules,
moderate or severe rhinophyma, dense telangiectases, plaque-like
facial edema or ocular involvement and those who had a history of not
responding to metronidazole therapy for rosacea. Of the patients
                  included
in the efficacy database (n=416), there were 142 men and 274 women. 
Endpoint efficacy data comparisons for patients treated
with daily NORITATE
or
vehicle applications are listed below.
                  

* Statistically significant differences between NORITATE and vehicle groups with p


<0.05. Erythema scores: 0=none, 1=mild, 2=moderate and 3=severe.

                  
Safety Studies: 

                  
Studies of contact sensitization (n=258), phototoxicity (n=21), and photocontact sensitization (n=29) of NORITATE were conducted. No evidence of sensitization or phototoxicity was seen in these studies.
               
               
            
         