
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY 
               
                  Vancomycin is poorly absorbed after oral administration. During multiple dosing of 250 mg every 8 hours for 7 doses, fecal concentrations of vancomycin in volunteers exceeded 100 mg/kg in the majority of samples. No blood concentrations were detected and urinary recovery did not exceed 0.76%. Additional data using an oral solution follow. In anephric patients with no inflammatory bowel disease, blood concentrations of vancomycin were barely measurable (0.66 μg/mL) in 2 of 5 subjects who received 2 g of vancomycin HCl for Oral Solution daily for 16 days. No measurable blood concentrations were attained in the other 3 patients. With doses of 2 g daily, very high concentrations of drug can be found in the feces (>3100 mg/kg) and very low concentrations (<1 μg/mL) can be found in the serum of patients with normal renal function who have pseudomembranous colitis. Orally administered vancomycin does not usually enter the systemic circulation even when inflammatory lesions are present. After multiple-dose oral administration of vancomycin, measurable serum concentrations may infrequently occur in patients with active C. difficile-induced pseudomembranous colitis, and, in the presence of renal impairment, the possibility of accumulation exists. 
               
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Microbiology 
                     
                        The bactericidal action of vancomycin results primarily from inhibition of cell-wall biosynthesis. In addition, vancomycin alters bacterial-cell-membrane permeability and RNA synthesis. There is no cross-resistance between vancomycin and other antibiotics. 
                        NOTE: VANCOCIN HCl Capsules are effective only for the infections noted in the 
                              INDICATIONS AND USAGE
                            section. The oral form is 
                              not
                            effective for any other type of infection. 
                        Vancomycin has been shown to be active against most strains of the following microorganisms in clinical infections as described in the 
                              INDICATIONS AND USAGE
                            section. 
                        Aerobic gram-positive microorganisms 
                        
                           
                               
                              Staphylococcus aureus (including methicillin-resistant strains) associated with enterocolitis 
                        
                        Anaerobic gram-positive microorganisms 
                        
                           
                               
                              Clostridium difficile antibiotic-associated pseudomembranous colitis. 
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         