
                     
                     
                     Drug Interactions
                     
                        Erythromycin use in patients who are receiving high doses of 
theophylline may be associated with an increase in serum theophylline levels and 
potential theophylline toxicity. In case of theophylline toxicity and/or 
elevated serum theophylline levels, the dose of theophylline should be reduced 
while the patient is receiving concomitant erythromycin therapy.
                        Concomitant administration of erythromycin and digoxin has been reported to 
result in elevated digoxin serum levels.
                        There have been reports of increased anticoagulant effects when erythromycin 
and oral anticoagulants were used concomitantly. Increased anticoagulation 
effects due to interactions of erythromycin with oral anticoagulants may be more 
pronounced in the elderly.
                        Erythromycin is a substrate and inhibitor of the 3A isoform subfamily of the 
cytochrome p450 enzyme system (CYP3A). Coadministration of erythromycin and a 
drug primarily metabolized by CYP3A may be associated with elevations in drug 
concentrations that could increase or prolong both the therapeutic and adverse 
effects of the concomitant drug. Dosage adjustments may be considered, and when 
possible, serum concentrations of drugs primarily metabolized by CYP3A should be 
monitored closely in patients concurrently receiving erythromycin.
                        The following are examples of some clinically significant CYP3A based drug 
interactions. Interactions with other drugs metabolized by the CYP3A isoform are 
also possible. The following CYP3A based drug interactions have been observed 
with erythromycin products in post-marketing experience:
                        
                           

                        
                        
                        Ergotamine/dihydroergotamineConcurrent use of erythromycin and ergotamine or 
dihydroergotamine has been associated in some patients with acute ergot toxicity 
characterized by severe peripheral vasospasm and dysesthesia.
                        
                           

                        
                        
                        Triazolobenzodiazepines (Such as Triazolam and Alprazolam) 
and Related BenzodiazepinesErythromycin has been reported to decrease the clearance of 
triazolam and midazolam, and thus, may increase the pharmacologic effect of 
these benzodiazepines.
                        
                           

                        
                        
                        HMG-CoA Reductase InhibitorsErythromycin has been reported to increase concentrations of 
HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors (e.g., lovastatin and simvastatin). Rare reports of 
rhabdomyolysis have been reported in patients taking these drugs 
concomitantly.
                        
                        Sildenafil (Viagra)Erythromycin has been reported to increase the systemic exposure 
(AUC) of sildenafil. Reduction of sildenafil dosage should be considered. (See 
Viagra package insert.)
                        
                        There have been spontaneous or published reports of CYP3A based 
interactions of erythromycin with cyclosporine, carbamazepine, tacrolimus, 
alfentanil, disopyramide, rifabutin, quinidine, methylprednisolone, cilostazol, 
vinblastine, and bromocriptine.
                        Concomitant administration of erythromycin with cisapride, pimozide, 
astemizole, or terfenadine is contraindicated. (See CONTRAINDICATIONS.)
                        In addition, there have been reports of interactions of erythromycin with 
drugs not thought to be metabolized by CYP3A, including hexobarbital, phenytoin, 
and valproate.
                        Erythromycin has been reported to significantly alter the metabolism of the 
nonsedating antihistamines terfenadine and astemizole when taken concomitantly. 
Rare cases of serious cardiovascular adverse events, including 
electrocardiographic QT/QTc interval prolongation, 
cardiac arrest, torsades de pointes, and other ventricular arrhythmias, have 
been observed. (See CONTRAINDICATIONS.) In addition, 
deaths have been reported rarely with concomitant administration of terfenadine 
and erythromycin.
                        There have been post-marketing reports of drug interactions when erythromycin 
was co-administered with cisapride, resulting in QT prolongation, cardiac 
arrhythmias, ventricular tachycardia, ventricular fibrillation, and torsades de 
pointes, most likely due to the inhibition of hepatic metabolism of cisapride by 
erythromycin. Fatalities have been reported. (See CONTRAINDICATIONS).
                        
                           

                        
                        
                        Drug/Laboratory Test InteractionsErythromycin interferes with the fluorometric determination of 
urinary catecholamines.
                        
                           

                        
                        
                        
                        Carcinogenesis, Mutagenesis, Impairment of 
Fertility
                        Long-term (2-year) oral studies conducted in rats with 
erythromycin base did not provide evidence of tumorigenicity. Mutagenicity 
studies have not been conducted. There was no apparent effect on male or female 
fertility in rats fed erythromycin (base) at levels up to 0.25 percent of 
diet.
                        
                           

                        
                        
                        
                        Pregnancy

                           

                        
                        Teratogenic effects
                        

                        
Pregnancy Category BThere is no evidence of teratogenicity or any other adverse 
effect on reproduction in female rats fed erythromycin base (up to 0.25 percent 
of diet) prior to and during mating, during gestation, and through weaning of 
two successive litters. There are, however, no adequate and well-controlled 
studies in pregnant women. Because animal reproduction studies are not always 
predictive of human response, this drug should be used during pregnancy only if 
clearly needed.
                        
                           

                        
                        
                        
                        Labor and Delivery
                        The effect of erythromycin on labor and delivery is 
unknown.
                        
                           

                        
                        
                        
                        Nursing Mothers
                        Erythromycin is excreted in human milk. Caution should be 
exercised when erythromycin is administered to a nursing woman.
                        
                           

                        
                        
                        
                        Pediatric Use
                        See INDICATIONS AND USAGEand DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION.
                     
                  
               