
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Simeprevir is a direct-acting antiviral (DAA) agent against the hepatitis C virus [see Microbiology (12.4)].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Cardiac Electrophysiology
                              
                              The effect of simeprevir at the recommended dose of 150 mg once daily and 350 mg (at 2.3 times the recommended dosage) once daily for 7 days on the QT interval was evaluated in a randomized, double-blind, placebo- and positive-controlled (moxifloxacin 400 mg once daily), 4-way cross-over study in 60 healthy subjects. No meaningful changes in QTc interval were observed at either the recommended dose of 150 mg once daily or the dose of 350 mg (2.3 times the recommended dosage) once daily.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        The pharmacokinetic properties of simeprevir have been evaluated in healthy adult subjects and in adult HCV-infected subjects. Plasma Cmax and AUC increased more than dose-proportionally after multiple doses between 75 mg and 200 mg once daily, with accumulation occurring following repeated dosing. Steady-state was reached after 7 days of once daily dosing. Plasma exposure (AUC) of simeprevir in HCV-infected subjects was about 2- to 3-fold higher compared to that observed in HCV-uninfected subjects. Plasma Cmax and AUC of simeprevir were similar during co-administration of simeprevir with Peg-IFN-alfa and RBV compared with administration of simeprevir alone. In HCV-infected subjects, the mean steady-state predose plasma concentration was 1936 ng/mL (standard deviation: 2640) and the mean steady-state AUC24 was 57469 ng.h/mL (standard deviation: 63571).
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Absorption
                              
                              Simeprevir is orally bioavailable. Maximum plasma concentrations (Cmax) are typically achieved between 4 to 6 hours post dose.
                              
                                 In vitro studies with human Caco-2 cells indicated that simeprevir is a substrate of P-gp.
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Effects of Food on Oral Absorption
                                    
                                    Administration of simeprevir with food to healthy subjects increased the relative bioavailability (AUC) by 61% and 69% after a high-fat, high-caloric (928 kcal) and normal-caloric (533 kcal) breakfast, respectively, and delayed the absorption by 1 hour and 1.5 hours, respectively. Due to increased bioavailability, OLYSIO should be administered with food. The type of food does not affect exposure to simeprevir.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Distribution
                              
                              Simeprevir is extensively bound to plasma proteins (greater than 99.9%), primarily to albumin and, to a lesser extent, alfa 1-acid glycoprotein. Plasma protein binding is not meaningfully altered in patients with renal or hepatic impairment.
                              In animals, simeprevir is extensively distributed to gut and liver (liver:blood ratio of 29:1 in rat) tissues. In vitro data and physiologically-based pharmacokinetic modeling and simulations indicate that hepatic uptake in humans is mediated by OATP1B1/3.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Metabolism
                              
                              Simeprevir is metabolized in the liver. In vitro experiments with human liver microsomes indicated that simeprevir primarily undergoes oxidative metabolism by the hepatic CYP3A system. Involvement of CYP2C8 and CYP2C19 cannot be excluded. Co-administration of OLYSIO with moderate or strong inhibitors of CYP3A may significantly increase the plasma exposure of simeprevir, and co-administration with moderate or strong inducers of CYP3A may significantly reduce the plasma exposure of simeprevir [see Drug Interactions (7)].
                              Following a single oral administration of 200 mg (1.3 times the recommended dosage) 14C-simeprevir to healthy subjects, the majority of the radioactivity in plasma (mean: 83%) was accounted for by unchanged drug and a small part of the radioactivity in plasma was related to metabolites (none being major metabolites). Metabolites identified in feces were formed via oxidation at the macrocyclic moiety or aromatic moiety or both and by O-demethylation followed by oxidation.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Elimination
                              
                              Elimination of simeprevir occurs via biliary excretion. Renal clearance plays an insignificant role in its elimination. Following a single oral administration of 200 mg 14C-simeprevir to healthy subjects, on average 91% of the total radioactivity was recovered in feces. Less than 1% of the administered dose was recovered in urine. Unchanged simeprevir in feces accounted for on average 31% of the administered dose.
                              The terminal elimination half-life of simeprevir was 10 to 13 hours in HCV-uninfected subjects and 41 hours in HCV-infected subjects receiving 200 mg (1.3 times the recommended dosage) of simeprevir.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Specific Populations
                              
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Geriatric Use
                                    
                                    There is limited data on the use of OLYSIO in patients aged 65 years and older. Age (18–73 years) had no clinically meaningful effect on the pharmacokinetics of simeprevir based on a population pharmacokinetic analysis of HCV-infected subjects treated with OLYSIO. No dose adjustment of OLYSIO is required in geriatric patients [see Use in Specific Populations (8.5)].
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Renal Impairment
                                    
                                    Renal elimination of simeprevir is negligible. Compared to HCV-uninfected subjects with normal renal function (classified using the Modification of Diet in Renal Disease [MDRD] eGFR formula; eGFR greater than or equal to 80 mL/min) the mean steady-state AUC of simeprevir was 62% higher in HCV-uninfected subjects with severe renal impairment (eGFR below 30 mL/min). Based on the observed and expected changes in simeprevir exposure, no dose adjustment of OLYSIO is needed in patients with mild, moderate or severe renal impairment. The safety and efficacy of OLYSIO have not been studied in HCV-infected patients with severe renal impairment or end-stage renal disease, including patients requiring dialysis [see Use in Specific Populations (8.7)].
                                    In a population pharmacokinetic analysis of mild or moderate renally impaired HCV-infected subjects treated with OLYSIO 150 mg once daily, creatinine clearance was not found to influence the pharmacokinetic parameters of simeprevir. It is therefore not expected that renal impairment will have a clinically relevant effect on the exposure to simeprevir.
                                    As simeprevir is highly bound to plasma proteins, it is unlikely that it will be significantly removed by dialysis.
                                    Refer to the prescribing information for the antiviral drugs used in combination with OLYSIO regarding their use in patients with renal impairment.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Hepatic Impairment
                                    
                                    Simeprevir is primarily metabolized by the liver. Compared to HCV-uninfected subjects with normal hepatic function, the mean steady-state AUC of simeprevir was 2.4-fold higher in HCV-uninfected subjects with moderate hepatic impairment (Child-Pugh Class B) and 5.2-fold higher in HCV-uninfected subjects with severe hepatic impairment (Child-Pugh Class C).
                                    No dose adjustment of OLYSIO is necessary in patients with mild hepatic impairment (Child-Pugh Class A).
                                    The safety and efficacy of OLYSIO have not been established in HCV-infected patients with moderate or severe hepatic impairment (Child-Pugh Class B or C).
                                    OLYSIO is not recommended for use in patients with moderate or severe hepatic impairment (Child-Pugh Class B or C) [see Dosage and Administration (2.5), Warnings and Precautions (5.2) and Use in Specific Populations (8.8)].
                                    In clinical trials, higher simeprevir exposures have been associated with increased frequency of adverse reactions, including increased bilirubin, rash and photosensitivity [see Adverse Reactions (6.1)].
                                    Based on a population pharmacokinetic analysis of HCV-infected subjects with mild hepatic impairment (Child-Pugh Class A) treated with OLYSIO, liver fibrosis stage did not have a clinically relevant effect on the pharmacokinetics of simeprevir.
                                    Refer to the prescribing information for the antiviral drugs used in combination with OLYSIO regarding their use in patients with hepatic impairment.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Gender, Body Weight, Body Mass Index
                                    
                                    No dose adjustment is necessary based on gender, body weight or body mass index. These characteristics have no clinically meaningful relevant effect on the pharmacokinetics of simeprevir based on a population pharmacokinetic analysis of HCV-infected subjects treated with OLYSIO.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Race
                                    
                                    Based on results from studies in HCV-uninfected subjects and HCV-infected subjects, simeprevir exposures are higher in Asians compared to Caucasians. In the Phase 3 trials, the mean simeprevir plasma exposure in Asian subjects (n=14) was 3.4-fold higher than in the pooled Phase 3 population. In clinical trials, higher simeprevir exposures have been associated with increased frequency of adverse reactions, including rash and photosensitivity. There are insufficient safety data to recommend an appropriate dose for patients of East Asian ancestry. The potential risks and benefits of OLYSIO should be carefully considered prior to use in patients of East Asian ancestry [see Use in Specific Populations (8.6)].
                                    Population pharmacokinetic estimates of exposure of simeprevir were comparable between Caucasian and Black/African American HCV-infected subjects.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Drug Interactions
                              
                              
                                 [See also Warnings and Precautions (5.7) and Drug Interactions (7)]
                              
                              
                                 In vitro studies indicated that simeprevir is a substrate and mild inhibitor of CYP3A. Simeprevir does not affect CYP2C9, CYP2C19 or CYP2D6 in vivo. Simeprevir does not induce CYP1A2 or CYP3A4 in vitro. In vivo, simeprevir mildly inhibits the CYP1A2 activity and intestinal CYP3A4 activity, while it does not affect hepatic CYP3A4 activity. Simeprevir is not a clinically relevant inhibitor of cathepsin A enzyme activity.
                              
                                 In vitro, simeprevir is a substrate for P-gp, MRP2, BCRP, OATP1B1/3 and OATP2B1; simeprevir inhibits the uptake transporters OATP1B1/3 and NTCP and the efflux transporters P-gp/MDR1, MRP2 and BSEP. The inhibitory effects of simeprevir on the bilirubin transporters OATP1B1/3 and MRP2 likely contribute to clinical observations of elevated bilirubin [see Adverse Reactions (6.1)].
                              Simeprevir is transported into the liver by OATP1B1/3 where it undergoes metabolism by CYP3A. Based on results from in vivo studies, co-administration of OLYSIO with moderate or strong inhibitors of CYP3A may significantly increase the plasma exposure of simeprevir and co-administration with moderate or strong inducers of CYP3A may significantly reduce the plasma exposure of simeprevir, which may lead to loss of efficacy.
                              Drug interaction studies were performed in healthy adults with simeprevir (at the recommended dose of 150 mg once daily unless otherwise noted) and drugs likely to be co-administered or drugs commonly used as probes for pharmacokinetic interactions. The effects of co-administration of other drugs on the Cmax, AUC, and Cmin values of simeprevir are summarized in Table 7 (effect of other drugs on OLYSIO). The effect of co-administration of OLYSIO on the Cmax, AUC, and Cmin values of other drugs are summarized in Table 8 (effect of OLYSIO on other drugs). For information regarding clinical recommendations, see Drug Interactions (7)
                                 .
                              



                           



                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.4   Microbiology
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Mechanism of Action
                              
                              Simeprevir is an inhibitor of the HCV NS3/4A protease which is essential for viral replication. In a biochemical assay simeprevir inhibited the proteolytic activity of recombinant genotype 1a and 1b HCV NS3/4A proteases, with median Ki values of 0.5 nM and 1.4 nM, respectively.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Antiviral Activity
                              
                              The median simeprevir EC50 and EC90 values against a HCV genotype 1b replicon were 9.4 nM (7.05 ng/mL) and 19 nM (14.25 ng/mL), respectively. Activity of simeprevir against a selection of genotype 1a (N=78) and genotype 1b (N=59) chimeric replicons carrying NS3 sequences derived from HCV NS3/4A protease-inhibitor-naïve subjects resulted in median fold change (FC) in EC50 values of 1.4 (interquartile range, IQR: 0.8 to 11) and 0.4 (IQR: 0.3 to 0.7) compared to reference genotype 1b replicon, respectively. Genotype 1a (N=33) and 1b (N=2) isolates with a baseline Q80K polymorphism resulted in median FC in simeprevir EC50 value of 11 (IQR: 7.4 to 13) and 8.4, respectively. The presence of 50% human serum reduced simeprevir replicon activity by 2.4-fold. Combination of simeprevir with IFN, RBV, NS5A inhibitors, nucleoside analog NS5B polymerase inhibitors or non-nucleoside analog NS5B polymerase inhibitors, including NS5B thumb 1-, thumb 2-, and palm-domain targeting drugs, was not antagonistic.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Resistance in Cell Culture
                              
                              Resistance to simeprevir was characterized in HCV genotype 1a and 1b replicon-containing cells. Ninety-six percent (96%) of simeprevir-selected genotype 1 replicons carried one or multiple amino acid substitutions at NS3 protease positions F43, Q80, R155, A156, and/or D168, with substitutions at NS3 position D168 being most frequently observed (78%). Additionally, resistance to simeprevir was evaluated in HCV genotype 1a and 1b replicon assays using site-directed mutants and chimeric replicons carrying NS3 sequences derived from clinical isolates. Amino acid substitutions at NS3 positions F43, Q80, S122, R155, A156, and D168 reduced susceptibility to simeprevir. Replicons with D168V or A, and R155K substitutions displayed large reductions in susceptibility to simeprevir (FC in EC50 value greater than 50), whereas other substitutions such as Q80K or R, S122R, and D168E displayed lower reductions in susceptibility (FC in EC50 value between 2 and 50). Other substitutions such as Q80G or L, S122G, N or T did not reduce susceptibility to simeprevir in the replicon assay (FC in EC50 value lower than 2). Amino acid substitutions at NS3 positions Q80, S122, R155, and/or D168 that were associated with lower reductions in susceptibility to simeprevir when occurring alone, reduced susceptibility to simeprevir by more than 50-fold when present in combination.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Resistance in Clinical Studies
                              
                              In a pooled analysis of subjects treated with 150 mg OLYSIO in combination with Peg-IFN-alfa and RBV who did not achieve SVR in the controlled Phase 2 and Phase 3 clinical trials, emerging virus with amino acid substitutions at NS3 positions Q80, S122, R155 and/or D168 were observed in 180 out of 197 (91%) subjects. Substitutions D168V and R155K alone or in combination with other substitutions at these positions emerged most frequently (Table 9). Most of these emerging substitutions have been shown to reduce susceptibility to simeprevir in cell culture replicon assays.
                              HCV genotype 1 subtype-specific patterns of simeprevir treatment-emergent amino acid substitutions were observed. HCV genotype 1a predominately had emerging R155K alone or in combination with amino acid substitutions at NS3 positions Q80, S122 and/or D168, while HCV genotype 1b had most often an emerging D168V substitution (Table 9). In HCV genotype 1a with a baseline Q80K amino acid polymorphism, an emerging R155K substitution was observed most frequently at failure.
                              


                              


In the COSMOS trial in HCV genotype 1-infected subjects treated with OLYSIO in combination with sofosbuvir (without or with RBV), virus from 5 out of 6 (83%) subjects with relapse had emerging NS3 amino acid substitutions R155K or D168E. No emerging NS5B amino acid substitutions associated with sofosbuvir resistance were observed.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Persistence of Resistance–Associated Substitutions
                              
                              The persistence of simeprevir-resistant virus was assessed following treatment failure in the pooled analysis of subjects receiving 150 mg OLYSIO in combination with Peg-IFN-alfa and RBV in the controlled Phase 2 and Phase 3 trials. The proportion of subjects with detectable levels of treatment-emergent, resistance-associated variants was followed post treatment for a median time of 28 weeks (range 0 to 70 weeks). Resistant variants remained at detectable levels in 32 out of 66 subjects (48%) with single emerging R155K and in 16 out of 48 subjects (33%) with single emerging D168V.
                              The lack of detection of virus containing a resistance-associated substitution does not necessarily indicate that the resistant virus is no longer present at clinically significant levels. The long-term clinical impact of the emergence or persistence of virus containing OLYSIO-resistance-associated substitutions is unknown.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Effect of Baseline HCV Polymorphisms on Treatment Response
                              
                              Analyses were conducted to explore the association between naturally-occurring baseline NS3/4A amino acid substitutions (polymorphisms) and treatment outcome. In the pooled analysis of the Phase 3 trials QUEST 1 and QUEST 2, and in the PROMISE trial, the efficacy of OLYSIO in combination with Peg-IFN-alfa and RBV was substantially reduced in subjects infected with HCV genotype 1a virus with the NS3 Q80K polymorphism at baseline [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.5)].
                              The observed prevalence of NS3 Q80K polymorphic variants at baseline in the overall population of the Phase 2 and Phase 3 trials (PILLAR, ASPIRE, PROMISE, QUEST 1 and QUEST 2) was 14%; while the observed prevalence of the Q80K polymorphism was 30% in subjects infected with HCV genotype 1a and 0.5% in subjects infected with HCV genotype 1b. The observed prevalence of Q80K polymorphic variants at baseline in the U.S. population of these Phase 2 and Phase 3 trials was 35% overall, 48% in subjects infected with HCV genotype 1a and 0% in subjects infected with HCV genotype 1b. With the exception of the NS3 Q80K polymorphism, baseline HCV variants with polymorphisms at NS3 positions F43, Q80, S122, R155, A156, and/or D168 that were associated with reduced simeprevir activity in replicon assays were generally uncommon (1.3%) in subjects with HCV genotype 1 infection in these Phase 2 and Phase 3 trials (n=2007).
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Cross-Resistance
                              
                              Cross-resistance is expected among NS3/4A protease inhibitors. Some of the treatment-emergent virus detected in OLYSIO-treated subjects who did not achieve SVR in clinical trials, including virus expressing R155K, which emerged frequently, and I170T, which emerged infrequently, have been shown to be less susceptible to the NS3/4A protease inhibitors, boceprevir and/or telaprevir.
                              The most frequently occurring boceprevir or telaprevir treatment-emergent viruses that are expected to impact subsequent treatment with OLYSIO include variants expressing NS3 R155K, A156T, or A156V. Virus expressing the NS3 amino substitutions V36A or G and I170A or T, which displayed slight shifts in susceptibility to simeprevir in replicon cultures, may emerge in patients who do not achieve SVR with boceprevir or telaprevir, and may therefore also impact subsequent treatment with OLYSIO. Failure to achieve SVR with simeprevir does not select virus that is cross-resistant to sofosbuvir or vice versa.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.5   Pharmacogenomics
                     
                        A genetic variant near the gene encoding interferon-lambda-3 (IL28B rs12979860, a C [cytosine] to T [thymine] substitution) is a strong predictor of response to Peg-IFN-alfa and RBV (PR). In the Phase 3 trials, IL28B genotype was a stratification factor.
                        Overall, SVR rates were lower in subjects with the CT and TT genotypes compared to those with the CC genotype. Among both treatment-naïve subjects and those who experienced previous treatment failures, subjects of all IL28B genotypes had the highest SVR rates with OLYSIO-containing regimens (Table 10).
                        


