
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           Co-administration of amiodarone with sofosbuvir in combination with OLYSIO may result in serious symptomatic bradycardia. (5.1)
                           Co-administration of OLYSIO with drugs that are moderate or strong inducers or inhibitors of CYP3A may significantly affect the plasma concentrations of simeprevir. The potential for drug-drug interactions must be considered prior to and during treatment. (5.7, 7, 12.3)
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1     Potential for OLYSIO to Affect Other Drugs
                     
                        Simeprevir mildly inhibits CYP1A2 activity and intestinal CYP3A4 activity, but does not affect hepatic CYP3A4 activity. Co-administration of OLYSIO with drugs that are primarily metabolized by CYP3A4 may result in increased plasma concentrations of such drugs (see Table 6). Simeprevir does not affect CYP2C9, CYP2C19 or CYP2D6 in vivo.
                        Simeprevir inhibits OATP1B1/3 and P-glycoprotein (P-gp) transporters. Co-administration of OLYSIO with drugs that are substrates for OATP1B1/3 and P-gp transport may result in increased plasma concentrations of such drugs (see Table 6).
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2     Potential for Other Drugs to Affect OLYSIO
                     
                        The primary enzyme involved in the biotransformation of simeprevir is CYP3A [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)]. Clinically relevant effects of other drugs on simeprevir pharmacokinetics via CYP3A may occur. Co-administration of OLYSIO with moderate or strong inhibitors of CYP3A may significantly increase the plasma exposure of simeprevir. Co-administration with moderate or strong inducers of CYP3A may significantly reduce the plasma exposure of simeprevir and lead to loss of efficacy (see Table 6). Therefore, co-administration of OLYSIO with substances that are moderate or strong inducers or inhibitors of CYP3A is not recommended [see Warnings and Precautions (5.7) and Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3     Established and Other Potentially Significant Drug Interactions
                     
                        Table 6 shows the established and other potentially significant drug interactions based on which alterations in dose or regimen of OLYSIO and/or co-administered drug may be recommended. Drugs that are not recommended for co-administration with OLYSIO are also included in Table 6. For information regarding the magnitude of interaction, see Tables 7 and 8
                            [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                        


                     



                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4     Drugs without Clinically Significant Interactions with OLYSIO
                     
                        In addition to the drugs included in Table 6, the interaction between OLYSIO and the following drugs were evaluated in clinical studies and no dose adjustments are needed for either drug [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)]: caffeine, dextromethorphan, escitalopram, ethinyl estradiol/norethindrone, methadone, midazolam (intravenous administration), omeprazole, raltegravir, rilpivirine, sofosbuvir, tacrolimus, tenofovir disoproxil fumarate, and warfarin.
                        No clinically relevant drug-drug interaction is expected when OLYSIO is co-administered with antacids, the corticosteroids budesonide, fluticasone, methylprednisolone, and prednisone, fluvastatin, H2-receptor antagonists, the narcotic analgesics buprenorphine and naloxone, NRTIs (such as abacavir, didanosine, emtricitabine, lamivudine, stavudine, zidovudine), maraviroc, methylphenidate, and proton pump inhibitors.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         