
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           Hypoglycemia agents:  Hypo- and/or hyperglycemia may occur. Glucose monitoring is recommended and anti-diabetic treatment adjusted accordingly (7.1)
                           Cyclosporine: Somatuline may decrease the bioavailability of cyclosporine. Cyclosporine dose may need to be adjusted (7.2)
                           Drugs affecting heart rate:  Somatuline may decrease heart rate. Dose adjustment of coadministered drugs that decrease heart rate may be necessary (7.3)
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 Insulin and Oral Hypoglycemic Drugs
                     
                        Lanreotide, like somatostatin and other somatostatin analogs, inhibits the secretion of insulin and glucagon. Therefore, blood glucose levels should be monitored when lanreotide treatment is initiated or when the dose is altered and antidiabetic treatment should be adjusted accordingly.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 Cyclosporine
                     
                        Concomitant administration of cyclosporine with lanreotide may decrease the relative bioavailability of cyclosporine and, therefore, may necessitate adjustment of cyclosporine dose to maintain therapeutic levels. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3 Other Concomitant Drug Therapy
                     
                        The pharmacological gastrointestinal effects of Somatuline Depot may reduce the intestinal absorption of concomitant drugs. Limited published data indicate that concomitant administration of a somatostatin analog and bromocriptine may increase the availability of bromocriptine.
                        Concomitant administration of bradycardia inducing drugs (e.g. beta-blockers) may have an additive effect on the reduction of heart rate associated with lanreotide. Dose adjustments of concomitant medication may be necessary.
                        Vitamin K absorption was not affected when concomitantly administered with lanreotide.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4 Drug Metabolism Interactions
                     
                        The limited published data available indicate that somatostatin analogs may decrease the metabolic clearance of compounds known to be metabolized by cytochrome P450 enzymes, which may be due to the suppression of growth hormone. Since it cannot be excluded that lanreotide may have this effect, other drugs mainly metabolized by CYP3A4 and which have a low therapeutic index (e.g. quinidine, terfenadine) should therefore be used with caution. Drugs metabolized by the liver may be metabolized more slowly during lanreotide treatment and dose reductions of the concomitantly administered medications should be considered.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         