
                     
                     
                     Drug Interactions 
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           CYP3A4 Interactions 
                           
                              Lovastatin is metabolized by CYP3A4 but has no CYP3A4 inhibitory activity; therefore it is not expected to affect the plasma concentrations of other drugs metabolized by CYP3A4. Potent inhibitors of CYP3A4 (below) increase the risk of myopathy by reducing the elimination of lovastatin. See WARNINGS
                                 , 
                                    
                                       Myopathy/Rhabdomyolysis, and CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
                                  , 
                                    
                                       Pharmacokinetics.
                                 
                              
                              
                                 
                                     
                                    Itraconazole
                                 
                                 
                                     
                                    Ketoconazole
                                 
                                 
                                     
                                    Erythromycin
                                 
                                 
                                     
                                    Clarithromycin
                                 
                                 
                                     
                                    Telithromycin
                                 
                                 
                                     
                                    HIV protease inhibitors
                                 
                                 
                                     
                                    Nefazodone
                                 
                                 
                                     
                                    Cyclosporine
                                 
                                 
                                     
                                    Large quantities of grapefruit juice (>1 quart daily)
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Interactions with lipid-lowering drugs that can cause myopathy when given alone 
                           
                              The risk of myopathy is also increased by the following lipid-lowering drugs that are not potent CYP3A4 inhibitors, but which can cause myopathy when given alone. 
                              
                                 See WARNINGS, 
                                       Myopathy/Rhabdomyolysis.
                                    
                                 
                              
                              
                                 
                                     
                                    Gemfibrozil
                                 
                                 
                                     
                                    Other fibrates
                                 
                                 
                                     
                                    Niacin (nicotinic acid) (≥1 g/day)
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Other drug interactions 
                           
                              Cyclosporine or Danazol: The risk of myopathy/rhabdomyolysis is increased by concomitant administration of cyclosporine or danazol particularly with higher doses of lovastatin (see WARNING, 
                                    Myopathy/Rhabdomyolysis
                                 ). 
                              
                                 Amiodarone or Verapamil:  The risk of myopathy/rhabdomyolysis is increased when either amiodarone or verapamil is used concomitantly with a closely related member of the HMG-CoA reductase inhibitor class (see WARNINGS, 
                                    Myopathy/Rhabdomyolysis; 
                                 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
                                 , Pharmacokinetics
                                 ). 
                              
                                 Coumarin Anticoagulants:  In a small clinical trial in which lovastatin was administered to warfarin treated patients; no effect on prothrombin time was detected. However, another HMG-CoA reductase inhibitor has been found to produce a less than two seconds increase in prothrombin time in healthy volunteers receiving low doses of warfarin. Also, bleeding and/or increased prothrombin time have been reported in a few patients taking coumarin anticoagulants concomitantly with lovastatin. It is recommended that in patients taking anticoagulants, prothrombin time be determined before starting lovastatin and frequently enough during early therapy to insure that no significant alteration of prothrombin time occurs. Once a stable prothrombin time has been documented, prothrombin times can be monitored at the intervals usually recommended for patients on coumarin anticoagulants. If the dose of lovastatin is changed, the same procedure should be repeated. Lovastatin therapy has not been associated with bleeding or with changes in prothrombin time in patients not taking anticoagulants. 
                              
                                 Propranolol:   In normal volunteers, there was no clinically significant pharmacokinetic or pharmacodynamic interaction with concomitant administration of single doses of lovastatin and propranolol. 
                              
                                 Digoxin:   In patients with hypercholesterolemia, concomitant administration of lovastatin and digoxin resulted in no effect on digoxin plasma concentrations. 
                              
                                 Oral Hypoglycemic Agents:  In pharmacokinetic studies of lovastatin in hypercholesterolemic non-insulin dependent diabetic patients, there was no drug interaction with glipizide or with chlorpropamide (see CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY , 
                                    Clinical Studies
                                  ). 
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               