
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Nutrilipid® 20% administered intravenously provides biologically utilizable source of calories and essential fatty acids. 
                        Fatty acids serve as an important substrate for energy production. The most common mechanism of action for energy production derived from fatty acid metabolism is beta oxidation. Fatty acids are important for membrane structure and function, precursors for bioactive molecules (such as prostaglandins), and as regulators of gene expression.
                        Nutrilipid® 20% causes an increase in heat production, decrease in respiratory quotient, and increase in oxygen consumption following its administration.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        The infused lipid particles are removed from the bloodstream in a manner generally thought to be similar to the enzymatic clearance of naturally produced chylomicrons formed after enteral fat intake. Following infusion, there is a transient increase in plasma triglycerides. The triglycerides are hydrolyzed to free fatty acids and glycerol by the enzyme lipoprotein lipase. The free fatty acids either enter the tissues (where they may be oxidized or resynthesized into triglycerides and stored) or circulate in the plasma, bound to albumin. In the liver, circulating free fatty acids are oxidized or converted to very low density lipoproteins that re-enter the bloodstream.
                        Phosphatides are the hydrophobic components of membranes and provide electrically insulated layers. They are involved in the formation of membrane structures. Choline prevents deposition of fat in the liver.
                        Glycerol is metabolized to carbon dioxide and glycogen or is used in the synthesis of body fats.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         