
                     
                     
                     Drug Interactions
                     
                        A number of compounds are inhibitors of CYP2C9.  Drug interactions studies of mefenamic acid and these compounds have not been conducted. The possibility of altered safety and efficacy should be considered when mefenamic acid  is used concomitantly with these drugs. 
                        ACE-inhibitors
                        Reports suggest that NSAIDs may diminish the antihypertensive effect of ACE-inhibitors.  This interaction should be given consideration in patients taking NSAIDs concomitantly with ACE-inhibitors. 
                        Aspirin
                        When mefenamic acid is administered with aspirin, its protein binding is reduced, although the clearance of free mefenamic acid is not altered.  The clinical significance of this interaction is not known; however, as with other NSAIDs, concomitant administration of mefenamic acid and aspirin is not generally recommended because of the potential of increased adverse effects.
                        Diuretics
                        Clinical studies, as well as postmarketing observations, have shown that mefenamic acid can reduce the natriuretic effect of furosemide and thiazides in some patients.  This response has been attributed to inhibition of renal prostaglandin synthesis.  During concomitant therapy of NSAIDs, the patient should be observed closely for signs of renal failure (see 
                              PRECAUTIONS, Renal Effects
                           ), as well as to assure diuretic efficacy.
                        Lithium
                        NSAIDs have produced an elevation of plasma lithium levels and a reduction in renal lithium clearance.  The mean minimum lithium concentration increased 15% and the renal clearance decreased by approximately 20%. These effects have been attributed to inhibition of renal prostaglandin synthesis by the NSAID.  Thus, when NSAIDs and lithium are administered concurrently, subjects should be observed carefully for signs of lithium toxicity.
                        Methotrexate 
                        NSAIDs have been reported to competitively inhibit methotrexate accumulation in rabbit kidney slices.  This may indicate that they could enhance the toxicity of methotrexate.  Caution should be used when NSAIDs are administered concomitantly with methotrexate.
                        Warfarin
                        The effects of warfarin and NSAIDs on GI bleeding are synergistic, such that users of both drugs together have a risk of serious GI bleeding higher than users of either drug alone.
                        Antacids
                        In a single dose study (n=6), ingestion of an antacid containing 1.7 grams of magnesium hydroxide with 500 mg of mefenamic acid increased the Cmax and AUC of mefenamic acid by 125% and 36%, respectively.1
                        
                     
                     
                  
               