
               
               
               DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
                  

                  

                  
                  ACE-Inhibitors and Angiotensin II 
Antagonists
                  Reports suggest that NSAIDs may diminish the antihypertensive 
effect of ACE-inhibitors and angiotensin II antagonists. Indomethacin can reduce 
the antihypertensive effects of captopril and losartan. These interactions 
should be given consideration in patients taking NSAIDs concomitantly with 
ACE-inhibitors or angiotensin II antagonists. In some patients with compromised 
renal function, the coadministration of an NSAID and an ACE-inhibitor or an 
angiotensin II antagonist may result in further deterioration of renal function, 
including possible acute renal failure, which is usually reversible.
                  
                  
                  
                  Aspirin
                  When Indomethacin is administered with aspirin, its protein 
binding is reduced, although the clearance of free indomethacin is not altered. 
The clinical significance of this interaction is not known.
                  The use of indomethacin in conjunction with aspirin or other salicylates is 
not recommended. Controlled clinical studies have shown that the combined use of 
indomethacin and aspirin does not produce any greater therapeutic effect than 
the use of indomethacin alone. In a clinical study of the combined use of 
indomethacin and aspirin, the incidence of gastrointestinal side effects was 
significantly increased with combined therapy.
                  In a study in normal volunteers, it was found that chronic concurrent 
administration of 3.6 g of aspirin per day decreases indomethacin blood levels 
approximately 20%.
                  
                  
                  
                  Beta-Adrenoceptor Blocking 
Agents
                  Blunting of the antihypertensive effect of beta-adrenoceptor 
blocking agents by non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs including indomethacin 
has been reported. Therefore, when using these blocking agents to treat 
hypertension, patients should be observed carefully in order to confirm that the 
desired therapeutic effect has been obtained.
                  
                  
                  
                  Cyclosporine
                  Administration of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs 
concomitantly with cyclosporine has been associated with an increase in 
cyclosporine-induced toxicity, possibly due to decreased synthesis of renal 
prostacyclin. NSAIDs should be used with caution in patients taking 
cyclosporine, and renal function should be carefully monitored.
                  
                  
                  
                  Diflunisal
                  In normal volunteers receiving indomethacin, the administration 
of diflunisal decreased the renal clearance and significantly increased the 
plasma levels of indomethacin. In some patients, combined use of indomethacin 
and diflunisal has been associated with fatal gastrointestinal hemorrhage. 
Therefore, diflunisal and indomethacin should not be used concomitantly.
                  
                  
                  
                  Digoxin
                  Indomethacin given concomitantly with digoxin has been reported 
to increase the serum concentration and prolong the half-life of digoxin. 
Therefore, when indomethacin and digoxin are used concomitantly, serum digoxin 
levels should be closely monitored.
                  
                  
                  
                  Diuretics
                  In some patients, the administration of indomethacin can reduce 
the diuretic, natriuretic, and anti-hypertensive effects of loop, 
potassium-sparing, and thiazide diuretics. This response has been attributed to 
inhibition of renal prostaglandin synthesis.
                  Indomethacin reduces basal plasma renin activity (PRA), as well as those 
elevations of PRA induced by furosemide administration, or salt or volume 
depletion. These facts should be considered when evaluating plasma renin 
activity in hypertensive patients.
                  It has been reported that the addition of triamterene to a maintenance 
schedule of indomethacin resulted in reversible acute renal failure in two of 
four healthy volunteers. Indomethacin and triamterene should not be administered 
together.
                  Indomethacin and potassium-sparing diuretics each may be associated with 
increased serum potassium levels. The potential effects of indomethacin and 
potassium-sparing diuretics on potassium kinetics and renal function should be 
considered when these agents are administered concurrently.
                  Most of the above effects concerning diuretics have been attributed, at least 
in part, to mechanisms involving inhibition of prostaglandin synthesis by 
indomethacin.
                  During concomitant therapy with NSAIDs, the patient should be observed 
closely for signs of renal failure (see WARNINGS, Renal 
Effects), as well as to assure diuretic efficacy.
                  
                  
                  
                  Lithium
                  Indomethacin capsules 50 mg t.i.d. produced a clinically relevant 
elevation of plasma lithium and reduction in renal lithium clearance in 
psychiatric patients and normal subjects with steady state plasma lithium 
concentrations. This effect has been attributed to inhibition of prostaglandin 
synthesis. As a consequence, when NSAIDs and lithium are given concomitantly, 
the patient should be carefully observed for signs of lithium toxicity. (Read 
circulars for lithium preparations before use of such concomitant therapy.) In 
addition, the frequency of monitoring serum lithium concentration should be 
increased at the outset of such combination drug treatment.
                  
                  
                  
                  Methotrexate
                  NSAIDs have been reported to competitively inhibit methotrexate 
accumulation in rabbit kidney slices. This may indicate that they could enhance 
the toxicity of methotrexate. Caution should be used when NSAIDs are 
administered concomitantly with methotrexate.
                  
                  
                  
                  NSAIDs
                  The concomitant use of indomethacin with other NSAIDs is not 
recommended due to the increased possibility of gastrointestinal toxicity, with 
little or no increase in efficacy.
                  
                  
                  
                  Oral Anticoagulants
                  Clinical studies have shown that indomethacin does not influence 
the hypoprothrombinemia produced by anticoagulants. However, when any additional 
drug, including indomethacin, is added to the treatment of patients on 
anticoagulant therapy, the patients should be observed for alterations of the 
prothrombin time. In postmarketing experience, bleeding has been reported in 
patients on concomitant treatment with anticoagulants and Indomethacin. Caution 
should be exercised when Indomethacin and anticoagulants are administered 
concomitantly. The effects of warfarin and NSAIDs on GI bleeding are 
synergistic, such that users of both drugs together have a risk of serious GI 
bleeding higher than users of either drug alone.
                  
                  
                  
                  Probenecid
                  When indomethacin is given to patients receiving probenecid, the 
plasma levels of indomethacin are likely to be increased. Therefore, a lower 
total daily dosage of indomethacin may produce a satisfactory therapeutic 
effect. When increases in the dose of indomethacin are made, they should be made 
carefully and in small increments.
                  
                  
                  Drug/Laboratory Test InteractionsFalse-negative results in the dexamethasone suppression test 
(DST) in patients being treated with indomethacin have been reported. Thus, 
results of the DST should be interpreted with caution in these patients.
                  
                  
                  Carcinogenesis, Mutagenesis, Impairment of 
FertilityIn an 81 week chronic oral toxicity study in the rat at doses up 
to 1 mg/kg/day, indomethacin had no tumorigenic effect.
                  Indomethacin produced no neoplastic or hyperplastic changes related to 
treatment in carcinogenic studies in the rat (dosing period 73 to 110 weeks) and 
the mouse (dosing period 62 to 88 weeks) at doses up to 1.5 mg/kg/day.
                  Indomethacin did not have any mutagenic effect in in 
vitro bacterial tests (Ames test and E. coli 
with or without metabolic activation) and a series of in vivo tests including the host-mediated assay, sex-linked 
recessive lethals in Drosophila, and the micronucleus 
test in mice.
                  Indomethacin at dosage levels up to 0.5 mg/kg/day had no effect on fertility 
in mice in a two generation reproduction study or a two litter reproduction 
study in rats.
                  

               
               
            
         