
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  Physiolyte exerts a mechanical cleansing action for sterile irrigation of body cavities, tissues or wounds, indwelling urethral catheters and surgical drainage tubes, and for washing, rinsing or soaking surgical dressings, instruments and laboratory specimens. It also serves as a vehicle for drugs used for irrigation or other pharmaceutical preparations.
                  Physiolyte provides an isotonic calcium-free balanced electrolyte irrigation with the same ionic composition as Isolyte® S (Multi-Electrolyte Solution) a multiple electrolyte solution for IV replacement of acute extracellular fluid losses. 
                  Physiological irrigation solutions are considered generally compatible with living tissues and organs.
                  Sodium, the major cation of the extracellular fluid, functions primarily in the control of water distribution, fluid balance, and osmotic pressure of body fluids. Sodium is also associated with chloride and bicarbonate in the regulation of the acid-base equilibrium of body fluid. 
                  Potassium, the principal cation of intracellular fluid, participates in carbohydrate utilization and protein synthesis, and is critical in the regulation of nerve conduction and muscle contraction, particularly in the heart.
                  Chloride, the major extracellular anion, closely follows the metabolism of sodium, and changes in the acid-base balance of the body are reflected by changes in the chloride concentration.
                  Magnesium, a principal cation of soft tissue, is primarily involved in enzyme activity associated with the metabolism of carbohydrates and protein. Magnesium is also involved in neuromuscular and cardiac conduction and irritability.
                  Gluconate and acetate are organic ions which are hydrogen ion acceptors and contribute bicarbonate during their metabolism to carbon dioxide and water, and serve as alkalinizing agents.
                  Water is an essential constituent of all body tissues and accounts for approximately 70% of total body weight. Average normal adult daily requirement ranges from two to three liters (1.0 to 1.5 liters each for insensible water loss by perspiration and urine production). 
                  Water balance is maintained by various regulatory mechanisms. Water distribution depends primarily on the concentration of electrolytes in the body compartments and sodium (Na+) plays a major role in maintaining physiologic equilibrium. 
               
               
            
         