
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           Mixed agonist/antagonist opioid analgesics: Avoid use with EXALGO because they may reduce analgesic effect of EXALGO or precipitate withdrawal symptoms. (5.12, 7.2)

                           CNS depressants: Avoid use of EXALGO with other drugs or substances having increased risk of respiratory depression. (7.1)

                           Monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs): Avoid EXALGO in patients taking MAOIs or within 14 days of stopping such treatment. (7.3)
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1       CNS Depressants
                     
                        Avoid use of EXALGO with central nervous system depressants such as hypnotics, sedatives, general anesthetics, antipsychotics and alcohol, due to the increased risk of respiratory depression, hypotension and profound sedation or coma.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2       Mixed Agonist/Antagonist Opioid Analgesics
                     
                        Mixed agonist/antagonists (buprenorphine, nalbuphine, pentazocine) may reduce the analgesic effect of EXALGO and/or may precipitate withdrawal symptoms in these patients. Avoid the use of agonist/antagonist analgesics in patients receiving EXALGO.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3       Monoamine Oxidase Inhibitors (MAOI)
                     
                        The effects of opioid analgesics may be potentiated by MAOIs. EXALGO is not recommended for use in patients who have received MAOIs within 14 days. If concurrent therapy with an MAOI and EXALGO is unavoidable, monitor patients for increased respiratory and central nervous system depression.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4       Anticholinergics
                     
                        Anticholinergics or other medications with anticholinergic activity when used concurrently with EXALGO may result in increased risk of urinary retention and/or severe constipation, which may lead to paralytic ileus. Monitor patients for signs of urinary retention or reduced gastric motility when EXALGO is used concurrently with anticholinergic drugs.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         