
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY 
               
                  Levobunolol HCl is a noncardioselective beta-adrenoceptor
                            blocking agent, equipotent at both beta1 and beta2
                            receptors. Levobunolol HCl is greater than 60 times more potent than its
                            dextro isomer in its beta-blocking activity, yet equipotent in its
                            potential for direct myocardial depression. Accordingly, the levo
                            isomer, levobunolol HCl, is used. Levobunolol HCl does not have
                            significant local anesthetic (membrane-stabilizing) or intrinsic
                            sympathomimetic activity. 
                  Beta-adrenergic receptor blockade reduces cardiac output in both
                            healthy subjects and patients with heart disease. In patients with
                            severe impairment of myocardial function, beta-adrenergic receptor
                            blockade may inhibit the stimulatory effect of the sympathetic nervous
                            system necessary to maintain adequate cardiac function. 
                  Beta-adrenergic receptor blockade in the bronchi and bronchioles
                            results in increased airway resistance from unopposed parasympathetic
                            activity. Such an effect in patients with asthma or other bronchospastic
                            conditions is potentially dangerous. 
                  
                     BETAGAN
                     ® (levobunolol hydrochloride
                            ophthalmic solution, USP) has been shown to be an active agent in
                            lowering elevated as well as normal intraocular pressure (IOP) whether
                            or not accompanied by glaucoma. Elevated IOP presents a major risk
                            factor in glaucomatous field loss. The higher the level of IOP, the
                            greater the likelihood of optic nerve damage and visual field loss. 
                  The onset of action with one drop of BETAGAN
                     ®
                            can be detected within one hour after treatment, with maximum effect
                            seen between 2 and 6 hours. 
                  A significant decrease of IOP can be maintained for up to 24
                            hours following a single dose. 
                  In two, separate, controlled studies (one three month and one up
                            to 12 months duration) BETAGAN
                     ® ophthalmic solution
                            0.25% b.i.d. controlled the IOP of approximately 64% and 70% of the
                            subjects. The overall mean decrease from baseline was 5.4 mm Hg and 5.1
                            mm Hg respectively. In an open-label study, BETAGAN
                     ®
                            ophthalmic solution 0.25% q.d. controlled the IOP of 72% of the subjects
                            while achieving an overall mean decrease of 5.9 mm Hg. 
                  In controlled clinical studies of approximately two years
                            duration, intraocular pressure was well-controlled in approximately 80%
                            of subjects treated with BETAGAN
                     ® ophthalmic
                            solution 0.5% b.i.d. The mean IOP decrease from baseline was between
                            6.87 mm Hg and 7.81 mm Hg. No significant effects on pupil size, tear
                            production or corneal sensitivity were observed.
                            BETAGAN
                     ® at the concentrations tested, when applied
                            topically, decreased heart rate and blood pressure in some patients. The
                            IOP-lowering effect of BETAGAN
                     ® was well maintained
                            over the course of these studies. 
                  In a three month clinical study, a single daily application of
                            0.5% BETAGAN
                     ® ophthalmic solution controlled the IOP
                            of 72% of subjects achieving an overall mean decrease in IOP of 7.0 mm
                            Hg. 
                  The primary mechanism of the ocular hypotensive action of
                            levobunolol HCl in reducing IOP is most likely a decrease in aqueous
                            humor production. BETAGAN
                     ® reduces IOP with little
                            or no effect on pupil size or accommodation in contrast to the miosis
                            which cholinergic agents are known to produce. The blurred vision and
                            night blindness often associated with miotics would not be expected and
                            have not been reported with the use of BETAGAN
                     ®
                            ophthalmic solution. This is particularly important in cataract patients
                            with central lens opacities who would experience decreased visual acuity
                            with pupillary constriction. 
               
               
            
         