
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     General
                     
                        Fluorine F 18 ions normally accumulate in the skeleton in an even fashion, with greater deposition in the axial skeleton (e.g., vertebrae and pelvis) than in the appendicular skeleton and greater deposition in the bones around joints than in the shafts of long bones.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        Increased fluorine F 18 ion deposition around joints can occur in arthritis or following trauma; increased deposition has also been documented in bone around fracture sites, in osteomyelities, fibrous dysplasia, spondylitis tuberculosa, Paget's disease, hyperstosis frontalis interna, myositis, ossificans, and in rapidly growing epiphyses. The tendency for fluorine F 18 ions to accumulate in the vicinity of primary and metastatic malignancy in bone has proven clinically useful in detection of such lesions (3-10).
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        Following intravenous administration, Sodium Fluoride F 18 Injection provides fluorine F 18 ions that rapidly equilibrate, primarily within the extracellular fluid space. These fluorine F 18 ions are then rapidly cleared by bone deposition and by excretion into the urine.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Distribution
                     
                        Deposition of the fluorine F 18 ions in bone appears to be primarily a function of blood flow to the bone and the efficiency of the bone in extracting the fluorine F 18 ions from the blood perfusing the bone (1). Fluorine F 18 ions do not appear to be bound to serum proteins.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Elimination
                     
                        In patients with normal renal function, 20% or more of the fluorine F 18 ions are cleared from the body in the urine within the first 2 hours after intravenous administration (3). Subsequently, small amounts of fluorine 18 ions continue to be excreted in the urine further diminishing the radioactivity of the fluorine F 18 ions in soft tissues of the body. (See Pharmacokinetics section)
                        The clearance of fluorine F 18 ions from the blood is rapid (2). Fluorine F 18 ions are rapidly eliminated via the renal system.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Drug-Drug Interactions
                     
                        Drug-drug interactions with Sodium Fluoride F 18 Injection have not been studied.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         