
               
               
               
                  CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        General 
                     
                     
                        
                           Mechanism of Action
                           :  Basiliximab functions as an IL-2 receptor antagonist by binding with high affinity (Ka = 1 x 1010 M-1) to the alpha chain of the high affinity IL-2 receptor complex and inhibiting IL-2 binding.  Basiliximab is specifically targeted against IL-2Rα, which is selectively expressed on the surface of activated T-lymphocytes.  This specific high affinity binding of Simulect®
                            (basiliximab) to IL-2Rα competitively inhibits IL-2-mediated activation of lymphocytes, a critical pathway in the cellular immune response involved in allograft rejection.
                        
		     
	While in the circulation, Simulect impairs the response of the immune system to antigenic challenges.  Whether the ability to respond to repeated or ongoing challenges with those antigens returns to normal after Simulect is cleared is unknown (see PRECAUTIONS).
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        Pharmacokinetics
                     
                     
                        
                           Adults
                           :  Single-dose and multiple-dose pharmacokinetic studies have been conducted in patients undergoing first kidney transplantation.  Cumulative doses ranged from 15 mg up to 150 mg.  Peak mean ± SD serum concentration following intravenous infusion of 20 mg over 30 minutes is 7.1 ± 5.1 mg/L.  There is a dose-proportional increase in Cmax and AUC up to the highest tested single dose of 60 mg.  The volume of distribution at steady state is 8.6 ± 4.1 L. The extent and degree of distribution to various body compartments have not been fully studied.  The terminal half-life is 7.2 ± 3.2 days. Total body clearance is 41 ± 19 mL/h. No clinically relevant influence of body weight or gender on distribution volume or clearance has been observed in adult patients.  Elimination half-life was not influenced by age (20-69 years), gender or race (see DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION).
                        
                           Pediatric
                           :  The pharmacokinetics of Simulect have been assessed in 39 pediatric patients undergoing renal transplantation.  In infants and children (1-11 years of age, n=25), the distribution volume and clearance were reduced by about 50% compared to adult renal transplantation patients.  The volume of distribution at steady state was 4.8 ± 2.1 L, half-life was 9.5 ± 4.5 days and clearance was 17 ± 6 mL/h.  Disposition parameters were not influenced to a clinically relevant extent by age (1-11 years of age), body weight (9-37 kg) or body surface area (0.44-1.20 m2) in this age group. In adolescents (12-16 years of age, n=14), disposition was similar to that in adult renal transplantation patients.  The volume of distribution at steady state was 7.8 ± 5.1 L, half-life was 9.1 ± 3.9 days and clearance was 31 ± 19 mL/h (see DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION).
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        Pharmacodynamics
                     
                     
                        Complete and consistent binding to IL-2Rα in adults is maintained as long as serum Simulect levels exceed 0.2 µg/mL.  As concentrations fall below this threshold, the IL-2Rα sites are no longer fully bound and the number of T-cells expressing unbound IL-2Rα returns to pretherapy values within 1-2 weeks. The relationship between serum concentration and receptor saturation was assessed in 13 pediatric patients and was similar to that characterized in adult renal transplantation patients.  In vitro studies using human tissues indicate that Simulect binds only to lymphocytes.
                        
		     
	The duration of clinically relevant IL-2 receptor blockade after the recommended course of Simulect is not known.  When basiliximab was added to a regimen of cyclosporine, USP (MODIFIED) and corticosteroids in adult patients, the duration of IL-2Rα saturation was 36 ± 14 days (mean ± SD), similar to that observed in pediatric patients (36 ± 14 days) (see DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION). When basiliximab was added to a triple therapy regimen consisting of cyclosporine, USP (MODIFIED), corticosteroids, and azathioprine in adults, the duration was 50 ± 20 days and when added to cyclosporine, USP (MODIFIED), corticosteroids, and mycophenolate mofetil in adults, the duration was 59 ± 17 days (see PRECAUTIONS,Drug Interactions).  No significant changes to circulating lymphocyte numbers or cell phenotypes were observed by flow cytometry. 
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         