
               
               
               7	DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
                  Because paliperidone palmitate is hydrolyzed to paliperidone [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)], results from studies with oral paliperidone should be taken into consideration when assessing drug-drug interaction potential.
               
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           Drugs that may cause orthostatic hypotension: An additive effect may occur when co-administered with INVEGA SUSTENNA®. (7.1)
                           Strong CYP3A4/P-glycoprotein (P-gp) inducers: It may be necessary to increase the dose of INVEGA SUSTENNA® when a strong inducer of both CYP3A4 and P-gp (e.g., carbamazepine, rifampin, St John's wort) is co-administered. Conversely, on discontinuation of the strong inducer, it may be necessary to decrease the dose of INVEGA SUSTENNA®. (7.2, 12.3)
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1	Potential for INVEGA SUSTENNA® to Affect Other Drugs
                     
                        Paliperidone may antagonize the effect of levodopa and other dopamine agonists. 
                        Because of its potential for inducing orthostatic hypotension, an additive effect may occur when INVEGA SUSTENNA® is administered with other therapeutic agents that have this potential [see Warnings and Precautions (5.7)].
                        No dose adjustment is necessary for lithium when it is coadministered with INVEGA SUSTENNA®. Pharmacokinetic interaction between INVEGA SUSTENNA® and lithium is unlikely.
                        No dose adjustment is necessary for valproate when INVEGA SUSTENNA® is added to the therapy. Steady-state pharmacokinetics of valproate was not affected when patients were coadministered oral paliperidone extended-release tablets [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                        
                        Paliperidone is not expected to cause clinically important pharmacokinetic interactions with drugs that are metabolized by cytochrome P450 isozymes [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2	Potential for Other Drugs to Affect INVEGA SUSTENNA®
                     
                     
                        On initiation of strong inducers of both CYP3A4 and P-gp (e.g., carbamazepine, rifampin, or St John's wort), it may be necessary to increase the dose of INVEGA SUSTENNA®. Conversely, on discontinuation of the strong inducer, it may be necessary to decrease the dose of INVEGA SUSTENNA®
                            [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                        No dose adjustment is necessary for INVEGA SUSTENNA® when valproate is added to treatment [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                        
                        No dose adjustment is necessary for INVEGA SUSTENNA® when it is coadministered with lithium.  Pharmacokinetic interaction between INVEGA SUSTENNA® and lithium is unlikely.
                        
                           In vitro studies indicate that CYP2D6 and CYP3A4 may be involved in paliperidone metabolism; however, there is no evidence in vivo that inhibitors of these enzymes significantly affect the metabolism of paliperidone. Paliperidone is not a substrate of CYP1A2, CYP2A6, CYP2C9, and CYP2C19; an interaction with inhibitors or inducers of these isozymes is unlikely.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         