
               
               
               12	CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1	Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Paliperidone palmitate is hydrolyzed to paliperidone [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)]. Paliperidone is the major active metabolite of risperidone. The mechanism of action of paliperidone is unknown. However, it has been proposed that the drug's therapeutic activity in schizophrenia is mediated through a combination of central dopamine Type 2 (D2) and serotonin Type 2 (5HT2A) receptor antagonism.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2	Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        Paliperidone is a centrally active dopamine Type 2 (D2) receptor antagonist and a serotonin Type 2 (5HT2A) receptor antagonist. Paliperidone is also active as an antagonist at α1 and α2 adrenergic receptors and H1 histaminergic receptors, which may explain some of the other effects of the drug. Paliperidone has no affinity for cholinergic muscarinic or β1- and β2-adrenergic receptors. The pharmacological activity of the (+)- and (-)- paliperidone enantiomers is qualitatively and quantitatively similar in vitro.
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Absorption and Distribution
                              Due to its extremely low water solubility, paliperidone palmitate dissolves slowly after intramuscular injection before being hydrolyzed to paliperidone and absorbed into the systemic circulation. Following a single intramuscular dose, the plasma concentrations of paliperidone gradually rise to reach maximum plasma concentrations at a median Tmax of 13 days. The release of the drug starts as early as day 1 and lasts for as long as 126 days.
                              Following intramuscular injection of single doses (39 mg – 234 mg) in the deltoid muscle, on average, a 28% higher Cmax was observed compared with injection in the gluteal muscle. The two initial deltoid intramuscular injections of 234 mg on day 1 and 156 mg on day 8 help attain therapeutic concentrations rapidly. The release profile and dosing regimen of INVEGA SUSTENNA® results in sustained therapeutic concentrations. The AUC of paliperidone following INVEGA SUSTENNA® administration was dose-proportional over a 39 mg–234 mg dose range, and less than dose-proportional for Cmax for doses exceeding 78 mg. The mean steady-state peak:trough ratio for an INVEGA SUSTENNA® dose of 156 mg was 1.8 following gluteal administration and 2.2 following deltoid administration.
                              Following administration of paliperidone palmitate the (+) and (-) enantiomers of paliperidone interconvert, reaching an AUC (+) to (-) ratio of approximately 1.6–1.8.
                              Based on a population analysis, the apparent volume of distribution of paliperidone is 391 L. The plasma protein binding of racemic paliperidone is 74%.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Metabolism and Elimination
                              In a study with oral immediate-release 14C-paliperidone, one week following administration of a single oral dose of 1 mg immediate-release 14C-paliperidone, 59% of the dose was excreted unchanged into urine, indicating that paliperidone is not extensively metabolized in the liver. Approximately 80% of the administered radioactivity was recovered in urine and 11% in the feces. Four metabolic pathways have been identified in vivo, none of which accounted for more than 10% of the dose: dealkylation, hydroxylation, dehydrogenation, and benzisoxazole scission. Although in vitro studies suggested a role for CYP2D6 and CYP3A4 in the metabolism of paliperidone, there is no evidence in vivo that these isozymes play a significant role in the metabolism of paliperidone. Population pharmacokinetics analyses indicated no discernible difference on the apparent clearance of paliperidone after administration of oral paliperidone between extensive metabolizers and poor metabolizers of CYP2D6 substrates.
                              The median apparent half-life of paliperidone following INVEGA SUSTENNA® single-dose administration over the dose range of 39 mg – 234 mg ranged from 25 days – 49 days.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Long-Acting Paliperidone Palmitate Injection versus Oral Extended-Release Paliperidone
                              INVEGA SUSTENNA® is designed to deliver paliperidone over a monthly period while extended-release oral paliperidone is administered on a daily basis. The initiation regimen for INVEGA SUSTENNA® (234 mg/156 mg in the deltoid muscle on Day 1/Day 8) was designed to rapidly attain steady-state paliperidone concentrations when initiating therapy without the use of oral supplementation.
                              In general, overall initiation plasma levels with INVEGA SUSTENNA® were within the exposure range observed with 6–12 mg extended-release oral paliperidone. The use of the INVEGA SUSTENNA® initiation regimen allowed patients to stay in this exposure window of 6–12 mg extended-release oral paliperidone even on trough pre-dose days (Day 8 and Day 36). The intersubject variability for paliperidone pharmacokinetics following delivery from INVEGA SUSTENNA® was lower relative to the variability determined from extended-release oral paliperidone tablets. Because of the difference in median pharmacokinetic profiles between the two products, caution should be exercised when making a direct comparison of their pharmacokinetic properties.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Drug Interaction Studies
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Potential for INVEGA SUSTENNA® to Affect Other Drugs
                                    
                                    
                                       In vitro studies in human liver microsomes demonstrated that paliperidone does not substantially inhibit the metabolism of drugs metabolized by cytochrome P450 isozymes, including CYP1A2, CYP2A6, CYP2C8/9/10, CYP2D6, CYP2E1, CYP3A4, and CYP3A5. Therefore, paliperidone is not expected to inhibit clearance of drugs that are metabolized by these metabolic pathways in a clinically relevant manner. Paliperidone is also not expected to have enzyme inducing properties.
                                    Paliperidone is a weak inhibitor of P-glycoprotein (P-gp) at high concentrations. No in vivo data are available, and the clinical relevance is unknown.
                                    In a drug interaction study, co-administration of oral paliperidone extended-release tablets (12 mg once daily for 5 days) with divalproex sodium extended-release tablets (500 mg to 2000 mg once daily) did not affect the steady-state pharmacokinetics (AUC24h and Cmax,ss) of valproate in 13 patients stabilized on valproate. In a clinical study, subjects on stable doses of valproate had comparable valproate average plasma concentrations when oral paliperidone extended-release tablets 3–15 mg/day was added to their existing valproate treatment [see Drug Interactions (7.1)].
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Potential for Other Drugs to Affect INVEGA SUSTENNA®
                                       
                                    
                                    While in vitro studies indicate that CYP2D6 and CYP3A4 may be minimally involved in paliperidone metabolism, in vivo studies did not demonstrate decreased elimination by these isozymes; they contribute to only a small fraction of total body clearance. In vitro studies demonstrated that paliperidone is a P-gp substrate [see Drug Interactions (7.2)].
                                    Co-administration of oral paliperidone extended-release 6 mg once daily with carbamazepine, a strong inducer of both CYP3A4 and P-gp, at 200 mg twice daily caused a decrease of approximately 37% in the mean steady-state Cmax and AUC of paliperidone. This decrease is caused, to a substantial degree, by a 35% increase in renal clearance of paliperidone. A minor decrease in the amount of drug excreted unchanged in the urine suggests that there was little effect on the CYP metabolism or bioavailability of paliperidone during carbamazepine co-administration [see Drug Interactions (7.2)].
                                    Co-administration of a single dose of oral paliperidone extended-release 12 mg tablet with divalproex sodium extended-release tablets (two 500 mg tablets once daily at steady-state) resulted in an increase of approximately 50% in the Cmax and AUC of paliperidone. Although this interaction has not been studied with INVEGA SUSTENNA®, a clinically significant interaction would not be expected between divalproex sodium and INVEGA SUSTENNA® intramuscular injection [see Drug Interactions (7.2)].
                                    Paliperidone is metabolized to a limited extent by CYP2D6. In an interaction study in healthy subjects in which a single 3 mg dose of oral paliperidone extended-release was administered concomitantly with 20 mg per day of paroxetine (a potent CYP2D6 inhibitor), paliperidone exposures were on average 16% (90% CI: 4, 30) higher in CYP2D6 extensive metabolizers. Higher doses of paroxetine have not been studied. The clinical relevance is unknown.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Specific Populations
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Renal Impairment
                                    
                                    INVEGA SUSTENNA® has not been systematically studied in patients with renal impairment. Based on a limited number of observations with INVEGA SUSTENNA® in subjects with mild renal impairment and pharmacokinetic simulations, the dose of INVEGA SUSTENNA® should be reduced in patients with mild renal impairment; INVEGA SUSTENNA® is not recommended in patients with moderate or severe renal impairment. Although INVEGA SUSTENNA® was not studied in patients with moderate or severe renal impairment, the disposition of a single oral dose paliperidone 3 mg extended-release tablet was studied in subjects with varying degrees of renal function. Elimination of paliperidone decreased with decreasing estimated creatinine clearance. Total clearance of paliperidone was reduced in subjects with impaired renal function by 32% on average in mild (CrCl = 50 mL/min to < 80 mL/min), 64% in moderate (CrCl = 30 mL/min to < 50 mL/min), and 71% in severe (CrCl = 10 mL/min to < 30 mL/min) renal impairment, corresponding to an average increase in exposure (AUCinf) of 1.5 fold, 2.6 fold, and 4.8 fold, respectively, compared to healthy subjects [see Dosage and Administration (2.5) and Use in Specific Populations (8.6)].
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Hepatic Impairment
                                    
                                    INVEGA SUSTENNA® has not been studied in patients with hepatic impairment. Based on a study with oral paliperidone in subjects with moderate hepatic impairment (Child-Pugh class B), no dose adjustment is required in patients with mild or moderate hepatic impairment. In the study with oral paliperidone in subjects with moderate hepatic impairment (Child-Pugh class B), the plasma concentrations of free paliperidone were similar to those of healthy subjects, although total paliperidone exposure decreased because of a decrease in protein binding. Paliperidone has not been studied in patients with severe hepatic impairment [see Use in Specific Populations (8.7)].
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Elderly
                                    
                                    No dosage adjustment is recommended based on age alone. However, dose adjustment may be required because of age-related decreases in creatinine clearance [see Renal Impairment above and Dosage and Administration (2.5)].
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Race
                                    
                                    No dosage adjustment is recommended based on race. No differences in pharmacokinetics were observed between Japanese and Caucasians.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Gender
                                    
                                    No dosage adjustment is recommended based on gender, although slower absorption was observed in females in a population pharmacokinetic analysis.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Smoking
                                    
                                    No dosage adjustment is recommended based on smoking status. Based on in vitro studies utilizing human liver enzymes, paliperidone is not a substrate for CYP1A2; smoking should, therefore, not have an effect on the pharmacokinetics of paliperidone.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         