
               
               
               7   DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
                  
                     
                        Aminoglutethimide: Aminoglutethimide may lead to loss of corticosteroid-induced adrenal suppression.

                     
                     
                        Ampho
                        tercin B: There have been cases reported in which concomitant used of Amphotericin B and hydrocortisone was followed by cardiac enlargement and congestive heart failure (see also potassium depleting agents)

                     
                     
                        Anticholinsterase agents: Concomitant use of anticholinesterase agents and corticosteroids may produce severe weakness in patients with myasthenia gravis.  If possible, anticholinesterase agents should be withdrawn at least 24 hours before initiating corticosteroid therapy.

                     
                     
                        Anticoagulant agents: Co-administration of corticosteroids and warfarin usually result in inhibition of response to warfarin, although there have been some conflicting reports.  Therefore, coagulation indices should be monitored frequently to maintain the desired anticoagulant effect.

                     
                     
                        Antidiabetic Agent: Because corticosteroids may increase blood glucose concentrations, dosage adjustments of antidiabetic agents may be required.

                     
                     
                        Antitubercular drugs: Serum concentrations of isoniazid may be decreased.

                     
                     
                        CYP 3A4 inducers (e.g. barbiturates, phenytoin, carbamazepine, and rifampin): Drugs such as barbiturates, phenytoin, ephedrine, and rifampin, which induce hepatic microsomal drug metabolizing enzymes activity may enhance metabolism of prednisolone and require that the dosage of Orapred be increased.

                     
                     
                        CYP 3A4 inhibitors (e.g., ketoconazole, macrolide, antibiotics): Ketoconazole has been reported to decrease the metabolism of certain corticosteroids by up to 60% leading to an increased risk of corticosteroid side effects.

                     
                     
                        Cholestyramine: Cholestyramine may increase the clearance of corticosteroids.

                     
                     
                        Cyclosporine: Increased activity of both cyclosporine and corticosteroids may occur when the two are used   concurrently. Convulsions have been reported with this concurrent use.

                     
                     
                        Digititus: patients on digitalis glycosides may be at increased risk of arrhythmias due to hypokalemia.

                     
                     
                        Estrogens, including oral contraceptives: Estrogens may decrease the hepatic metabolism of certain corticosteroids thereby increasing their effect.

                     
                     
                        NSAIDS, including aspirin and salicylates: Concomitant use of aspirin or other non-steroidal anti-inflammatory agents and corticosteroids increases the risk of gastrointestinal side effects. Aspirin should be used cautiously in conjunction with corticosteroids in hypoprothrombinemia. The clearance of salicylates may be increased with concurrent use of corticosteroids. 

                     
                     
                        Potassium-depleting agents (e.g., diuretics, Amphotericin B): When corticosteroids are administered concomitantly with potassium-depleting agents, patients should be observed closely for development of hypokalemia.

                     
                     
                        Skin Test: Corticosteroids may suppress reactions to skin tests.

                     
                     
                        Toxoids and live or inactivated Vaccines: Due to inhibition of antibody response, patients on prolonged corticosteroid therapy ma exhibit a diminished response, patients on prolonged corticosteroid therapy may exhibit a diminished response to toxoids and liver or inactivated vaccines.  Corticosteroids may also potentiate the replication of some organisms contained in live attenuated vaccines.
                  
               
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           Anticoagulant Agents: may enhance or diminish anticoagulant effects. Monitor coagulation indices. (7)

                           
                           Antidiabetic Agents: May increase blood glucose concentrations. Dose adjustments of antidiabetic agents may be required. (7)

                           
                           CYP 3A4 inducers and inhibitors: May, respectively, increase or decrease clearance of corticosteroids, necessitating dose adjustment. (7)

                           
                           Cyclosporine: Increase in activity of both, cyclosporine and corticosteroid when administered concurrently. Convulsions have been reported with concurrent use. (7)

                           
                           NSAIDS including aspirin and salicylates: Increased risk of gastrointestinal side effects. (7)
                        
                         
                     
                  
               
            
         