
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
                  Etravirine is a substrate of CYP3A, CYP2C9, and CYP2C19. Therefore, co-administration of INTELENCE® with drugs that induce or inhibit CYP3A, CYP2C9, and CYP2C19 may alter the therapeutic effect or adverse reaction profile of INTELENCE® (see Table 3). [See also Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)
                     .]
                  Etravirine is an inducer of CYP3A and inhibitor of CYP2C9, CYP2C19 and P-glycoprotein. Therefore, co-administration of drugs that are substrates of CYP3A, CYP2C9 and CYP2C19 or are transported by P-glycoprotein with INTELENCE® may alter the therapeutic effect or adverse reaction profile of the co-administered drug(s) (see Table 3). [See also Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)
                     .]
                  Table 3 shows the established and other potentially significant drug interactions based on which, alterations in dose or regimen of INTELENCE® and/or co-administered drug may be recommended. Drugs that are not recommended for co-administration with INTELENCE® are also included in Table 3. 
                  


                  


In addition to the drugs included in Table 3, the interaction between INTELENCE® and the following drugs were evaluated in clinical studies and no dose adjustment is needed for either drug [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)
                     ]: didanosine, enfuvirtide (ENF), ethinylestradiol/norethindrone, omeprazole, paroxetine, raltegravir, ranitidine, and tenofovir disoproxil fumarate.
               
               
               
                  
                     
                        INTELENCE® should not be co-administered with the following antiretrovirals:
                        
                           Tipranavir/ritonavir, fosamprenavir/ritonavir, atazanavir/ritonavir
                           Protease inhibitors administered without ritonavir
                           NNRTIs
                        
                        Co-administration of INTELENCE® with drugs that inhibit or induce CYP3A, CYP2C9, and/or CYP2C19 may alter the therapeutic effect or adverse reaction profile of etravirine. (7)
                        Co-administration of INTELENCE® with drugs that are substrates of CYP3A, CYP2C9, and/or CYP2C19 or are transported by P-glycoprotein may alter the therapeutic effect or adverse reaction profile of the co-administered drug(s). (7)
                         Refer to the Full Prescribing Information for other drugs that should not be co-administered with  INTELENCE®  and for other drugs that may require a change in dose or regimen. (7)
                     
                  
               
            
         