
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
                  Guanfacine is primarily metabolized by CYP3A4 and its plasma concentrations can be affected significantly by CYP3A4 inhibitors or inducers (Figure 1). Dose adjustments are recommended . Guanfacine does not significantly affect exposures of methylphenidate and lisdexamfetamine when coadministered (Figure 2). Therefore, no dose adjustments in methylphenidate or lisdexamfetamine are necessary.
                            [
                     ]
                                
                           see Dosage and Administration (2.7)
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     Figure 1: Impact of Other Drugs on the Pharmacokinetics (PK) of Intuniv
                  
                  
                     
                  
                  
                     Figure 2: Impact of Intuniv on the Pharmacokinetics (PK) of Other Drugs
                  
                  
                     
                  
               
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           Strong CYP3A4 inhibitors (e.g., ketoconazole): Coadministration increases guanfacine exposure. Guanfacine dose should be limited to no more than 2 mg/day. When discontinuing CYP3A4 inhibitors, guanfacine dose should be doubled based on patient tolerability. The maximum dose should not exceed 4 mg/day ( and ).
                                        2.7
                              7
                           
                           Strong CYP3A4 inducers (e.g., rifampin): Coadministration decreases guanfacine exposure. Guanfacine dose may be titrated up to 8 mg/day. When discontinuing CYP3A4 inducers, guanfacine dose should be decreased by half in 1-2 weeks based on patient tolerability. The maximum dose should not exceed 4 mg/day ( and ).
                                        2.7
                              7
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     Figure 1
                     
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     Figure 2
                     
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         