
               
               
               12.	CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1.	Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Doxepin binds with high affinity to the histamine H1 receptor (Ki < 1 nM) where it functions as an antagonist. The exact mechanism by which doxepin exerts its sleep maintenance effect is unknown but is believed due to its antagonism of the H1 receptor.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2.	Pharmacodynamics
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Cardiac Safety
                              
                              In a thorough QTc prolongation clinical study in healthy subjects, doxepin had no effect on QT intervals or other electrocardiographic parameters after multiple daily doses up to 50 mg.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3.	Pharmacokinetics
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Absorption
                              
                              The median time to peak concentrations (Tmax) of doxepin occurred at 3.5 hours postdose after oral administration of a 6 mg dose to fasted healthy subjects. Peak plasma concentrations (Cmax) of Silenor increased in approximately a dose-proportional manner for 3 mg and 6 mg doses. The AUC was increased by 41% and Cmax  by 15% when 6 mg Silenor was administered with a high fat meal. Additionally, compared to the fasted state, Tmax was delayed by approximately 3 hours. Therefore, for faster onset and to minimize the potential for next day effects, it is recommended that Silenor not be taken within 3 hours of a meal [see Dosage and Administration (2.3)].
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Distribution
                              
                              Silenor is widely distributed throughout the body tissues. The mean apparent volume of distribution following a single 6 mg oral dose of Silenor to healthy subjects was 11,930 liters. Silenor is approximately 80% bound to plasma proteins.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Metabolism
                              
                              Following oral administration, Silenor is extensively metabolized by oxidation and demethylation. The primary metabolite is N-desmethyldoxepin (nordoxepin).
                              The primary metabolite undergoes further biotransformation to glucuronide conjugates.
                              In vitro studies have shown that CYP2C19 and CYP2D6 are the major enzymes involved in doxepin metabolism, and that CYP1A2 and CYP2C9 are involved to a lesser extent.
                              Doxepin appears not to have inhibitory effects on human CYP enzymes at therapeutic concentrations. The potential of doxepin to induce metabolizing enzymes is not known. Doxepin is not a Pgp substrate.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Excretion
                              
                              Doxepin is excreted in the urine mainly in the form of glucuronide conjugates.
                              Less than 3% of a doxepin dose is excreted in the urine as parent compound or nordoxepin. The apparent terminal half-life (t ½) of doxepin was 15.3 hours and for nordoxepin was 31 hours.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.4.	 Drug Interactions
                     
                        Since doxepin is metabolized by CYP2C19 and CYP2D6, inhibitors of these CYP isozymes may increase the exposure of doxepin.
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Cimetidine:
                              
                              The effect of cimetidine, a non-specific inhibitor of CYP1A2, 2C19, 2D6, and 3A4, on Silenor plasma concentrations was evaluated in healthy subjects. When cimetidine 300 mg BID was co-administered with a single dose of Silenor 6 mg, there was approximately a 2-fold increase in Silenor Cmax and AUC compared to Silenor given alone. A maximum dose of doxepin in adults and elderly should be 3 mg, when doxepin is co-administered with cimetidine.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Sertraline:
                              
                              The effect of sertraline HCl, a selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor, on doxepin plasma concentrations was evaluated in a daytime study conducted with 24 healthy subjects. Following co-administration of doxepin 6 mg with sertraline 50 mg (at steady-state), the doxepin mean AUC and Cmax estimates were approximately 21% and 32% higher, respectively, than those obtained following administration of doxepin alone. Psychomotor function as measured by the digit symbol substitution test and symbol copy test performance was decreased more at 2-4 hours post dosing for the combination of sertraline and doxepin as compared to doxepin alone, but subjective measures of alertness were comparable for the two treatments.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.5.	 Special Populations
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Renal Impairment
                              
                              The effects of renal impairment on doxepin pharmacokinetics have not been studied. Because only small amounts of doxepin and nordoxepin are eliminated in the urine, renal impairment would not be expected to result in significantly altered doxepin concentrations.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Hepatic Impairment
                              
                              The effects of Silenor in patients with hepatic impairment have not been studied. Because doxepin is extensively metabolized by hepatic enzymes, patients with hepatic impairment may display higher doxepin concentrations than healthy individuals.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Poor Metabolizers of CYPs
                              
                              Poor metabolizers of CYP2C19 and CYP2D6 may have higher doxepin plasma levels than normal subjects.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         