
               
               
               
CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY

               
                  
                     Systemic Absorption
                  
                  Absorption studies in humans with the ciprofloxacin ointment have not been conducted, however, based on studies with ciprofloxacin solution, 0.3%, mean maximal concentrations are expected to be less than 2.5 ng/mL.
                  
                     Microbiology
                  
                  Ciprofloxacin has in vitro activity against a wide range of gram-negative and gram-positive organisms. The bactericidal action of ciprofloxacin results from interference with the enzyme DNA gyrase which is needed for the synthesis of bacterial DNA.
                  Ciprofloxacin has been shown to be active against most strains of the following microorganisms both in vitro and in clinical infections (SEE 
                        INDICATIONS AND USAGE
                      section).
                  
                     Aerobic gram-positive microorganisms:
                  
                  
                     Staphylococcus aureus (methicillin-susceptible strains)
                  
                     Staphylococcus epidermidis (methicillin-susceptible strains)
                  
                     Streptococcus pneumoniae
                  
                  
                     Streptococcus Viridans Group
                  
                     Aerobic gram-negative microorganisms:
                  
                  
                     Haemophilus influenzae
                  
                  The following in vitro data are available; but their clinical significance in ophthalmologic infections is unknown. The safety and effectiveness of ciprofloxacin in treating conjunctivitis due to these microorganisms have not been established in adequate and well controlled trials.
                  The following organisms are considered susceptible when evaluated using systemic breakpoints. However, a correlation between the in vitro systemic breakpoint and ophthalmological efficacy has not been established. Ciprofloxacin exhibits in vitro minimal inhibitory concentrations (MIC's) of 1 μg/mL or less (systemic susceptible breakpoint) against most (≥ 90%) strains of the following ocular pathogens.
                  
                     Aerobic gram-positive microorganisms:
                  
                  
                     Bacillus species
                  
                  
                     Corynebacterium species
                  
                  
                     Staphylococcus haemolyticus
                  
                  
                     Staphylococcus hominis
                  
                  
                     Aerobic gram-negative microorganisms:
                  
                  
                     Acinetobacter calcoaceticus
                  
                  
                     Enterobacter aerogenes
                  
                  
                     Escherichia coli
                  
                  
                     Haemophilus parainfluenzae
                  
                  
                     Klebsielle pneumoniae
                  
                  
                     Moraxella catarrhalis
                  
                  
                     Neisseria gonorrhoeae
                  
                  
                     Proteus mirabilis
                  
                  
                     Pseudomonas aeruginosa
                  
                  
                     Serratia marcesens
                  
                  Most strains of Burkholderia cepacia and some strains of Stenotrophomonas maltophilia are resistant to ciprofloxacin as are most anaerobic bacteria, including Bacteroides fragilis and Clostridium difficile.
                  The minimal bactericidal concentration (MBC) generally does not exceed the minimal inhibitory concentration (MIC) by more than a factor of 2. Resistance to ciprofloxacin in vitro usually develops slowly (multiple-step mutation). Ciprofloxacin does not cross-react with other antimicrobial agents such as beta-lactams or aminoglycosides; therefore, organisms resistant to these drugs may be susceptible to ciprofloxacin. Organisms resistant to ciprofloxacin may be susceptible to beta-lactams or aminoglycosides.
                  
                     Clinical Studies
                  
                  In multicenter clinical trials, approximately 75% of the patients with signs and symptoms of bacterial conjunctivitis and positive conjunctival cultures were clinically cured and approximately 80% had presumed pathogens eradicated by the end of treatment (day 7).
               
               
            
         