
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  Pharmacokinetics
                  
                  AbsorptionThe absolute oral bioavailability of mefloquine has not been 
determined since an intravenous formulation is not available. The 
bioavailability of the tablet formation compared with an oral solution was over 
85%. The presence of food significantly enhances the rate and extent of 
absorption, leading to about a 40% increase in bioavailability. In healthy 
volunteers, plasma concentrations peak 6 to 24 hours (median, about 17 hours) 
after a single dose of mefloquine. In a similar group of volunteers, maximum 
plasma concentrations in mcg/L are roughly equivalent to the dose in milligrams 
(for example, a single 1000 mg dose produces a maximum concentration of about 
1000 mcg/L). In healthy volunteers, a dose of 250 mg once weekly produces 
maximum steady-state plasma concentrations of 1000 to 2000 mcg/L, which are 
reached after 7 to 10 weeks.
                  
                  
                  DistributionIn healthy adults, the apparent volume of distribution is 
approximately 20 L/kg, indicating extensive tissue distribution. Mefloquine may 
accumulate in parasitized erythrocytes. Experiments conducted in vitro with human blood using concentrations between 50 
and 1000 mg/mL showed a relatively constant erythrocyte-to-plasma concentration 
ratio of about 2 to 1. The equilibrium reached in less than 30 minutes was found 
to be reversible. Protein binding is about 98%.
                  Mefloquine crosses the placenta. Excretion into breast milk appears to be 
minimal (see 
                        PRECAUTIONS: Nursing 
Mothers
                     ).
                  
                  
                  MetabolismMefloquine is extensively metabolized in the liver by the 
cytochrome P450 system. In vitro and in vivo studies strongly suggested that CYP3A4 is the major 
isoform involved.
                  Two metabolites of mefloquine have been identified in humans. The main 
metabolite, 2,8-bis-trifluoromethyl-4-quinoline 
carboxylic acid, is inactive in Plasmodium 
falciparum. In a study in healthy volunteers, the carboxylic acid 
metabolite appeared in plasma 2 to 4 hours after a single oral dose. Maximum 
plasma concentrations of the metabolite, which were about 50% higher than those 
of mefloquine, were reached after 2 weeks. Thereafter, plasma levels of the main 
metabolite and mefloquine declined at a similar rate. The area under the plasma 
concentration-time curve (AUC) of the main metabolite was 3 to 5 times larger 
than that of the parent drug. The other metabolite, an alcohol, was present in 
minute quantities only.
                  
                  
                  EliminationIn several studies in healthy adults, the mean elimination 
half-life of mefloquine varied between 2 and 4 weeks, with an average of about 3 
weeks. Total clearance, which is essentially hepatic, is in the order of 30 
mL/min. There is evidence that mefloquine is excreted mainly in the bile and 
feces. In volunteers, urinary excretion of unchanged mefloquine and its main 
metabolite under steady-state condition accounted for about 9% and 4% of the 
dose, respectively. Concentrations of other metabolites could not be measured in 
the urine.
                  
                  
                  Pharmacokinetics in Special Clinical 
Situations
                  
                  Children and the ElderlyNo relevant age-related changes have been observed in the 
pharmacokinetics of mefloquine. Therefore, the dosage for children has been 
extrapolated from the recommended adult dose.
                  No pharmacokinetic studies have been performed in patients with renal 
insufficiency since only a small proportion of the drug is eliminated renally. 
Mefloquine and its main metabolite are not appreciably removed by hemodialysis. 
No special chemoprophylactic dosage adjustments are indicated for dialysis 
patients to achieve concentrations in plasma similar to those in healthy 
persons.
                  Although clearance of mefloquine may increase in late pregnancy, in general, 
pregnancy has no clinically relevant effect on the pharmacokinetics of 
mefloquine.
                  The pharmacokinetics of mefloquine may be altered in acute malaria.
                  Pharmacokinetic differences have been observed between various ethnic 
populations. In practice, however, these are of minor importance compared with 
host immune status and sensitivity of the parasite.
                  During long-term prophylaxis (>2 years), the trough concentrations and the 
elimination half-life of mefloquine were similar to those obtained in the same 
population after 6 months of drug use, which is when they reached steady 
state.
                  
                     In vitro and in vivo 
studies showed no hemolysis associated with glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase 
deficiency (see 
                        ANIMAL 
TOXICOLOGY
                     ).
                  
                  
                  Microbiology
                  
                  Mechanism of ActionMefloquine is an antimalarial agent which acts as a blood 
schizonticide. Its exact mechanism of action is not known.
                  
                  
                  Activity In Vitro and In VivoMefloquine is active against the erythrocytic stages of Plasmodium species (See 
                        INDICATIONS AND USAGE
                     ). However, 
the drug has no effect against the exoerythrocytic (hepatic) stages of the 
parasite. Mefloquine is effective against malaria parasites resistant to 
chloroquine (see 
                        INDICATIONS AND USAGE
                     ).
                  
                  
                  Drug ResistanceStrains of P. falciparum with 
decreased susceptibility to mefloquine can be selected in 
vitro or in vivo. Resistance of P. falciparum to mefloquine has been reported in areas of 
multi-drug resistance in South East Asia. Increased incidences of resistance 
have also been reported in other parts of the world.
                  
                  
                  Cross ResistanceCross-resistance between mefloquine and halofantrine and 
cross-resistance between mefloquine and quinine have been observed in some 
regions.
               
               
            
         