
                     
                     
                      Drug Interactions 
                     
                        Specific drug interaction studies have not been conducted with CIPRODEX® Otic.
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                            Carcinogenesis, Mutagenesis, Impairment of Fertility 
                           
                              Long-term carcinogenicity studies in mice and rats have been completed for ciprofloxacin. After daily oral doses of 750 mg/kg (mice) and 250 mg/kg (rats) were administered for up to 2 years, there was no evidence that ciprofloxacin had any carcinogenic or tumorigenic effects in these species. No long term studies of CIPRODEX® Otic have been performed to evaluate carcinogenic potential.
                              Eight in vitro mutagenicity tests have been conducted with ciprofloxacin, and the test results are listed below:
                              
                                 Salmonella/Microsome Test (Negative)
                              
                                 E. coli DNA Repair Assay (Negative)
                              Mouse Lymphoma Cell Forward Mutation
                              Assay (Positive)
                              Chinese Hamster V79 Cell HGPRT Test (Negative)
                              Syrian Hamster Embryo Cell Transformation
                              Assay (Negative)
                              
                                 Saccharomyces cerevisiae Point Mutation
                              Assay (Negative)
                              
                                 Saccharomyces cerevisiae Mitotic Crossover and Gene
                              Conversion Assay (Negative)
                              Rat Hepatocyte DNA Repair Assay (Positive)
                              Thus, 2 of the 8 tests were positive, but results of the following 3 in vivo test systems gave negative results:
                              Rat Hepatocyte DNA Repair Assay
                              Micronucleus Test (Mice)
                              Dominant Lethal Test (Mice)
                              Fertility studies performed in rats at oral doses of ciprofloxacin up to 100 mg/kg/day revealed no evidence of impairment. This would be over 100 times the maximum recommended clinical dose of ototopical ciprofloxacin based upon body surface area, assuming total absorption of ciprofloxacin from the ear of a patient treated with CIPRODEX® Otic twice per day according to label directions.
                              Long term studies have not been performed to evaluate the carcinogenic potential of topical otic dexamethasone.  Dexamethasone has been tested for in vitro and in vivo genotoxic potential and shown to be positive in the following assays; chromosomal aberrations, sister-chromatid exchange in human lymphocytes and micronuclei and sister-chromatid exchanges in mouse bone marrow. However, the Ames/Salmonella assay, both with and without S9 mix, did not show any increase in His+ revertants. 
                              The effect of dexamethasone on fertility has not been investigated following topical otic application. However, the lowest toxic dose of dexamethasone identified following topical dermal application was 1.802 mg/kg in a 26-week study in male rats and resulted in changes to the testes, epididymis, sperm duct, prostate, seminal vessicle, Cowper's gland and accessory glands. The relevance of this study for short term topical otic use is unknown.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               