
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  Nabumetone is a non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID) that exhibits anti-inflammatory, analgesic, and antipyretic properties in pharmacologic studies. As with other non-steroidal anti-inflammatory agents, its mode of action is not known; however, the ability to inhibit prostaglandin synthesis may be involved in the anti-inflammatory effect.
                  The parent compound is a prodrug, which undergoes hepatic biotransformation to the active component, 6-methoxy-2-naphthylacetic acid (6MNA) that is a potent inhibitor of prostaglandin synthesis.
                  
                     
                  
                  It is acidic and has an n-octanol:phosphate buffer partition coefficient of 0.5 at pH 7.4.
               
               
               
                  
                     parent
                     
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Special Studies: 
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Elderly Patients: 
                           
                           
                              Steady-state plasma concentrations in elderly patients were generally higher than in young healthy subjects (see Table 1 for summary of pharmacokinetic parameters).
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Renal Insufficiency: 
                           
                           
                              In moderate renal insufficiency patients (creatinine clearance 30 to 49 mL/min), the terminal half-life of 6MNA was increased by approximately 50% (39.2 ± 7.8 hrs, N=12) compared to the normal subjects (26.9 ± 3.3 hrs, N=13), and there was a 50% increase in the plasma levels of unbound 6MNA.
                              Additionally, the renal excretion of 6MNA in the moderate renal impaired patients decreased on average by 33% compared to that in the normal patients. A similar increase in the mean terminal half-life of 6MNA was seen in a small study of patients with severe renal dysfunction (creatine clearance <30 mLlmin). In patients undergoing hemodialysis, steady-state plasma concentrations of the active metabolite 6MNA were similar to those observed in healthy subjects. Due to extensive protein binding, 6MNA is not dialyzable.
                              Dosage adjustment of nabumetone generally is not necessary in patients with mild renal insufficiency (~50 mL/min). Caution should be used in prescribing nabumetone to patients with moderate or severe renal insufficiency. The maximum starting doses of nabumetone in patients with moderate or severe renal insufficiency should not exceed 750 mg or 500 mg, respectively once daily. Following careful monitoring of renal function in patients with moderate or severe renal insufficiency, daily doses may be increased to a maximum of 1,500 mg and 1,000 mg, respectively (see 
           
 
  
                                    WARNINGS: Renal Effects: 
                                 ).
          

 
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Hepatic Impairment: 
                           
                           
                              Data in patients with severe hepatic impairment are limited.  Biotransformation of nabumetone to 6MNA and the further metabolism of 6MNA to inactive metabolites is dependent on hepatic function and could be reduced in patients with severe hepatic impairment (history of or biopsy-proven cirrhosis).
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Pharmacokinetics:
                     
                        After oral administration, approximately 80% of a radiolabelled dose of nabumetone is found in the urine, indicating that nabumetone is well absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract. Nabumetone itself is not detected in the plasma because, after absorption, it undergoes rapid biotransformation to the principal active metabolite, 6methoxy- 2-naphthylacetic acid (6MNA). Approximately 35% of a 1,000-mg oral dose of nabumetone is converted to 6MNA and 50% is converted into unidentified metabolites which are subsequently excreted in the urine. Following oral administration of nabumetone, 6MNA exhibits pharmacokinetic characteristics that generally follow a one-compartment model with first order input and first order elimination.
                        6MNA is more than 99% bound to plasma proteins. The free fraction is dependent on total concentration of 6MNA and is proportional to dose over the range of 1,000 mg to 2,000 mg. It is 0.2% to 0.3% at concentrations typically achieved following administration of 1,000 mg of nabumetone and is approximately 0.6% to 0.8% of the total concentrations at steady state following daily administration of 2,000 mg.
                        Steady-state plasma concentrations of 6MNA are slightly lower than predicted from single dose data. This may result from higher fraction of unbound 6MNA which undergoes greater hepatic clearance.
                        Coadministration of food increases the rate of absorption and subsequent appearance of 6MNA in the plasma but does not affect the extent of conversion of nabumetone into 6MNA. Peak plasma concentrations of 6MNA are increased by approximately one third.
                        Coadministration with an aluminum-containing antacid had no significant effect on the bioavailability of 6MNA.
                        
                           
                        
                        Table 1. Mean Pharmacokinetic Parameters of Nabumetone Active Metabolite (6MNA) at Steady State Following Oral Administration of 1,000-mg or 2,000-mg Doses of Nabumetone
                        The simulated curves in the graph below illustrate the range of active metabolite plasma concentrations that would be expected from 95% of patients following 1,000-mg to 2,000-mg doses to steady state. The cross-hatched area represents the expected overlap in plasma concentrations due to intersubject variation following oral administration of 1,000 mg to 2,000 mg of nabumetone.
                        
                           
                        
                        6MNA undergoes biotransformation in the liver, producing inactive metabolites that are eliminated as both free metabolites and conjugates. None of the known metabolites of 6MNA has been detected in plasma. Preliminary 
  in vivo and 
  in vitro studies suggest that unlike other NSAIDs, there is no evidence of enterohepatic recirculation of the active metabolite. Approximately 75% of a radiolabelled dose was recovered in urine in 48 hours.
 
                        Approximately 80% was recovered in 168 hours. A further 9% appeared in the feces. In the first 48 hours, metabolites consisted of:
                        
                           
                        
                        Following oral administration of dosages of 1,000 mg to 2,000 mg to steady state, the mean plasma clearance of 6MNA is 20 to 30 mL/min and the elimination half-life is approximately 24 hours.
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           table1
                           
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           simcurves
                           
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           metabolites
                           
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         