
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        
                           Clindamycin: Clindamycin is a lincosamide antibacterial [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.4)].
                        
                           Benzoyl Peroxide: Benzoyl peroxide is an oxidizing agent with bacteriocidal and keratolytic effects, but the precise mechanism of action is unknown.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        A comparative trial of the pharmacokinetics of clindamycin phosphate and benzoyl peroxide gel, 1.2%/5% and 1% clindamycin solution alone in 78 subjects indicated that mean plasma clindamycin levels during the 4-week dosing period were <0.5 ng/mL for both treatment groups.
                        Benzoyl peroxide has been shown to be absorbed by the skin where it is converted to benzoic acid. Less than 2% of the dose enters systemic circulation as benzoic acid.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.4 Microbiology
                     
                        Clindamycin binds to the 50S ribosomal subunits of susceptible bacteria and prevents elongation of peptide chains by interfering with peptidyl transfer, thereby suppressing protein synthesis.
                        
                           In Vivo Activity: No microbiology studies were conducted in the clinical trials with this product.
                        
                           In Vitro Activity: The clindamycin and benzoyl peroxide components individually have been shown to have in vitro activity against Propionibacterium
                            acnes, an organism which has been associated with acne vulgaris; however, the clinical significance of this in vitro activity is not known.
                        
                           Drug Resistance: There are reports of an increase of P. acnes resistance to clindamycin in the treatment of acne. In patients with P. acnes resistant to clindamycin, the clindamycin component may provide no additional benefit beyond benzoyl peroxide alone.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         