
                     
                     
                     
                        Drug Interactions:
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                    P450 Interaction:
                                 
                                 In vitro metabolism studies showed that CYP1A2 was the major enzyme responsible for the metabolism of ropinirole. There is thus the potential for substrates or inhibitors of this enzyme when coadministered with ropinirole to alter its clearance. Therefore, if therapy with a drug known to be a potent inhibitor of CYP1A2 is stopped or started during treatment with ropinirole hydrochloride, adjustment of the dose of ropinirole hydrochloride may be required.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                    L-dopa:
                                  Co-administration of carbidopa + L-dopa (SINEMET® 10/100 mg twice daily) with ropinirole (2 mg 3 times daily) had no effect on the steady-state pharmacokinetics of ropinirole (n = 28 patients). Oral administration of ropinirole hydrochloride 2 mg 3 times daily increased mean steady state Cmax of L-dopa by 20%, but its AUC was unaffected (n = 23 patients).
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                    Digoxin:
                                  Co-administration of ropinirole hydrochloride (2 mg 3 times daily) with digoxin (0.125 to 0.25 mg once daily) did not alter the steady-state pharmacokinetics of digoxin in 10 patients.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                    Theophylline:
                                  Administration of theophylline (300 mg twice daily, a substrate of CYP1A2) did not alter the steady-state pharmacokinetics of ropinirole (2 mg 3 times daily) in 12 patients with Parkinson's disease. Ropinirole (2 mg 3 times daily) did not alter the pharmacokinetics of theophylline (5 mg/kg IV) in 12 patients with Parkinson's disease.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                    Ciprofloxacin:
                                  Co-administration of ciprofloxacin (500 mg twice daily), an inhibitor of CYP1A2, with ropinirole (2 mg 3 times daily) increased ropinirole AUC by 84% on average and Cmax by 60% (n = 12 patients).
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                    Estrogens:
                                  Population pharmacokinetic analysis revealed that estrogens (mainly ethinylestradiol: intake 0.6 to 3 mg over 4-month to 23-year period) reduced the oral clearance of ropinirole by 36% in 16 patients. Dosage adjustment may not be needed for ropinirole hydrochloride in patients on estrogen therapy because patients must be carefully titrated with ropinirole to tolerance or adequate effect. However, if estrogen therapy is stopped or started during treatment with ropinirole hydrochloride, then adjustment of the dose of ropinirole hydrochloride may be required.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                    Dopamine Antagonists:
                                  Since ropinirole is a dopamine agonist, it is possible that dopamine antagonists such as neuroleptics (phenothiazines, butyrophenones, thioxanthenes) or metoclopramide may diminish the effectiveness of ropinirole hydrochloride. Patients with major psychotic disorders treated with neuroleptics should only be treated with dopamine agonists if the potential benefits outweigh the risks.
                              Population analysis showed that commonly administered drugs, e.g., selegiline, amantadine, tricyclic antidepressants, benzodiazepines, ibuprofen, thiazides, antihistamines, and anticholinergics, did not affect the oral clearance of ropinirole.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Carcinogenesis, Mutagenesis, Impairment of Fertility: Two-year carcinogenicity studies were conducted in Charles River CD-1 mice at doses of 5, 15, and 50 mg/kg/day and in Sprague-Dawley rats at doses of 1.5, 15, and 50 mg/kg/day (top doses equivalent to 10 and 20 times, respectively, the maximum recommended human dose of 24 mg/day on a mg/m2 basis). In the male rat, there was a significant increase in testicular Leydig cell adenomas at all doses tested, i.e.,≥ 1.5 mg/kg (0.6 times the maximum recommended human dose on a mg/m2 basis). This finding is of questionable significance because the endocrine mechanisms believed to be involved in the production of Leydig cell hyperplasia and adenomas in rats are not relevant to humans. In the female mouse, there was an increase in benign uterine endometrial polyps at a dose of 50 mg/kg/day (10 times the maximum recommended human dose on a mg/m2 basis).
                              Ropinirole was not mutagenic or clastogenic in the in vitro Ames test, the in vitro chromosome aberration test in human lymphocytes, the in vitro mouse lymphoma (L1578Y cells) assay, and the in vivo mouse micronucleus test.
                              When administered to female rats prior to and during mating and throughout pregnancy, ropinirole caused disruption of implantation at doses of 20 mg/kg/day (8 times the maximum recommended human dose on a mg/m2 basis) or greater. This effect is thought to be due to the prolactin-lowering effect of ropinirole. In humans, chorionic gonadotropin, not prolactin, is essential for implantation. In rat studies using low doses (5 mg/kg) during the prolactin-dependent phase of early pregnancy (gestation days 0 to 8), ropinirole did not affect female fertility at dosages up to 100 mg/kg/day (40 times the maximum recommended human dose on a mg/m2 basis). No effect on male fertility was observed in rats at dosages up to 125 mg/kg/day (50 times the maximum recommended human dose on a mg/m2 basis).
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Pregnancy: Pregnancy Category C: In animal reproduction studies, ropinirole has been shown to have adverse effects on embryo-fetal development, including teratogenic effects. Ropinirole given to pregnant rats during organogenesis (20 mg/kg on gestation days 6 and 7 followed by 20, 60, 90, 120, or 150 mg/kg on gestation days 8 through 15) resulted in decreased fetal body weight at 60 mg/kg/day, increased fetal death at 90 mg/kg/day, and digital malformations at 150 mg/kg/day (24, 36, and 60 times the maximum recommended clinical dose on a mg/m2 basis, respectively). The combined administration of ropinirole (10 mg/kg/day, 8 times the maximum recommended human dose on a mg/m2 basis) and L-dopa (250 mg/kg/day) to pregnant rabbits during organogenesis produced a greater incidence and severity of fetal malformations (primarily digit defects) than were seen in the offspring of rabbits treated with L-dopa alone. No indication of an effect on development of the conceptus was observed in rabbits when a maternally toxic dose of ropinirole was administered alone (20 mg/kg/day, 16 times the maximum recommended human dose on a mg/m2 basis). In a perinatal-postnatal study in rats, 10 mg/kg/day (4 times the maximum recommended human dose on a mg/m2 basis) of ropinirole impaired growth and development of nursing offspring and altered neurological development of female offspring.
                              There are no adequate and well-controlled studies using ropinirole hydrochloride in pregnant women. Ropinirole hydrochloride should be used during pregnancy only if the potential benefit outweighs the potential risk to the fetus.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Nursing Mothers: Ropinirole hydrochloride inhibits prolactin secretion in humans and could potentially inhibit lactation.
                              Studies in rats have shown that ropinirole hydrochloride and/or its metabolite(s) is excreted in breast milk. It is not known whether this drug is excreted in human milk. Because many drugs are excreted in human milk and because of the potential for serious adverse reactions in nursing infants from ropinirole hydrochloride, a decision should be made whether to discontinue nursing or to discontinue the drug, taking into account the importance of the drug to the mother.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Pediatric Use: Safety and effectiveness in the pediatric population have not been established.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               