
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  Fludarabine phosphate is rapidly dephosphorylated to 2-fluoro-ara-A and then phosphorylated intracellularly by deoxycytidine kinase to the active triphosphate, 2-fluoro-ara-ATP. This metabolite appears to act by inhibiting DNA polymerase alpha, ribonucleotide reductase and DNA primase, thus inhibiting DNA synthesis. The mechanism of action of this antimetabolite is not completely characterized and may be multi-faceted. 
                  Phase I studies in humans have demonstrated that fludarabine phosphate is rapidly converted to the active metabolite, 2-fluoro-ara- A, within minutes after intravenous infusion. Consequently, clinical pharmacology studies have focused on 2-fluoro-ara-A pharmacokinetics. After the five daily doses of 25 mg 2-fluoro-ara-AMP/m2 to cancer patients infused over 30 minutes, 2-fluoro-ara- A concentrations show a moderate accumulation. During a 5-day treatment schedule, 2-fluoro-ara-A plasma trough levels increased by a factor of about 2. The terminal half-life of 2-fluoro-ara-A was estimated as approximately 20 hours. In vitro, plasma protein binding of fludarabine ranged between 19% and 29%.
                  A correlation was noted between the degree of absolute granulocyte count nadir and increased area under the concentration x time curve (AUC).
               
               
               
                  
                     
                     Special Populations
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           Pediatric Patients
                           
                              Limited pharmacokinetic data for fludarabine phosphate injection are available from a published study of children (ages 1– 21 years) with refractory acute leukemias or solid tumors (Children’s Cancer Group Study 097). When fludarabine phosphate injection was administered as a loading dose over 10 minutes immediately followed by a 5-day continuous infusion, steady-state conditions were reached early.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           Patients with Renal Impairment
                           
                              The total body clearance of the principal metabolite 2-fluoro-ara-A correlated with the creatinine clearance, indicating the importance of the renal excretion pathway for the elimination of the drug. Renal clearance represents approximately 40% of the total body clearance. Patients with creatinine clearance 30-79 mL/min should have their Fludarabine Phosphate Injection dose reduced and be monitored closely for excessive toxicity. Due to insufficient data, Fludarabine Phosphate Injection should not be administered to patients with creatinine clearance less than 30 mL/min. (See 
                                    DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION 
                                 section).
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         