
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        BETHKIS is an antibacterial drug (see 12.4 Microbiology).
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        BETHKIS contains tobramycin, a cationic polar molecule that does not readily cross epithelial membranes.1 The bioavailability of BETHKIS may vary because of individual differences in nebulizer performance and airway pathology.2 Following administration of BETHKIS, tobramycin remains concentrated primarily in the airways.
                        
                           Sputum Concentrations: Thirty minutes after inhalation of the first 300 mg dose of BETHKIS, the maximum geometric mean concentration of tobramycin was 814 mcg/g (ranging from 23 to 2843 mcg/g) in sputum. High variability of tobramycin concentration in sputum was observed. Three hours after inhalation started, sputum tobramycin concentrations declined to approximately 15% of those observed at 30 minutes.  After four weeks of therapy with BETHKIS average mean sputum tobramycin concentrations obtained 10 minutes following administration were 717 mcg/g.
                        
                           Elimination: The elimination half-life of tobramycin from serum is approximately two hours after intravenous (IV) administration. The elimination half-life following the inhalation of BETHKIS is approximately 4.4 hours. Assuming tobramycin absorbed following inhalation behaves similarly to tobramycin following intravenous administration, systemically absorbed tobramycin is eliminated principally by glomerular filtration.  Unabsorbed tobramycin following inhalation is likely eliminated in expectorated sputum. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.4 Microbiology
                     
                        
                           Mechanism of Action
                        
                        Tobramycin, an aminoglycoside antimicrobial, acts primarily by disrupting protein synthesis in the bacterial cell which eventually leads to death of the cell. Tobramycin has activity against a wide range of gram-negative bacteria including P. aeruginosa.  It is bactericidal at or above the minimal inhibitory concentration (MIC) needed to inhibit growth of bacteria.
                        
                           Mechanism of Resistance
                        
                        The predominant mechanism of resistance to tobramycin in P. aeruginosa isolated from CF patients is impermeability and to a lesser extent enzymatic modification and other mechanisms which cumulatively lead to decreased susceptibility of P. aeruginosa to tobramycin.
                        
                           Cross Resistance
                        
                        Cross resistance between aminoglycosides exists but the cross resistance is variable.
                        
                           Development of Resistance
                        
                        Treatment for six months with BETHKIS in one clinical trial did not affect the susceptibility of the majority of P. aeruginosa isolates tested; however, increases in minimal inhibitory concentrations (MIC) were noted in some patients.  The clinical significance of this information has not been clearly established in the treatment of cystic fibrosis patients.
                        
                           Susceptibility Testing
                        
                        The clinical microbiology laboratory should provide cumulative results of the in vitro susceptibility test results for antimicrobial drugs used in local hospitals and practice areas to the physicians as periodic reports that describe the susceptibility profile of nosocomial and community-acquired pathogens. These reports should aid the physician in selecting the most effective antimicrobial.
                        
                           Susceptibility Testing Techniques
                        
                        
                           
                              Dilution Techniques
                           
                        
                        Quantitative methods can be used to determine the minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) of tobramycin that will inhibit the growth of the bacteria being tested. The MIC provides an estimate of the susceptibility of bacteria to tobramycin. The MIC should be determined using a standardized procedure.3, 5 Standardized procedures are based on a dilution method (broth or agar) or equivalent with standardized inoculum concentrations and standardized concentrations of tobramycin powder.
                        
                           
                              Diffusion Techniques
                           
                        
                        Quantitative methods that require measurement of zone diameters also provide reproducible estimates of the susceptibility of bacteria to antimicrobial compounds. One such standardized procedure requires the use of standardized inoculum concentrations.4,5 This procedure uses paper disks impregnated with 10 mcg of tobramycin to test the susceptibility of bacteria to tobramycin.
                        
                           Susceptibility Test Interpretive Criteria
                        
                        
                           In vitro susceptibility test interpretive criteria for inhaled tobramycin have not been determined. The relation of the in vitro MIC and/or disk diffusion susceptibility test results to clinical efficacy of inhaled tobramycin against the bacteria tested should be monitored. 
                        
                           Quality Control Parameters for Susceptibility Testing
                        
                        
                           In vitro susceptibility test quality control parameters exist for tobramycin so that laboratories that test the susceptibility of bacterial isolates to tobramycin can determine if the susceptibility test is performing correctly. Standardized dilution techniques and diffusion methods require the use of laboratory control bacteria to monitor the technical aspects of the laboratory procedures. Standard tobramycin powder should provide the following MIC and a 10 mcg tobramycin disk should produce the following zone diameters with the indicated quality control strains (Table 2).
                        


                        



                           Other
                        
                        No trends in the treatment-emergent isolation of other bacterial respiratory pathogens such as Burkholderia cepacia, Stenotrophomonas maltophilia, Achromobacter xylosoxidans, or Staphylococcus aureus were observed in clinical trials of BETHKIS relative to placebo. There was a slight increase in isolation of Candida spp in sputum at the end of the BETHKIS treatment cycle in clinical trials.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         