
               
               
               
                  12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                     
                        Hydrocodone is a semisynthetic narcotic antitussive and analgesic with multiple actions qualitatively similar to those of codeine. The precise mechanism of action of hydrocodone and other opiates is not known; however, hydrocodone is believed to act directly on the cough center. In excessive doses, hydrocodone will depress respiration. Hydrocodone can produce miosis, euphoria, and physical and physiological dependence.
                        
                        Pseudoephedrine hydrochloride is an orally active sympathomimetic amine and exerts a decongestant action on the nasal mucosa. Pseudoephedrine hydrochloride is recognized as an effective agent for the relief of nasal congestion due to upper respiratory allergies or common cold. Pseudoephedrine produces peripheral effects similar to those of ephedrine and central effects similar to, but less intense than, amphetamines. It has the potential for excitatory side effects.
                        
                        Guaifenesin is an expectorant the action of which promotes or facilitates the removal of secretions from the respiratory tract. The precise mechanism of action of guaifenesin is not known; however, it is thought to act as an expectorant by increasing the volume and reducing the viscosity of secretions in the trachea and bronchi. In turn, this may increase the efficiency of the cough reflex and facilitate removal of the secretions.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                     
                        Systemic exposure (in terms of peak plasma concentrations and area under plasma concentration versus time curve) of hydrocodone bitartrate, pseudoephedrine hydrochloride, and guaifenesin after a single 10 mL oral dose administration of 5 mg hydrocodone bitartrate, 60 mg pseudoephedrine hydrochloride, and 400 mg guaifenesin are equivalent to the respective reference solutions of 5 mL hydrocodone bitartrate (5 mg/5 mL), 5 mL pseudoephedrine hydrochloride (30 mg/5 mL), and 10 mL guaifenesin (200 mg/5 mL).
                        
                        
                           Hydrocodone
                           

Following a single 10 mL oral dose administration of 5 mg hydrocodone bitartrate, 60 mg pseudoephedrine hydrochloride, and 400 mg guaifenesin administered to 37 healthy adults, the geometric mean C
  max and AUC
  0-inf for hydrocodone were 9.0 ng/mL and 61.2 ng·hr/mL, respectively. The median time to maximum concentration for hydrocodone was about 1.67 hours. Food has no significant effect on the extent of absorption of hydrocodone. The mean plasma half-life of hydrocodone is approximately 4 hours.
 
                        
                        
                           Pseudoephedrine
                           

Following a single 10 mL oral dose administration of 5 mg hydrocodone bitartrate, 60 mg pseudoephedrine hydrochloride, and 400 mg guaifenesin administered to 37 healthy adults, the geometric mean C
  max and AUC
  0-inf for pseudoephedrine were 0.19 mcg/mL and 1.9 mcg·hr/mL, respectively. The median time to maximum concentration for pseudoephedrine was about 2.5 hours. Food has no significant effect on the extent of absorption of pseudoephedrine. The mean plasma half-life of pseudoephedrine is approximately 6 hours.
  

                        
                        
                           Guaifenesin
                           

Following a single 10 mL oral dose administration of 5 mg hydrocodone bitartrate, 60 mg pseudoephedrine hydrochloride, and 400 mg guaifenesin administered to 36 healthy adults, the geometric mean C
  max and AUC
  0-inf for guaifenesin were 2.0 mcg/mL and 2.6 mcg·hr/mL, respectively. The median time to maximum concentration was about 25 minutes. The effect of food on guaifenesin systemic exposure is not considered to be clinically meaningful. The mean plasma half-life of guaifenesin is approximately 1 hour.
  

                        
                        
                           Drug interactions
                           

When guaifenesin, pseudoephedrine, and hydrocodone were administered in combination, the pharmacokinetics for each component was similar to those observed when each component was administered separately.
 
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         