
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Bexarotene selectively binds and activates retinoid X receptor subtypes (RXRα, RXRß, RXRᵞ). RXRs can form heterodimers with various receptor partners such as retinoic acid receptors (RARs), vitamin D receptor, thyroid receptor, and peroxisome proliferator activator receptors (PPARs). Once activated, these receptors function as transcription factors that regulate the expression of genes that control cellular differentiation and proliferation.  Bexarotene inhibits the growth in vitro of some tumor cell lines of hematopoietic and squamous cell origin.  It also induces tumor regression in vivo in some animal models.  The exact mechanism of action of bexarotene in the treatment of cutaneous T-cell lymphoma (CTCL) is unknown.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        Terminal half-life of bexarotene is approximately seven hours.  Studies in patients with advanced malignancies show approximate single dose linearity within the therapeutic range.
                        
                           Absorption 
                        
                        After oral administration of TARGRETIN, bexarotene is absorbed with a Tmax of about two hours.  Plasma bexarotene AUC and Cmax values resulting from a 75 to 300 mg dose were 35% and 48% higher, respectively, after a fat-containing meal than after a glucose solution.
                        
                           Distribution 
                        
                        Bexarotene is highly bound (>99%) to plasma proteins. The plasma proteins to which bexarotene binds have not been elucidated, and the ability of bexarotene to displace drugs bound to plasma proteins and the ability of drugs to displace bexarotene binding have not been studied
                        
                           Elimination
                        
                        
                           Metabolism
                        
                        Four bexarotene metabolites have been identified in plasma: 6- and 7-hydroxy-bexarotene and 6- and 7-oxo-bexarotene.  In vitro studies suggest that cytochrome P450 3A4 is the major cytochrome P450 responsible for formation of the oxidative metabolites and that the oxidative metabolites may be glucuronidated.  The oxidative metabolites are active in in vitro assays of retinoid receptor activation, but the relative contribution of the parent and any metabolites to the efficacy and safety of TARGRETIN is unknown.
                        
                           Excretion
                        
                        The renal elimination of bexarotene and its metabolites was examined in patients with Type 2 diabetes mellitus.  Urinary elimination of bexarotene and its known metabolites is a minor excretory pathway (<1% of administered dose).
                        
                           Pharmacokinetics in Specific Populations
                        
                        Age: Based on the population pharmacokinetic analysis of data for 232 patients aged >65 years and 343 patients aged <65 years, age  has no statistically significant effect on bexarotene pharmacokinetics.
                        Body Weight and Gender: Based on the population pharmacokinetics analysis of data for 614 patients with a weight range of 26 to 145 kg, the bexarotene apparent clearance increases with increasing body weight.  Gender has no statistically significant effect on bexarotene pharmacokinetics.
                        Race: Based on the population pharmacokinetic analysis of data for 540 Caucasian and 44 Black patients, bexarotene pharmacokinetics are similar in Blacks and Caucasians.  There are insufficient data to evaluate potential differences in the pharmacokinetics of bexarotene for other races.
                        Renal Impairment: No formal studies have been conducted with TARGRETIN in patients with renal impairment.  Urinary elimination of bexarotene and its known metabolites is a minor excretory pathway (<1% of administered dose), but because renal impairment can result in significant protein binding changes, pharmacokinetics may be altered in patients with renal impairment. 
                        Hepatic Impairment: No specific studies have been conducted with TARGRETIN in patients with hepatic impairment.  Because less than 1% of the dose is excreted in the urine unchanged and there is in vitro evidence of extensive hepatic contribution to bexarotene elimination, hepatic impairment would be expected to lead to greatly decreased clearance.
                        
                           Drug Interactions
                        
                        
                           
                              Effect of Other Drugs on TARGRETIN
                           
                        
                        CYP3A4 Inhibitors/Inducers: In a clinical study, concomitant administration of multiple doses of ketoconazole with TARGRETIN did not alter bexarotene plasma concentrations.  This suggests that bexarotene elimination is not dependent on CYP3A4 metabolism.
                        Paclitaxel plus Carboplatin: The co-administration of paclitaxel (200 mg/m2 IV dose over 3 hours) plus carboplatin (at a dose expected to achieve an AUC of 6 mg●min/mL) with TARGRETIN (400 mg/m2 orally once daily) increased the exposure to bexarotene (AUC0-24 and Cmax) by 2-fold compared to TARGRETIN alone.
                        Atorvastatin: Bexarotene concentrations were not affected by concomitant atorvastatin administration.  
                        
                           
                              Effect of TARGRETIN on Other Drugs
                           
                        
                        Bexarotene did not significantly inhibit the following enzymes in human liver microsomes: CYP1A2, CYP2A6, CYP2C9, CYP2C19, CYP2D6, CYP2E1 and CYP3A4.  In vitro data suggested a potential for bexarotene to inhibit CYP2C8 and induce CYP3A4.  
                        Atorvastatin: The exposure (AUC) to atorvastatin (a substrate for CYP3A4) decreased by half when atorvastatin was co-administered with TARGRETIN (400 mg/m2 orally once daily).
                        Tamoxifen: Based on interim data, concomitant administration of TARGRETIN and tamoxifen resulted in approximately a 35% decrease in plasma concentrations of tamoxifen, possibly through induction of CYP3A4 by bexarotene.
                        Paclitaxel: The exposure (AUC) to paclitaxel (a substrate for CYP3A4 and CYP2C8) decreased by 19% when paclitaxel (200 mg/m2 IV dose over 3 hours) was co-administered with TARGRETIN (400 mg/m2 orally once daily). 
                        Carboplatin: The co-administration of TARGRETIN (400 mg/m2 orally once daily) had no effect on the exposure to free or total carboplatin.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         