
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  Following oral administration, the bioavailability of ofloxacin in the tablet formulation is approximately 98%. Maximum serum concentrations are achieved one to two hours after an oral dose. Absorption of ofloxacin after single or multiple doses of 200 to 400 mg is predictable, and the amount of drug absorbed increases proportionately with the dose. Ofloxacin has biphasic elimination. Following multiple oral doses at steady-state administration, the half-lives are approximately 4–5 hours and 20–25 hours. However, the longer half-life represents less than 5% of the total AUC. Accumulation at steady-state can be estimated using a half-life of 9 hours. The total clearance and volume of distribution are approximately similar after single or multiple doses. Elimination is mainly by renal excretion. The following are mean peak serum concentrations in healthy 70–80 kg male volunteers after single oral doses of 200, 300, or 400 mg of ofloxacin or after multiple oral doses of 400 mg. 
                  


                  


Steady-state concentrations were attained after four oral doses, and the area under the curve (AUC) was approximately 40% higher than the AUC after single doses. Therefore, after multiple-dose administration of 200 mg and 300 mg doses, peak serum levels of 2.2 µg/mL and 3.6 µg/mL, respectively, are predicted at steady-state.
                  In vitro, approximately 32% of the drug in plasma is protein bound.
                  The single dose and steady-state plasma profiles of ofloxacin injection were comparable in extent of exposure (AUC) to those of ofloxacin tablets when the injectable and tablet formulations of ofloxacin were administered in equal doses (mg/mg) to the same group of subjects. The mean steady-state AUC (0–12) attained after the intravenous administration of 400 mg over 60 min was 43.5 µg•h/mL; the mean steady-state AUC(0–12) attained after the oral administration of 400 mg was 41.2 µg•h/mL (two one-sided t-test, 90% confidence interval was 103–109). (See following chart.)
                  
                  Between 0 and 6 h following the administration of a single 200 mg oral dose of ofloxacin to 12 healthy volunteers, the average urine ofloxacin concentration was approximately 220 µg/mL. Between 12 and 24 hours after administration, the average urine ofloxacin level was approximately 34 µg/mL.
                  Following oral administration of recommended therapeutic doses, ofloxacin has been detected in blister fluid, cervix, lung tissue, ovary, prostatic fluid, prostatic tissue, skin, and sputum. The mean concentration of ofloxacin in each of these various body fluids and tissues after one or more doses was 0.8 to 1.5 times the concurrent plasma level. Inadequate data are presently available on the distribution or levels of ofloxacin in the cerebrospinal fluid or brain tissue.
                  Ofloxacin has a pyridobenzoxazine ring that appears to decrease the extent of parent compound metabolism. Between 65% and 80% of an administered oral dose of ofloxacin is excreted unchanged via the kidneys within 48 hours of dosing. Studies indicate that less than 5% of an administered dose is recovered in the urine as the desmethyl or N-oxide metabolites. Four to eight percent of an ofloxacin dose is excreted in the feces. This indicates a small degree of biliary excretion of ofloxacin.
                  The administration of ofloxacin tablets with food does not affect the Cmax and AUC∞ of the drug, but Tmax is prolonged. 
                  Clearance of ofloxacin is reduced in patients with impaired renal function (creatinine clearance rate ≤50 mL/min), and dosage adjustment is necessary. (See 
                        PRECAUTIONS: General 
                     and 
                        DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION.
                     ) 
                  Following oral administration to healthy elderly subjects (65-81 years of age), maximum plasma concentrations are usually achieved one to two hours after single and multiple twice-daily doses, indicating that the rate of oral absorption is unaffected by age or gender. Mean peak plasma concentrations in elderly subjects were 9-21% higher than those observed in younger subjects. Gender differences in the pharmacokinetic properties of elderly subjects have been observed. Peak plasma concentrations were 114% and 54% higher in elderly females compared to elderly males following single and multiple twice-daily doses. [This interpretation was based on study results collected from two separate studies.] Plasma concentrations increase dose-dependently with the increase in doses after single oral dose and at steady state. No differences were observed in the volume of distribution values between elderly and younger subjects. As in younger subjects, elimination is mainly by renal excretion as unchanged drug in elderly subjects, although less drug is recovered from renal excretion in elderly subjects. Consistent with younger subjects, less than 5% of an administered dose was recovered in the urine as the desmethyl and N-oxide metabolites in the elderly. A longer plasma half-life of approximately 6.4 to 7.4 hours was observed in elderly subjects, compared with 4 to 5 hours for young subjects. Slower elimination of ofloxacin is observed in elderly subjects as compared with younger subjects which may be attributable to the reduced renal function and renal clearance observed in the elderly subjects. Because ofloxacin is known to be substantially excreted by the kidney, and elderly patients are more likely to have decreased renal function, dosage adjustment is necessary for elderly patients with impaired renal function as recommended for all patients.(See 
                        PRECAUTIONS: General
                     
                     and 
                        DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION
                     
                     .)
               
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     MICROBIOLOGY
                     
                        Ofloxacin is a quinolone antimicrobial agent. The mechanism of action of ofloxacin and other fluoroquinolone antimicrobials involves inhibition of bacterial topoisomerase IV and DNA gyrase (both of which are type II topoisomerases), enzymes required for DNA replication, transcription, repair and recombination.
                        Ofloxacin has in vitro activity against a wide range of gram-negative and gram-positive microorganisms. Ofloxacin is often bactericidal at concentrations equal to or slightly greater than inhibitory concentrations. 
                        Fluoroquinolones, including ofloxacin, differ in chemical structure and mode of action from aminoglycosides, macrolides and β-lactam antibiotics, including penicillins. Fluoroquinolones may, therefore, be active against bacteria resistant to these antimicrobials.
                        Resistance to ofloxacin due to spontaneous mutation in vitro is a rare occurrence (range: 10-9 to 10-11). Although cross-resistance has been observed between ofloxacin and some other fluoroquinolones, some microorganisms resistant to other fluoroquinolones may be susceptible to ofloxacin.
                        Ofloxacin has been shown to be active against most strains of the following microorganisms both in vitro and in clinical infections as described in the 
                              INDICATIONS AND USAGE
                           
                           section:
                        
                           Aerobic Gram-positive microorganisms
                        
                        
                           Staphylococcus aureus (methicillin-susceptible strains) 
                           

                           Streptococcus pneumoniae (penicillin-susceptible strains)
                        
                        
                           Streptococcus pyogenes
                        
                        
                           Aerobic Gram-negative microorganisms
                        
                        
                           Citrobacter (diversus) koseri
                           
                              
Enterobacter aerogenes 
Escherichia coli
                        
                        
                           
                           Haemophilus influenzae
                            
Klebsiella pneumoniae 
Neisseria gonorrhoeae 
Proteus mirabilis 

                           Pseudomonas aeruginosa
                        
                        As with other drugs in this class, some strains of Pseudomonas aeruginosa may develop resistance fairly rapidly during treatment with ofloxacin.
                        
                           Other microorganisms
 
                        
                        
                           Chlamydia trachomatis 
                        
                        The following in vitro data are available, but their clinical significance is unknown.
                        Ofloxacin exhibits in vitro minimum inhibitory concentrations (MIC values) of 2 µg/mL or less against most (≥ 90%) strains of the following microorganisms; however, the safety and effectiveness of ofloxacin in treating clinical infections due to these microorganisms have not been established in adequate and well-controlled trials:
                        
                           Aerobic Gram-positive microorganisms
                           

                        
                        
                           Staphylococcus epidermidis (methicillin-susceptible strains) 
Staphylococcus saprophyticus 
Streptococcus pneumoniae (penicillin-resistant strains)
                        
                        
                           Aerobic Gram-negative microorganisms
                        
                        
                           Acinetobacter calcoaceticus                    
Bordetella pertussis                    
Citrobacter freundii                    
Enterobacter cloacae                    
Haemophilus ducreyi                    
Klebsiella oxytoca                    
Moraxella catarrhalis                    
Morganella morganii                    
Proteus vulgaris                    
Providencia rettgeri                    
Providencia stuartii                    
Serratia marcescens
                        
                        
                           Anaerobic
microorganisms
                        
                        
                           Clostridium
perfringes
                        
                        
                           Other
microorganisms
                        
                        
                           Chlamydia
pneumoniae                    
Gardnerella vaginalis                    
Legionella pneumophila                    
Mycoplasma hominis            
Mycoplasma pneumoniae                    
Ureaplasma urealyticum
                        
                        Ofloxacin is not active against Treponema pallidum (See 
                              WARNINGS
                           
                           .)
                        Many strains of other streptococcal species, Enterococcus species, and anaerobes are resistant to ofloxacin.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Susceptibility Tests
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Dilution techniques
                           
                              Quantitative methods are used to determine antimicrobial minimum inhibitory concentrations (MIC values). These MIC values provide estimates of the susceptibility of bacteria to antimicrobial compounds. The MIC values should be determined using a standardized procedure. Standardized procedures are based on a dilution method1 (broth or agar) or equivalent with standardized inoculum concentrations and standardized concentrations of ofloxacin powder. The MIC values should be interpreted according to the following criteria:
                              



                              


The current absence of data on resistant strains precludes
defining any results other than "Susceptible". Strains yielding MIC results
suggestive of a "nonsusceptible" category should be submitted to a reference
laboratory for further testing.
                              



                              


A report of “Susceptible” indicates that the pathogen is likely to be inhibited if the antimicrobial compound in the blood reaches the concentrations usually achievable. A report of “Intermediate” indicates that the result should be considered equivocal, and, if the microorganism is not fully susceptible to alternative, clinically feasible drugs, the test should be repeated. This category implies possible clinical applicability in body sites where the drug is physiologically concentrated or in situations where a high dosage of drug can be used. This category also provides a buffer zone which prevents small uncontrolled technical factors from causing major discrepancies in interpretation. A report of “Resistant” indicates that the pathogen is not likely to be inhibited if the antimicrobial compound in the blood reaches the concentration usually achievable; other therapy should be selected.
                              Standardized susceptibility test procedures require the use of laboratory control microorganisms to control the technical aspects of the laboratory procedures. Standard ofloxacin powder should provide the following MIC values:
                              


                           



                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Diffusion techniques
                           
                              Quantitative methods that require measurement of zone diameters also provide reproducible estimates of the susceptibility of bacteria to antimicrobial compounds. One such standardized procedure2 requires the use of standardized inoculum concentrations. This procedure uses paper disks impregnated with 5-µg ofloxacin to test the susceptibility of microorganisms to ofloxacin. 
                              Reports from the laboratory providing results of the standard single-disk susceptibility test with a 5-µg ofloxacin disk should be interpreted according to the following criteria:
                              



                              


The current absence of data on resistant strains precludes defining any results other than “Susceptible.” Strains yielding zone diameter results suggestive of a “nonsusceptible” category should be submitted to a reference laboratory for further testing.
                              



                              


Interpretation should be as stated above for results using dilution techniques. Interpretation involves correlation of the diameter obtained in the disk test with the MIC for ofloxacin.
                              As with standardized dilution techniques, diffusion methods require the use of laboratory control microorganisms that are used to control the technical aspects of the laboratory procedures. For the diffusion technique, the 5-µg ofloxacin disk should provide the following zone diameters in these laboratory quality control strains:
                              


                           



                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     graph
                     
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         