
                     
                     
                     Drug Interactions
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Antacids, Sucralfate, Metal Cations,
Multivitamins
                           
                              Quinolones form chelates with alkaline earth and transition metal cations. Administration of quinolones with antacids containing calcium, magnesium, or aluminum, with sucralfate, with divalent or trivalent cations such as iron, or with multivitamins containing zinc or with Videx®, (didanosine), may substantially interfere with the absorption of quinolones resulting in systemic levels considerably lower than desired. These agents should not be taken within the two-hour period before or within the two-hour period after ofloxacin administration.(See 
                                    DOSAGE
AND ADMINISTRATION.
                                 )
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Caffeine
                           
                              Interactions between ofloxacin and caffeine have not been detected.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Cimetidine
                           
                              Cimetidine has demonstrated interference with the elimination of some quinolones. This interference has resulted in significant increases in half-life and AUC of some quinolones. The potential for interaction between ofloxacin and cimetidine has not been studied. 
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Cyclosporine
                           
                              Elevated serum levels of cyclosporine have been reported with concomitant use of cyclosporine with some other quinolones. The potential for interaction between ofloxacin and cyclosporine has not been studied.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Drugs metabolized by Cytochrome P450
enzymes
                           
                              Most quinolone antimicrobial drugs inhibit cytochrome P450 enzyme activity. This may result in a prolonged half-life for some drugs that are also metabolized by this system (e.g., cyclosporine, theophylline/methylxanthines, warfarin) when co-administered with quinolones. The extent of this inhibition varies among different quinolones. (See other 
                                    Drug Interactions
                                 .)
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs:
                           
                              The concomitant administration of a non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug with a quinolone, including ofloxacin, may increase the risk of CNS stimulation and convulsive seizures.(See 
                                    WARNINGS
                                  and 
                                    PRECAUTIONS:
General
                                 .)
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Probenecid
                           
                              The concomitant use of probenecid with certain other quinolones has been reported to affect renal tubular secretion. The effect of probenecid on the elimination of ofloxacin has not been studied.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Theophylline
                           
                              Steady-state theophylline levels may increase when ofloxacin and theophylline are administered concurrently. As with other quinolones, concomitant administration of ofloxacin may prolong the half-life of theophylline, elevate serum theophylline levels, and increase the risk of theophylline-related adverse reactions. Theophylline levels should be closely monitored and theophylline dosage adjustments made, if appropriate, when ofloxacin is co-administered. Adverse reactions (including seizures) may occur with or without an elevation in the serum theophylline level. (See 
                                    WARNINGS
                                  and 
                                    PRECAUTIONS: General
                                 .)
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Warfarin
                           
                              Some quinolones have been reported to enhance the effects of the oral anticoagulant warfarin or its derivatives. Therefore, if a quinolone antimicrobial is administered concomitantly with warfarin or its derivatives, the prothrombin time or other suitable coagulation test should be closely monitored.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Antidiabetic agents (e.g., insulin,
glyburide/glibenclamide)
                           
                              Since disturbances of blood glucose, including hyperglycemia and hypoglycemia, have been reported in patients treated concurrently with quinolones and an antidiabetic agent, careful monitoring of blood glucose is recommended when these agents are used concomitantly.(See 
                                    PRECAUTIONS: General
                                  and 
                                    Information for Patients
                                 .)
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               