
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  
                     
                        Rifampin
                     
                  
                  Rifampin inhibits DNA-dependent RNA polymerase activity in susceptible cells. Specifically, it interacts with bacterialRNA polymerase but does not inhibit the mammalian enzyme. This is the mechanism of action by which rifampinexerts its therapeutic effect. Rifampin cross resistance has only been shown with other rifamycins.
                  In a study of 14 normal human adult males, peak blood levels of rifampin occurred 1½ to 3 hours following oraladministration of two rifampin and isoniazid capsules. The peaks ranged from 6.9 to 14 mcg/ml with an average of10 mcg/ml.
                  In normal subjects the T½ (biological half-life) of rifampin in blood is approximately 3 hours. Elimination occursmainly through the bile and, to a much lesser extent, the urine.
                  
                     
                        Isoniazid
                     
                  
                  Isoniazid acts against actively growing tubercle bacilli.
                  After oral administration isoniazid produces peak blood levels within 1 to 2 hours which decline to 50% or lesswithin 6 hours. It diffuses readily into all body fluids (cerebrospinal, pleural, and ascitic fluids), tissues, organs,and excreta (saliva, sputum, and feces). The drug also passes through the placental barrier and into milk inconcentrations comparable to those in the plasma. From 50 to 70% of a dose of isoniazid is excreted in the urine in 24 hours.
                  Isoniazid is metabolized primarily by acetylation and dehydrazination. The rate of acetylation is genetically determined.Approximately 50% of Blacks and Caucasians are "slow inactivators"; the majority of Eskimos and Orientalsare "rapid inactivators."
                  The rate of acetylation does not significantly alter the effectiveness of isoniazid. However, slow acetylation maylead to higher blood levels of the drug, and thus an increase in toxic reactions.
                  Pyridoxine deficiency (B6) is sometimes observed in adults with high doses of isoniazid and is considered probablydue to its competition with pyridoxal phosphate for the enzyme apotryptophanase.
               
               
            
         