
               
               
               DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
                  
                  
                  
                     Centrally-acting drugs: Due to CNS effects, use caution in combination. Avoid alcohol. (7.1)
                     Drugs that may cause orthostatic hypotension: An additive effect may be observed when co-administered with INVEGA®. (7.1)
                     Co-administration with carbamazepine decreased mean steady-state Cmax and AUC of paliperidone by approximately 37%. Adjust dose of INVEGA® if necessary based on clinical assessment. (7.2)
                     Co-administration of divalproex sodium increased Cmax and AUC of paliperidone by approximately 50%. Adjust dose of INVEGA® if necessary based on clinical assessment. (7.2)
                  
                  
 

                  
                  
                  Given the primary CNS effects of paliperidone [see Adverse Reactions (6.1, 6.2)], INVEGA® should be used with caution in combination with other centrally acting drugs and alcohol. Paliperidone may antagonize the effect of levodopa and other dopamine agonists.
                  Because of its potential for inducing orthostatic hypotension, an additive effect may be observed when INVEGA® is administered with other therapeutic agents that have this potential [see Warnings and Precautions (5.9)].
                  Paliperidone is not expected to cause clinically important pharmacokinetic interactions with drugs that are metabolized by cytochrome P450 isozymes. In vitro studies in human liver microsomes showed that paliperidone does not substantially inhibit the metabolism of drugs metabolized by cytochrome P450 isozymes, including CYP1A2, CYP2A6, CYP2C8/9/10, CYP2D6, CYP2E1, CYP3A4, and CYP3A5. Therefore, paliperidone is not expected to inhibit clearance of drugs that are metabolized by these metabolic pathways in a clinically relevant manner. Paliperidone is also not expected to have enzyme inducing properties.
                  Paliperidone is a weak inhibitor of P-glycoprotein (P-gp) at high concentrations. No in vivo data are available and the clinical relevance is unknown.
                  Pharmacokinetic interaction between lithium and INVEGA® is unlikely.
                  In a drug interaction study, co-administration of INVEGA® (12 mg once daily for 5 days) with divalproex sodium extended-release tablets (500 mg to 2000 mg once daily) did not affect the steady-state pharmacokinetics (AUC24h and Cmax,ss) of valproate in 13 patients stabilized on valproate. In a clinical study, subjects on stable doses of valproate had comparable valproate average plasma concentrations when INVEGA® 3–15 mg/day was added to their existing valproate treatment.
                  
 

                  
                  
                  Paliperidone is not a substrate of CYP1A2, CYP2A6, CYP2C9, and CYP2C19, so that an interaction with inhibitors or inducers of these isozymes is unlikely. While in vitro studies indicate that CYP2D6 and CYP3A4 may be minimally involved in paliperidone metabolism, in vivo studies do not show decreased elimination by these isozymes and they contribute to only a small fraction of total body clearance. In vitro studies have shown that paliperidone is a P-gp substrate.
                  Co-administration of INVEGA® 6 mg once daily with carbamazepine 200 mg twice daily caused a decrease of approximately 37% in the mean steady-state Cmax and AUC of paliperidone. This decrease is caused, to a substantial degree, by a 35% increase in renal clearance of paliperidone. A minor decrease in the amount of drug excreted unchanged in the urine suggests that there was little effect on the CYP metabolism or bioavailability of paliperidone during carbamazepine co-administration. On initiation of carbamazepine, the dose of INVEGA® should be re-evaluated and increased if necessary. Conversely, on discontinuation of carbamazepine, the dose of INVEGA® should be re-evaluated and decreased if necessary.
                  Paliperidone is metabolized to a limited extent by CYP2D6 [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)]. In an interaction study in healthy subjects in which a single 3 mg dose of INVEGA® was administered concomitantly with 20 mg per day of paroxetine (a potent CYP2D6 inhibitor), paliperidone exposures were on average 16% (90% CI: 4, 30) higher in CYP2D6 extensive metabolizers. Higher doses of paroxetine have not been studied. The clinical relevance is unknown.
                  Co-administration of a single dose of INVEGA® 12 mg with divalproex sodium extended-release tablets (two 500 mg tablets once daily) resulted in an increase of approximately 50% in the Cmax and AUC of paliperidone. Dosage reduction for INVEGA® should be considered when INVEGA® is co-administered with valproate after clinical assessment.
                  Pharmacokinetic interaction between lithium and INVEGA® is unlikely.
                  
 

               
               
            
         