
               
               
               12	CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1	Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Azithromycin is a macrolide antibacterial drug. [See Clinical Pharmacology (12.4)] 
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2	Pharmacodynamics
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Cardiac Electrophysiology
                              
                              QTc interval prolongation was studied in a randomized, placebo-controlled parallel trial in 116 healthy subjects who received either chloroquine (1000 mg) alone or in combination with azithromycin (500 mg, 1000 mg, and 1500 mg once daily).  Co-administration of azithromycin increased the QTc interval in a dose- and concentration-dependent manner.  In comparison to chloroquine alone, the maximum mean (95% upper confidence bound) increases in QTcF were 5 (10) ms, 7 (12) ms and 9 (14) ms with the co-administration of 500 mg, 1000 mg and 1500 mg azithromycin, respectively. 
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3	Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        Zmax is an extended-release microsphere formulation. Based on data obtained from studies evaluating the pharmacokinetics of azithromycin in healthy adult subjects a higher peak serum concentration (Cmax) and greater systemic exposure (AUC 0–24) of azithromycin are achieved on the day of dosing following a single 2 g dose of Zmax versus 1.5 g of azithromycin tablets administered over 3 days (500 mg/day) or 5 days (500 mg on day 1, 250 mg/day on days 2–5) [Table 2]. Consequently, due to these different pharmacokinetic profiles, Zmax is not interchangeable with azithromycin tablet 3-day and 5-day dosing regimens.
                        


                     



                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Absorption
                              
                              The bioavailability of Zmax relative to azithromycin immediate release (IR) (powder for oral suspension) was 83%. On average, peak serum concentrations were achieved approximately 2.5 hr later following Zmax administration and were lower by 57%, compared to 2 g azithromycin IR. Thus, single 2 g doses of Zmax and azithromycin IR are not bioequivalent and are not interchangeable.
                              Effect of food on absorption: A high-fat meal increased the rate and extent of absorption of a 2 g dose of Zmax (115% increase in Cmax, and 23% increase in AUC0–72) compared to the fasted state. A standard meal also increased the rate of absorption (119% increase in Cmax) and with less effect on the extent of absorption (12% increase in AUC0–72) compared to administration of a 2 g Zmax dose in the fasted state.
                              Effect of antacids: Following the administration of Zmax with an aluminum and magnesium hydroxide antacid, the rate and extent of azithromycin absorption were not altered.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Distribution 
                              
                              The serum protein binding of azithromycin is concentration dependent, decreasing from 51% at 0.02 mcg/mL to 7% at 2 mcg/mL. Following oral administration, azithromycin is widely distributed throughout the body with an apparent steady-state volume of distribution of 31.1 L/kg. 
                              Azithromycin concentrates in fibroblasts, epithelial cells, macrophages, and circulating neutrophils and monocytes. Higher azithromycin concentrations in tissues than in plasma or serum have been observed. White blood cell and lung exposure data in humans following a single 2 g dose of Zmax in adults are shown in Table 3. Following a 2 g single dose of Zmax, azithromycin achieved higher exposure (AUC0–120) in mononuclear leukocytes (MNL) and polymorphonuclear leukocytes (PMNL) than in serum. The azithromycin exposure (AUC0–72) in lung tissue and alveolar cells (AC) was approximately 100 times that in serum; and the exposure in epithelial lining fluid (ELF) was also higher (approximately 2–3 times) than in serum. The clinical significance of this distribution data is unknown. 
                              


                              


Following a regimen of 500 mg of azithromycin tablets on the first day and 250 mg daily for 4 days, only very low concentrations were noted in cerebrospinal fluid (less than 0.01 mcg/mL) in the presence of non-inflamed meninges.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Metabolism
                              
                              
                                 In vitro and in vivo studies to assess the metabolism of azithromycin have not been performed. 
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Excretion
                              
                              Serum azithromycin concentrations following a single 2 g dose of Zmax declined in a polyphasic pattern with a terminal elimination half-life of 59 hr. The prolonged terminal half-life is thought to be due to a large apparent volume of distribution. 
                              Biliary excretion of azithromycin, predominantly as unchanged drug, is a major route of elimination. Over the course of a week, approximately 6% of the administered dose appears as unchanged drug in urine.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Specific Populations
                              
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Renal Insufficiency
                                    
                                    Azithromycin pharmacokinetics were investigated in 42 adults (21 to 85 years of age) with varying degrees of renal impairment. Following the oral administration of a single 1.0 g dose of azithromycin (4 × 250 mg capsules), the mean Cmax and AUC0–120 were 5.1% and 4.2% higher, respectively in subjects with GFR 10 to 80 mL/min compared to subjects with normal renal function (GFR >80 mL/min). The mean Cmax and AUC0–120 were 61% and 35% higher, respectively in subjects with GFR <10 mL/min compared to subjects with normal renal function. [See Use in Specific Populations Renal Impairment (8.6)]
                                    
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Hepatic Insufficiency
                                    
                                    The pharmacokinetics of azithromycin in subjects with hepatic impairment has not been established.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Pediatric Patients
                                    
                                    The pharmacokinetics of azithromycin were characterized following a single 60 mg/kg dose of Zmax in pediatric patients aged 3 months to 16 years. Although there was high inter-patient variability in systemic exposure (AUC and Cmax) across the age groups studied, individual azithromycin AUC and Cmax values in pediatric patients were comparable to or higher than those following administration of 2 g Zmax in adults (Table 4). [See Use in Specific Populations (8.4)]
                                    
                                    


                                 



                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Gender
                                    
                                    The impact of gender on the pharmacokinetics of azithromycin has not been evaluated for Zmax. However, previous studies have demonstrated no significant differences in the disposition of azithromycin between male and female subjects.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Pharmacokinetic Interaction Studies
                              
                              A drug interaction study was performed with Zmax and antacids. All other drug interaction studies were performed with azithromycin immediate release (IR) formulations (capsules and tablets, doses ranging from 500 to 1200 mg) and other drugs likely to be co-administered. The effects of co-administration of azithromycin on the pharmacokinetics of other drugs are shown in Table 5 and the effects of other drugs on the pharmacokinetics of azithromycin are shown in Table 6. 
                              When used at therapeutic doses, azithromycin IR had a minimal effect on the pharmacokinetics of atorvastatin, carbamazepine, cetirizine, didanosine, efavirenz, fluconazole, indinavir, midazolam, nelfinavir, sildenafil, theophylline (intravenous and oral), triazolam, trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole or zidovudine (Table 5). Although the drug interaction studies were not conducted with Zmax, similar modest effect as observed with IR formulation are expected since the total exposure to azithromycin is comparable for Zmax and other azithromycin IR regimens. Therefore, no dosage adjustment of drugs listed in Table 5 is recommended when co-administered with Zmax.
                              Nelfinavir significantly increased the Cmax and AUC of azithromycin following co-administration with azithromycin IR 1200 mg (Table 6). However, no dose adjustment of azithromycin is recommended when Zmax is co-administered with nelfinavir.
                              Pharmacokinetic and/or pharmacodynamic interactions with the drugs listed below have not been reported in clinical trials with azithromycin; however, no specific drug interaction studies have been performed to evaluate potential drug-drug interaction. Nonetheless, pharmacokinetic and/or pharmacodynamic interactions with these drugs have been observed with other macrolide products. Until further data are developed, careful monitoring of patients is advised when azithromycin and these drugs are used concomitantly: digoxin, ergotamine or dihydroergotamine, cyclosporine, hexobarbital and phenytoin.
                              



                           



                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.4  Microbiology 
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Mechanism of Action
                              
                              Azithromycin binds to the 23S rRNA of the 50S ribosomal subunit and interferes with bacterial protein synthesis by impeding the assembly of the 50S ribosomal subunit.
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Resistance
                                    
                                    Azithromycin demonstrates cross resistance with erythromycin. The most frequently encountered mechanism of resistance to azithromycin is modification of the 23S rRNA target, most often by methylation. Ribosomal modifications can determine cross resistance to other macrolides, lincosamides and streptogramin B (MLSB phenotype).
                                    Azithromycin has been shown to be active against the following microorganisms, both in vitro and in clinical infections. [See Indications and Usage (1)].
                                    
                                    Gram-Positive Bacteria
                                    
                                         Streptococcus pneumoniae
                                    
                                    Gram-Negative Bacteria
                                    
                                         Haemophilus influenzae
                                    
                                    
                                         Moraxella catarrhalis
                                    
                                    "Other" Bacteria
                                    
                                         Chlamydophila pneumoniae
                                    
                                    
                                         Mycoplasma pneumoniae
                                    
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Susceptibility Testing Methods
                              
                              When available, the clinical microbiology laboratory should provide the results of in vitro susceptibility test results for antimicrobial products used in resident hospitals to the physician as periodic reports that describe the susceptibility profile of nosocomial and community-acquired pathogens. These reports should aid the physician in selecting an antibacterial drug product for treatment.
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Dilution Techniques
                                    
                                    Quantitative methods are used to determine minimal inhibitory concentrations (MICs). These MICs provide estimates of the susceptibility of bacteria to antimicrobial compounds. The MICs should be determined using a standardized test method 1,3,4 (broth or agar). The MIC values should be interpreted according to criteria provided in Table 7.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Diffusion Techniques
                                    
                                    Quantitative methods that require measurement of zone diameters can provide reproducible estimates of the susceptibility of bacteria to antimicrobial compounds. The zone size provides an estimate of the susceptibility of bacteria to antimicrobial compounds. The zone size should be determined using a standardized method 2,3,4. This procedure uses paper disk impregnated with 15 mcg azithromycin to test the susceptibility of bacteria to azithromycin. The disk diffusion interpretive criteria are provided in Table 7.
                                    


                                    


A report of "Susceptible" (S) indicates that the antimicrobial drug is likely to inhibit growth of the pathogen if the antimicrobial drug reaches the concentration at the site of infection. A report of "Intermediate" (I) indicates that the result should be considered equivocal, and if the microorganism is not fully susceptible to alternative clinically feasible drugs, the test should be repeated. This category implies possible clinical applicability in body sites where the drug is physiologically concentrated. This category also provides a buffer zone that prevents small uncontrolled technical factors from causing major discrepancies in interpretation. A report of "Resistant" (R) indicates that the antimicrobial drug is not likely to inhibit growth of the pathogen if the antimicrobial drug reaches the concentrations usually achievable at the infection site; other therapy should be selected.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Quality Control
                                    
                                    Standardized susceptibility test procedures require the use of laboratory controls to monitor and ensure the accuracy and precision of supplies and reagents used in the assay, and the techniques of the individuals performing the test 1,2,3,4. Standard azithromycin powder should provide the following range of MIC values provided in Table 8. For the diffusion technique using the 15-mcg azithromycin disk the criteria provided in Table 8 should be achieved.
                                    


