
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  Mechanism of ActionThe mechanism of action of trimethobenzamide hydrochloride 
capsules as determined in animals is obscure, but may involve the chemoreceptor 
trigger zone (CTZ), an area in the medulla oblongata through which emetic 
impulses are conveyed to the vomiting center; direct impulses to the vomiting 
center apparently are not similarly inhibited. In dogs pretreated with 
trimethobenzamide HCl, the emetic response to apomorphine is inhibited, while 
little or no protection is afforded against emesis induced by intragastric 
copper sulfate.
                  
                  PharmacokineticsThe pharmacokinetics of trimethobenzamide have been studied in 
healthy adult subjects. Following administration of 200 mg (100 mg/mL) 
trimethobenzamide hydrochloride I.M. injection, the time to reach maximum plasma 
concentration (Tmax) was about half an hour, about 15 
minutes longer for trimethobenzamide hydrochloride 300 mg oral capsule than an 
I.M. injection. A single dose of trimethobenzamide hydrochloride 300 mg oral 
capsule provided a plasma concentration profile of trimethobenzamide similar to 
trimethobenzamide hydrochloride 200 mg I.M. The relative bioavailability of the 
capsule formulation compared to the solution is 100%. The mean elimination 
half-life of trimethobenzamide is 7 to 9 hours. Between 30 – 50% of a single 
dose in humans is excreted unchanged in the urine within 48–72 hours. The major 
pathway of trimethobenzamide metabolism is through oxidation resulting in the 
formation of trimethobenzamide N-oxide metabolite. The pharmacologic activity of 
this major metabolite has not been evaluated.
                  
                  Special Populations
                  AgeThe clearance of trimethobenzamide is not known in patients with 
renal impairment. However, it may be advisable to consider reduction in the 
dosing of trimethobenzamide in elderly patients with renal impairment 
considering that a substantial amount of excretion and elimination of 
trimethobenzamide occurs via the kidney and that elderly patients may have 
various degrees of renal impairment. (See 
                        PRECAUTIONS: General
                      and 
                        DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION
                     ).
                  
                  GenderSystemic exposure to trimethobenzamide was similar between men 
(N=40) and women (N=28).
                  
                  RacePharmacokinetics appeared to be similar for Caucasians (N=53) and 
African Americans (N=12).
                  
                  Renal ImpairmentThe clearance of trimethobenzamide is not known in patients with 
renal impairment. However, it may be advisable to consider reduction in the 
dosing of trimethobenzamide in patients with renal impairment considering that a 
substantial amount of excretion and elimination of trimethobenzamide occurs via 
the kidney. (See 
                        PRECAUTIONS: 
General
                      and 
                        DOSAGE AND 
ADMINISTRATION
                     ).
               
               
            
         