
               
               
               
                  Pentazocine is a potent analgesic which when administered orally 
in a 50 mg dose appears equivalent in analgesic effect to 60 mg (1 grain) of 
codeine. Onset of significant analgesia usually occurs between 15 and 30 minutes 
after oral administration, and duration of action is usually three hours or 
longer. Onset and duration of action and the degree of pain relief are related 
both to dose and the severity of pretreatment pain. Pentazocine weakly 
antagonizes the analgesic effects of morphine and meperidine; in addition, it 
produces incomplete reversal of cardiovascular, respiratory, and behavioral 
depression induced by morphine and meperidine. Pentazocine has about 1/50 the 
antagonistic activity of nalorphine. It also has sedative activity.
                  Pentazocine is well absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract. Concentrations 
in plasma coincide closely with the onset, duration, and intensity of analgesia; 
peak values occur 1 to 3 hours after oral administration. The half-life in 
plasma is 2 to 3 hours.
                  Pentazocine is metabolized in the liver and excreted primarily in the urine. 
Pentazocine passes into the fetal circulation.
                  Naloxone when administered orally at 0.5 mg has no pharmacologic activity. 
Naloxone hydrochloride administered parenterally at the same dose is an 
effective antagonist to pentazocine and a pure antagonist to narcotic 
analgesics.
                  Pentazocine and naloxone hydrochlorides tablets are a potent analgesic when 
administered orally. However the presence of naloxone in pentazocine and 
naloxone naloxone hydrochlorides tablets will prevent the effect of pentazocine 
if the product is misused by injection.
                  Studies in animals indicate that the presence of naloxone does not affect 
pentazocine analgesia when the combination is given orally. If the combination 
is given by injection the action of pentazocine is neutralized.
               
               
            
         