
               
               
               DRUG INTERACTIONS SECTION
               
                  7.1 Drugs Affecting Seizure Threshold
Concomitant use of tramadol increases the seizure risk in patients taking SSRI/SNRI antidepressants or anorectics, TCA antidepressants and other tricyclic compounds, other opioids, MAOIs, neuroleptics or other drugs that lower the seizure threshold [see WARNINGS AND PRECAUTIONS (5.1)].
                  7.2 CYP2D6 and/or CYP3A4 inhibitors
Tramadol is metabolized by CYP2D6 to form the active metabolite, O-desmethyl tramadol (M1). In vitro drug interaction studies in human liver microsomes indicate that concomitant administration with inhibitors of CYP2D6 such as fluoxetine, paroxetine, and amitriptyline could result in some inhibition of the metabolism of tramadol.
                  Tramadol is also metabolized by CYP3A4 [see CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY (12.3)]. Administration of CYP3A4 inhibitors, such as ketoconazole and erythromycin with Tramadol Hydrochloride Extended-Release may affect the metabolism of tramadol leading to altered tramadol exposure.
                  Concomitant administration of CYP2D6 and/or CYP3A4 inhibitors, such as quinidine, fluoxetine, paroxetine and amitriptyline (CYP2D6 inhibitors), and ketoconazole and erythromycin (CYP3A4 inhibitors), may reduce metabolic clearance of tramadol increasing the risk for serious adverse events including seizures and serotonin syndrome [see CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY (12.3)].
                  7.3 Serotonergic Drugs
There have been post-marketing reports of serotonin syndrome with use of tramadol and SSRIs/SNRIs or MAOIs and α2-adrenergic blockers. Caution is advised when Tramadol Hydrochloride Extended-Release is co-administered with other drugs that may affect the serotonergic neurotransmitter systems, such as SSRIs, MAOIs, triptans, linezolid (an antibiotic which is a reversible non-selective MAOI), lithium, or St. John’s Wort. If concomitant treatment of Tramadol Hydrochloride Extended- Release with a drug affecting the serotonergic neurotransmitter system is clinically warranted, careful observation of the patient is advised, particularly during treatment initiation and dose increases [see WARNINGS AND PRECAUTIONS (5.3)].
                  7.4 Triptans
Based on the mechanism of action of tramadol and the potential for serotonin syndrome, caution is advised when Tramadol Hydrochloride Extended-Release is co-administered with a triptan. If concomitant treatment of Tramadol Hydrochloride Extended-Release with a triptan is clinically warranted, careful observation of the patient is advised, particularly during treatment initiation and dose increases [see WARNINGS AND PRECAUTIONS (5.3)].
                  7.5 Interaction With Central Nervous System (CNS) Depressants
Tramadol Hydrochloride Extended-Release should be used with caution and in reduced dosages when administered to patients receiving CNS depressants such as opioids, anesthetic agents, narcotics, phenothiazines, tranquilizers or sedative hypnotics. Tramadol Hydrochloride Extended-Release increases the risk of CNS and respiratory depression in these patients [see WARNINGS AND PRECAUTIONS (5.6)].
                  7.6 Quinidine
Quinidine is a strong inhibitor of CYP2D6. Coadministration of quinidine with an extended-release tramadol product resulted in a 50-60% increase in tramadol exposure and a 50-60% decrease in M1 exposure. The clinical consequences of these findings are unknown. [See CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY (12.3)]. In vitro drug interaction studies in human liver microsomes indicate that tramadol has no effect on quinidine metabolism.
                  7.7 Digoxin and Warfarins
Post-marketing surveillance of tramadol has revealed rare reports of digoxin toxicity and alteration of warfarin effect, including elevation of prothrombin times.
                  7.8 CYP3A4 Inducers
Administration of CYP3A4 inducers, such as carbamazepine, rifampin and St. John’s Wort, with Tramadol Hydrochloride Extended-Release may affect the metabolism of tramadol leading to reduced tramadol exposure [see CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY (12.3)].
                  Patients taking carbamazepine, a CYP3A4 inducer, may have a significantly reduced analgesic effect of tramadol. Because carbamazepine increases tramadol metabolism and because of the seizure risk associated with tramadol, concomitant administration of Tramadol Hydrochloride Extended-Release and carbamazepine is not recommended.
               
               
            
         