
               
               
               12	CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1	Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Endothelin (ET)-1 and its receptors (ETA and ETB) mediate a variety of deleterious effects, such as vasoconstriction, fibrosis, proliferation, hypertrophy, and inflammation. In disease conditions such as PAH, the local ET system is upregulated and is involved in vascular hypertrophy and in organ damage.
                        Macitentan is an endothelin receptor antagonist that prevents the binding of ET-1 to both ETA and ETB receptors. Macitentan displays high affinity and sustained occupancy of the ET receptors in human pulmonary arterial smooth muscle cells. One of the metabolites of macitentan is also pharmacologically active at the ET receptors and is estimated to be about 20% as potent as the parent drug in vitro.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2	Pharmacodynamics
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Pulmonary Hemodynamics: The clinical efficacy study in patients with pulmonary arterial hypertension assessed hemodynamic parameters in a subset of patients after 6 months of treatment. Patients treated with OPSUMIT 10 mg (N=57) achieved a median reduction of 37% (95% CI 22-49) in pulmonary vascular resistance and an increase of 0.6 L/min/m2 (95% CI 0.3-0.9) in cardiac index compared to placebo (N=67).
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Cardiac Electrophysiology: In a randomized, placebo-controlled four-way crossover study with a positive control in healthy subjects, repeated doses of macitentan 10 and 30 mg (3 times the recommended dosage) had no significant effect on the QTc interval.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3	Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        The pharmacokinetics of macitentan and its active metabolite have been studied primarily in healthy subjects. The pharmacokinetics of macitentan are dose proportional over a range from 1 mg to 30 mg after once daily administration.
                        A cross study comparison shows that the exposures to macitentan and its active metabolite in patients with PAH are similar to those observed in healthy subjects.
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Absorption and Distribution
                              
                              The maximum plasma concentration of macitentan is achieved about 8 hours after oral administration. The absolute bioavailability after oral administration is not known. In a study in healthy subjects, the exposure to macitentan and its active metabolite were unchanged after a high fat breakfast. Macitentan may therefore be taken with or without food.
                              Macitentan and its active metabolite are highly bound to plasma proteins (>99%), primarily to albumin and to a lesser extent to alpha-1-acid glycoprotein. The apparent volumes of distribution (Vss/F) of macitentan and its active metabolite were about 50 L and 40 L respectively in healthy subjects.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Metabolism and Elimination
                              
                              Following oral administration, the apparent elimination half-lives of macitentan and its active metabolite are approximately 16 hours and 48 hours, respectively. Macitentan is metabolized primarily by oxidative depropylation of the sulfamide to form the pharmacologically active metabolite. This reaction is dependent on the cytochrome P450 (CYP) system, mainly CYP3A4 with a minor contribution of CYP2C19. At steady state in PAH patients, the systemic exposure to the active metabolite is 3-times the exposure to macitentan and is expected to contribute approximately 40% of the total pharmacologic activity. In a study in healthy subjects with radiolabeled macitentan, approximately 50% of radioactive drug material was eliminated in urine but none was in the form of unchanged drug or the active metabolite. About 24% of the radioactive drug material was recovered from feces.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Special Populations
                              
                              There are no clinically relevant effects of age, sex, or race on the pharmacokinetics of macitentan and its active metabolite.
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Renal impairment: Exposure to macitentan and its active metabolite in patients with severe renal impairment (CrCl 15-29 mL/min) compared to healthy subjects was increased by 30% and 60%, respectively. This increase is not considered clinically relevant.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Hepatic impairment: Exposure to macitentan was decreased by 21%, 34%, and 6% and exposure to the active metabolite was decreased by 20%, 25%, and 25% in subjects with mild, moderate, or severe hepatic impairment (Child-Pugh Class A, B, and C), respectively. This decrease is not considered clinically relevant.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Drug Interactions
                              
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       In vitro studies
                                    
                                    At plasma levels obtained with dosing at 10 mg once daily, macitentan has no relevant inhibitory or inducing effects on CYP enzymes, and is neither a substrate nor an inhibitor of the multi-drug resistance protein (P-gp, MDR-1). Macitentan and its active metabolite are neither substrates nor inhibitors of the organic anion transporting polypeptides (OATP1B1 and OATP1B3) and do not significantly interact with proteins involved in hepatic bile salt transport, i.e., the bile salt export pump (BSEP) and the sodium-dependent taurocholate co-transporting polypeptide (NTCP).
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                          In vivo studies
                                       
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                       
                                       
                                          
                                             
                                                Effect of other drugs on macitentan: 
                                             The effect of other drugs on macitentan and its active metabolite are studied in healthy subjects and are shown in Figure 1 below.
                                          
                                             Figure 1
                                          
                                          
                                             
                                          
                                          Effects of other strong CYP3A4 inhibitors such as ritonavir on macitentan were not studied, but are likely to result in an increase in macitentan exposure at steady state similar to that seen with ketoconazole [see Drug Interactions (7.2)].
                                       
                                       
                                       
                                          
                                             Figure 1
                                             
                                                
                                             
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                       
                                       
                                          
                                             
                                                Effect of macitentan on other drugs 
                                             
                                          
                                       
                                       
                                       
                                          
                                             
                                             
                                             
                                                
                                                   Warfarin: Macitentan once daily dosing did not alter the exposure to R- and S-warfarin or their effect on international normalized ratio (INR).
                                             
                                             
                                          
                                       
                                       
                                          
                                             
                                             
                                             
                                                
                                                   Sildenafil: At steady-state, the exposure to sildenafil 20 mg t.i.d. increased by 15% during concomitant administration of macitentan 10 mg once daily. This change is not considered clinically relevant.
                                             
                                             
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         