
               
               
               7	DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
                  It is recommended that appropriate references be consulted regarding physical or chemical incompatibilities before adding HYLENEX recombinant to a solution containing another drug.
               
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           Furosemide, the benzodiazepines and phenytoin are incompatible with hyaluronidase. (7.1)
                           Hyaluronidase should not be used to enhance the dispersion and absorption of dopamine and/or alpha agonist drugs. (7.2)
                           Local anesthetics: Hyaluronidase hastens onset and shortens duration of effect, increases incidence of systemic reactions. (7.3)
                           Large doses of salicylates, cortisone, ACTH, estrogens or antihistamines may require larger amounts of hyaluronidase for equivalent dispersing effect. (7.4)
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1	Incompatibilities
                     
                        Furosemide, the benzodiazepines and phenytoin have been found to be incompatible with hyaluronidase.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2	Drug-Specific Precautions
                     
                        Hyaluronidase should not be used to enhance the dispersion and absorption of dopamine and/or alpha agonist drugs.
                        When considering the administration of any other drug with hyaluronidase, it is recommended that appropriate references first be consulted to determine the usual precautions for the use of the other drug.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3	Local Anesthetics
                     
                        When hyaluronidase is added to a local anesthetic agent, it hastens the onset of analgesia and tends to reduce the swelling caused by local infiltration, but the wider spread of the local anesthetic solution increases its absorption; this shortens its duration of action and tends to increase the incidence of systemic reaction.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4	Salicylates, Cortisone, ACTH, Estrogens and Antihistamines
                     
                        Patients receiving large doses of salicylates, cortisone, ACTH, estrogens or antihistamines may require larger amounts of hyaluronidase for equivalent dispersing effect, since these drugs apparently render tissues partly resistant to the action of hyaluronidase.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         