
               
               
               7. DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           CYP1A2 is the major enzyme responsible for the metabolism of ropinirole. Thus inhibitors (e.g., ciprofloxacin, fluvoxamine) or inducers (e.g., omeprazole or smoking) of CYP1A2 may alter the clearance of ropinirole. Adjustment of dosage of Ropinirole Extended-release Tablets may be required. (7.1) 
                           Higher doses of estrogens, usually associated with hormone replacement therapy (HRT), reduced oral clearance of ropinirole. Starting or stopping HRT treatment may require adjustment of dosage of Ropinirole Extended-release Tablets. (7.3) 
                           Dopamine antagonists, such as neuroleptics (e.g., phenothiazines, butyrophenones, thioxanthenes) or metoclopramide, may diminish effectiveness of ropinirole. (7.4) 
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     7.1 P450 Interaction
                     
                        
                           In vitro metabolism studies showed that CYP1A2 is the major enzyme responsible for the metabolism of ropinirole. There is thus the potential for inducers or inhibitors of this enzyme to alter the clearance of ropinirole. Therefore, if therapy with a drug known to be a potent inducer or inhibitor of CYP1A2 is stopped or started during treatment with ropinirole, adjustment of the dose of ropinirole may be required. 
                        Coadministration of ciprofloxacin, an inhibitor of CYP1A2, with immediate-release ropinirole increased the AUC of ropinirole by 84% on average and Cmax by 60% [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)]. 
                        
                        Cigarette smoking is expected to increase the clearance of ropinirole since CYP1A2 is known to be induced by smoking. In one study in patients with Restless Legs Syndrome, cigarette smokers had an approximate 30% lower Cmax and a 38% lower AUC than did nonsmokers, when those parameters were normalized for dose. 
                        There is no evidence of interaction between ropinirole and other CYP1A2 substrates (e.g., theophylline). 
                        Ropinirole and its circulating metabolites do not inhibit or induce P450 enzymes therefore ropinirole is unlikely to affect the pharmacokinetics of other drugs by a P450 mechanism [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)]. 
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     7.2 L-dopa
                     
                        Coadministration of carbidopa + L-dopa (SINEMET®*) with immediate-release ropinirole had no effect on the steady-state pharmacokinetics of ropinirole. Oral administration of immediate-release ropinirole increased mean steady-state Cmax of L-dopa by 20%, but its AUC was unaffected [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)]. 
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     7.3 Estrogens
                     
                        Population pharmacokinetic analysis revealed that higher doses of estrogens (usually associated with hormone replacement therapy [HRT]) reduced the oral clearance of ropinirole by approximately 35%. Dosage adjustment is not needed for initiating Ropinirole Extended-release Tablets in patients on estrogen therapy because patients are individually titrated with Ropinirole Extended-release Tablets to tolerance or adequate effect. If estrogen therapy is stopped or started during treatment with Ropinirole Extended-release Tablets then adjustment of the dose of Ropinirole Extended-release Tablets may be required.    
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     7.4 Dopamine Antagonists
                     
                        Since ropinirole is a dopamine agonist, it is possible that dopamine antagonists such as neuroleptics (e.g., phenothiazines, butyrophenones, thioxanthenes) or metoclopramide may diminish the effectiveness of Ropinirole Extended-release Tablets. Patients with a history or presence of major psychotic disorders should be treated with dopamine agonists only if the potential benefits outweigh the risks. 
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         