
                     
                     
                     Drug Interactions
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Antacids:
                           
                              The simultaneous oral administration of sodium polystyrene sulfonate with nonabsorbable cation-donating antacids and laxatives may reduce the resin’s
potassium exchange capability.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Non-absorbable cation-donating antacids and laxatives:
                           
                              Systemic alkalosis has been reported after cation-exchange resins were administered orally in combination with nonabsorbable cation-donating antacids and laxatives such as magnesium hydroxide and aluminum carbonate. Magnesium hydroxide should not be administered with sodium polystyrene sulfonate.  One case of grand mal seizure has been reported in a patient with chronic hypocalcemia of renal failure who was given sodium polystyrene sulfonate with magnesium hydroxide as a laxative.
                              Intestinal obstruction due to concretions of aluminum hydroxide when used in combination with sodium polystyrene sulfonate has been reported.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Digitalis:
                           
                              The toxic effects of digitalis on the heart, especially various ventricular arrhythmias and A-V nodal dissociation, are likely to be exaggerated by hypokalemia, even in the face of serum digoxin concentrations in the "normal range". (See 
                                    WARNINGS
                                 .)
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Sorbitol:
                           
                              Concomitant use of Sorbitol with sodium polystyrene sulfonate has been implicated in cases of intestinal necrosis, which may be fatal. Therefore, concomitant
administration is not recommended.  (See 
                                    WARNINGS
                                 .)
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Lithium:
                           
                              Sodium polystyrene sulfonate may decrease absorption of lithium.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Thyroxine:
                           
                              Sodium polystyrene sulfonate may decrease absorption of thyroxine.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               