
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS

               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           ACE inhibitors: NSAIDs may diminish the antihypertensive effect of ACE inhibitors. (7.3)

                           Aspirin: Concomitant administration of ibuprofen and aspirin is not generally recommended because of the potential for increased adverse effects. (7.1)

                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 Aspirin

                     
                        When ibuprofen is administered with aspirin, ibuprofen's protein binding is reduced, although the clearance of free ibuprofen is not altered. The clinical significance of this interaction is not known; however, as with other NSAIDs, concomitant administration of Caldolor and aspirin is not generally recommended because of the potential for increased adverse effects.

                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 Anticoagulants

                     
                        The effects of warfarin and NSAIDs on GI bleeding are synergistic, such that the users of both drugs together have a higher risk of serious GI bleeding than users of either drug alone [see Warnings and Precautions (5.2)].

                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3 ACE Inhibitors

                     
                        NSAIDs may diminish the antihypertensive effect of ACE inhibitors. This interaction should be given consideration in patients taking NSAIDs concomitantly with ACE inhibitors.

                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4 Diuretics

                     
                        Clinical studies and postmarketing observations have shown that ibuprofen can reduce the natriuretic effects of furosemide and thiazides in some patients. This response has been attributed to inhibition of renal prostaglandin synthesis. During concomitant therapy with NSAIDs, observe patients closely for signs of renal failure, as well as to assure diuretic efficacy [see Warnings and Precautions (5.6)].

                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.5 Lithium

                     
                        NSAIDs have produced elevations of plasma lithium levels and a reduction in renal lithium clearance. The mean minimum lithium concentration increased 15%, and the renal clearance of lithium decreased by 20%. This effect has been attributed to inhibition of renal prostaglandin synthesis by the NSAID. Thus, when NSAIDs and lithium are administered concurrently, observe patients carefully for signs of lithium toxicity.

                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.6 Methotrexate

                     
                        NSAIDs have been reported to competitively inhibit methotrexate accumulation in rabbit kidney slices. This indicates that NSAIDs may enhance the toxicity of methotrexate. Use caution when NSAIDs are administered concomitantly with methotrexate.

                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.7  H-2 Antagonists

                     
                        In studies of human volunteers, co-administration of cimetidine or ranitidine with ibuprofen had no substantive effect on ibuprofen serum concentrations.

                     
                     
                  
               
            
         