
               
               
               
                  
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     

The mechanism of action of omega-3-acid ethyl esters is not completely understood. Potential
  

mechanisms of action include inhibition of acyl-CoA:1,2-diacylglycerol acyltransferase, increased
  

mitochondrial and peroxisomal β-oxidation in the liver, decreased lipogenesis in the liver, and
  

increased plasma lipoprotein lipase activity. Omega-3-acid ethyl esters may reduce the synthesis of
  

triglycerides in the liver because EPA and DHA are poor substrates for the enzymes responsible for
  

TG synthesis, and EPA and DHA inhibit esterification of other fatty acids.
 
                  
                     

                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     

In healthy volunteers and in subjects with hypertriglyceridemia, EPA and DHA were absorbed when
  

administered as ethyl esters orally. Omega-3-acids administered as ethyl esters induced significant,
  

dose-dependent increases in serum phospholipid EPA content, though increases in DHA content were
  

less marked and not dose-dependent when administered as ethyl esters.
  

Specific Populations: Age: Uptake of EPA and DHA into serum phospholipids in subjects treated with
  

omega-3-acid ethyl esters was independent of age (<49 years versus ≥49 years).
  

Gender: Females tended to have more uptake of EPA into serum phospholipids than males. The clinical
  

significance of this is unknown.
 
                  
                     

                     Pediatric: Pharmacokinetics of omega-3-acid ethyl esters have not been studied.
  

Renal or Hepatic Impairment: Omega-3-acid ethyl esters has not been studied in patients with renal or
  

hepatic impairment.
  

Drug-Drug Interactions:Simvastatin: In a 14-day trial of 24 healthy adult subjects, daily coadministration
  

of simvastatin 80 mg with omega-3-acid ethyl esters 4 grams did not affect the extent (AUC) or rate
  

(C ) of exposure to simvastatin or the major active metabolite, beta-hydroxy simvastatin at steady
  

state.
  

                     Atorvastatin: In a 14-day trial of 50 healthy adult subjects, daily coadministration of atorvastatin 80 mg
  

with omega-3-acid ethyl esters 4 grams did not affect AUC or C of exposure to atorvastatin, 2-
  

hydroxyatorvastatin, or 4-hydroxyatorvastatin at steady state.
  

Rosuvastatin: In a 14-day trial of 48 healthy adult subjects, daily coadministration of rosuvastatin 40 mg
  

with omega-3-acid ethyl esters 4 grams did not affect AUC or C of exposure to rosuvastatin at
  

steady state.
 
                  
                     

In vitro studies using human liver microsomes indicated that clinically significant cytochrome P450-
  

mediated inhibition by EPA/DHA combinations are not expected in humans.
 
                  
               
               
            
         