
               
               
               
                  7  DRUG INTERACTIONS 

               
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                            CNS depressants: Increased risk of respiratory depression, hypotension, profound sedation, coma or death. When combined therapy with CNS depressant is contemplated, the dose of one or both agents should be reduced. (7.2)
                            Mixed agonist/antagonist opioids (i.e., pentazocine, nalbuphine, and butorphanol): May reduce analgesic effect and/or precipitate withdrawal symptoms. (7.3)
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        7.1 Alcohol

                     
                     
                        Concomitant use of alcohol with oxymorphone hydrochloride extended-release tablets can result in an increase of oxymorphone plasma levels and potentially fatal overdose of oxymorphone. Instruct patients not to consume alcoholic beverages or use prescription or non-prescription products containing alcohol while on oxymorphone hydrochloride extended-release tablet therapy [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        7.2 CNS Depressants

                     
                     
                        Concurrent use of oxymorphone hydrochloride extended-release tablets and other CNS depressants including sedatives, hypnotics, tranquilizers, general anesthetics, phenothiazines, other opioids, and alcohol can increase the risk of respiratory depression, hypotension, profound sedation, or coma. Monitor patients receiving CNS depressants and oxymorphone hydrochloride extended-release tablets for signs of respiratory depression and hypotension. When such combined therapy is contemplated, reduce the initial dose of one or both agents.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        7.3 Mixed Agonist/Antagonist Opioid Analgesics

                     
                     
                        Mixed agonist/antagonist analgesics (i.e., pentazocine, nalbuphine, butorphanol, or buprenorphine) may reduce the analgesic effect of oxymorphone hydrochloride extended-release tablets or may precipitate withdrawal symptoms in these patients. Avoid the use of mixed agonist/antagonist analgesics in patients receiving oxymorphone hydrochloride extended-release tablets.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        7.4 Cimetidine

                     
                     
                        Cimetidine can potentiate opioid-induced respiratory depression. Monitor patients for respiratory depression when oxymorphone hydrochloride extended-release tablets and cimetidine are used concurrently.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        7.5 Anticholinergics

                     
                     
                        Anticholinergics or other medications with anticholinergic activity when used concurrently with opioid analgesics may result in increased risk of urinary retention and/or severe constipation, which may lead to paralytic ileus. Monitor patients for signs of respiratory and central nervous system depression when oxymorphone hydrochloride extended-release tablets are used concurrently with anticholinergic drugs.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         