


Drug Interactions




Interactions with Substrates, Inhibitors or Inducers of
                                        Cytochrome P-450 Enzymes

                                        Because propranolol’s metabolism involves
                                            multiple pathways in the cytochrome P-450 system
                                            (CYP2D6, 1A2, 2C19), administration of propranolol with
                                            drugs that are metabolized by, or affect the activity
                                            (induction or inhibition) of one or more of these
                                            pathways may lead to clinically relevant drug
                                            interactions (see PRECAUTIONS, Drug
                                        Interactions).
                                    






Substrates
                                        or Inhibitors of CYP2D6

                                        Blood levels of propranolol may be increased by
                                            administration of propranolol with substrates or
                                            inhibitors of CYP2D6, such as amiodarone, cimetidine,
                                            delavirdine, fluoxetine, paroxetine, quinidine, and
                                            ritonavir. No interactions were observed with either
                                            ranitidine or lansoprazole.
                                    






Substrates
                                        or Inhibitors of CYP1A2

                                        Blood levels of propranolol may be increased by
                                            administration of propranolol with substrates or
                                            inhibitors of CYP1A2, such as imipramine, cimetidine,
                                            ciprofloxacin, fluvoxamine, isoniazid, ritonavir,
                                            theophylline, zileuton, zolmitriptan, and
                                        rizatriptan.
                                    






Substrates
                                        or Inhibitors of CYP2C19

                                        Blood levels of propranolol may be increased by
                                            administration of propranolol with substrates or
                                            inhibitors of CYP2C19, such as fluconazole, cimetidine,
                                            fluoxetine, fluvoxamine, teniposide, and tolbutamide. No
                                            interaction was observed with omeprazole.
                                    






Inducers of
                                        Hepatic Drug Metabolism

                                        Blood levels of propranolol may be decreased by
                                            administration of propranolol with inducers such as
                                            rifampin and ethanol. Cigarette smoking also induces
                                            hepatic metabolism and has been shown to increase up to
                                            100% the clearance of propranolol, resulting in
                                            decreased plasma concentrations.
                                    






Cardiovascular Drugs




Antiarrhythmics

                                                The AUC of propafenone is increased by more
                                                  than 200% with co-administration of propranolol.
                                                The metabolism of propranolol is reduced by
                                                  co-administration of quinidine, leading to a 2-
                                                  to 3-fold increased blood concentrations and
                                                  greater beta-blockade.
                                                The metabolism of lidocaine is inhibited by
                                                  co-administration of propranolol, resulting in a
                                                  25% increase in lidocaine
                                                concentrations.
                                            






Calcium Channel Blockers

                                                The mean Cmax and AUC of
                                                  propranolol are increased respectively, by 50%
                                                  and 30% by co-administration of nisoldipine and
                                                  by 80% and 47%, by co-administration of
                                                  nicardipine.
                                                The mean values of Cmax and AUC of
                                                  nifedipine are increased by 64% and 79%,
                                                  respectively, by co-administration of
                                                  propranolol.
                                                Propranolol does not affect the
                                                  pharmacokinetics of verapamil and norverapamil.
                                                  Verapamil does not affect the pharmacokinetics
                                                  of propranolol.
                                            








Non-Cardiovascular Drugs




Migraine Drugs

                                                Administration of zolmitriptan or rizatriptan
                                                  with propranolol resulted in increased
                                                  concentrations of zolmitriptan (AUC increased by
                                                  56% and Cmax by 37%) or rizatriptan
                                                  (the AUC and Cmax were increased by
                                                  67% and 75%, respectively).
                                            






Theophylline

                                                Co-administration of theophylline with
                                                  propranolol decreases theophylline clearance by
                                                  33% to 52%.
                                            






Benzodiazepines

                                                Propranolol can inhibit the metabolism of
                                                  diazepam, resulting in increased concentrations
                                                  of diazepam and its metabolites. Diazepam does
                                                  not alter the pharmacokinetics of propranolol.
                                                The pharmacokinetics of oxazepam, triazolam,
                                                  lorazepam, and alprazolam are not affected by
                                                  co-administration of propranolol.
                                            






Neuroleptic Drugs

                                                Co-administration of propranolol at doses
                                                  greater than or equal to 160 mg/day resulted in
                                                  increased thioridazine plasma concentrations
                                                  ranging from 50% to 370% and increased
                                                  thioridazine metabolites concentrations ranging
                                                  from 33% to 210%.
                                                Co-administration of chlorpromazine with
                                                  propranolol resulted in increased plasma levels
                                                  of both drugs (70% increase in propranolol
                                                  concentrations).
                                            






Anti-Ulcer Drugs

                                                Co-administration of propranolol with
                                                  cimetidine, a non-specific CYP450 inhibitor,
                                                  increased propranolol concentrations by about
                                                  40%. Co-administration with aluminum hydroxide
                                                  gel (1200 mg) resulted in a 50% decrease in
                                                  propranolol concentrations.
                                                Co-administration of metoclopramide with
                                                  propranolol did not have a significant effect on
                                                  propranolol’s
                                                pharmacokinetics.
                                            






Lipid Lowering Drugs

                                                Co-administration of cholesteramine or
                                                  colestipol with propranolol resulted in up to
                                                  50% decrease in propranolol concentrations.
                                                Co-administration of propranolol with
                                                  lovastatin or pravastatin decreased 20% to 25%
                                                  the AUC of both, but did not alter their
                                                  pharmacodynamics. Propranolol did not have an
                                                  effect on the pharmacokinetics of
                                                fluvastatin.
                                            






Warfarin

                                                Concomitant administration of propranolol and
                                                  warfarin has been shown to increase warfarin
                                                  bioavailability and increase prothrombin
                                                time.
                                            





