
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Mometasone furoate is a corticosteroid demonstrating potent anti-inflammatory activity. The precise mechanism of corticosteroid action on asthma is not known. Inflammation is an important component in the pathogenesis of asthma. Corticosteroids have been shown to have a wide range of inhibitory effects on multiple cell types (e.g., mast cells, eosinophils, neutrophils, macrophages, and lymphocytes) and mediators (e.g., histamine, eicosanoids, leukotrienes, and cytokines) involved in inflammation and in the asthmatic response. These anti-inflammatory actions of corticosteroids may contribute to their efficacy in asthma.
                        Mometasone furoate has been shown in vitro to exhibit a binding affinity for the human glucocorticoid receptor, which is approximately 12 times that of dexamethasone, 7 times that of triamcinolone acetonide, 5 times that of budesonide, and 1.5 times that of fluticasone. The clinical significance of these findings is unknown.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 HPA Axis Effects
                              
                              The effects of inhaled mometasone furoate administered via ASMANEX HFA on adrenal function have not been directly evaluated. However, the effects of inhaled mometasone furoate, administered as part of a mometasone furoate/formoterol fumarate inhalation aerosol combination product, on adrenal function were evaluated in two clinical trials in patients with asthma. As no evidence of a pharmacokinetic drug interaction between mometasone furoate and formoterol was observed when the two drugs were administered in combination, the HPA axis effects from the combination product are applicable to ASMANEX HFA. For the mometasone furoate/formoterol fumarate combination product clinical program, HPA-axis function was assessed by 24-hour plasma cortisol AUC. Although both these trials have open-label design and contain a small number of subjects per treatment arm, results from these trials taken together demonstrated suppression of 24-hour plasma cortisol AUC for the combination mometasone furoate/formoterol fumarate 200 mcg/5 mcg compared to placebo consistent with the known systemic effects of inhaled corticosteroid.
                              In a 42-day, open-label, placebo- and active-controlled study, the mean change from baseline plasma cortisol AUC(0-24 hr) was 8%, 22% and 34% lower compared to placebo for the mometasone furoate/formoterol fumarate 100 mcg/5 mcg (n=13), mometasone furoate/formoterol fumarate 200 mcg/5 mcg (n=15) and fluticasone propionate/salmeterol xinafoate 230 mcg/21 mcg (n=16) treatment groups, respectively.
                              In a 52-week, open-label safety study, the mean plasma cortisol AUC(0-24 hr) was 2.2%, 29.6%, 16.7%, and 32.2% lower from baseline for the mometasone furoate/formoterol fumarate 100 mcg/5 mcg (n=18), mometasone furoate/formoterol fumarate 200 mcg/5 mcg (n=20), fluticasone propionate/salmeterol xinafoate 125/25 mcg (n=8), and fluticasone propionate/salmeterol xinafoate 250/25 mcg (n=11) treatment groups, respectively.
                              The potential effect of mometasone furoate via a dry powder inhaler (DPI) on the HPA axis was also assessed in a 29-day study. A total of 64 adult patients with mild to moderate asthma were randomized to one of 4 treatment groups: mometasone furoate DPI 440 mcg twice daily, mometasone furoate DPI 880 mcg twice daily, oral prednisone 10 mg once daily, or placebo. The 30-minute post-Cosyntropin stimulation serum cortisol concentration on Day 29 was 23.2 mcg/dL for the mometasone furoate DPI 440 mcg twice daily group and 20.8 mcg/dL for the mometasone furoate DPI 880 mcg twice daily group, compared to 14.5 mcg/dL for the oral prednisone 10 mg group and 25 mcg/dL for the placebo group. The difference between mometasone furoate DPI 880 mcg twice daily (twice the maximum recommended dose) and placebo was statistically significant.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        As no evidence of a pharmacokinetic drug interaction between mometasone furoate and formoterol was observed when the two drugs were administered from a mometasone furoate/formoterol fumarate combination product, the pharmacokinetics information from the combination product is applicable to ASMANEX HFA.
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Absorption
                              
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Healthy Subjects: Following oral inhalation of single doses of ASMANEX HFA, mometasone furoate was absorbed in healthy subjects with median Tmax values ranging from 0.50 to 2 hours. Following single-dose administration of higher than recommended dose of ASMANEX HFA (4 inhalations of ASMANEX HFA 200 mcg) in healthy subjects, the arithmetic mean (CV%) Cmax and AUC(0-tf) values for mometasone furoate were 53 (102) pg/mL and 992 (80) pg∙hr/mL, respectively. Studies using oral dosing of labeled and unlabeled drug have demonstrated that the oral systemic bioavailability of mometasone furoate is negligible (<1%).
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Asthma Patients: Following oral inhalation of single and multiple doses of the mometasone furoate/formoterol fumarate combination product, mometasone furoate was absorbed in asthma patients with median Tmax values ranging from 1 to 2 hours. Following single-dose administration of mometasone furoate/formoterol fumarate 400 mcg/10 mcg, the arithmetic mean (CV%) Cmax and AUC(0-12 hr) values for mometasone furoate were 20 (88) pg/mL and 170 (94) pg∙hr/mL, respectively, while the corresponding estimates following twice daily dosing of mometasone furoate/formoterol fumarate 400 mcg/10 mcg at steady-state were 60 (36) pg/mL and 577 (40) pg∙hr/mL.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Distribution
                              
                              Based on the study employing a 1000 mcg inhaled dose of tritiated mometasone furoate inhalation powder in humans, no appreciable accumulation of mometasone furoate in the red blood cells was found. Following an intravenous 400 mcg dose of mometasone furoate, the plasma concentrations showed a biphasic decline, with a mean steady-state volume of distribution of 152 liters. The in vitro protein binding for mometasone furoate was reported to be 98% to 99% (in a concentration range of 5 to 500 ng/mL).
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Metabolism
                              
                              Studies have shown that mometasone furoate is primarily and extensively metabolized in the liver of all species investigated and undergoes extensive metabolism to multiple metabolites. In vitro studies have confirmed the primary role of human liver CYP3A4 in the metabolism of this compound; however, no major metabolites were identified. Human liver CYP3A4 metabolizes mometasone furoate to 6-beta hydroxy mometasone furoate.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Excretion
                              
                              Following an intravenous dosing, the terminal half-life was reported to be about 5 hours. Following the inhaled dose of tritiated 1000 mcg mometasone furoate, the radioactivity is excreted mainly in the feces (a mean of 74%), and to a small extent in the urine (a mean of 8%) up to 7 days. No radioactivity was associated with unchanged mometasone furoate in the urine. Absorbed mometasone furoate is cleared from plasma at a rate of approximately 12.5 mL/min/kg, independent of dose. The effective t½ for mometasone furoate following inhalation with DULERA was 25 hours in healthy subjects and in patients with asthma.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Special Populations
                              
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Hepatic/Renal Impairment: There are no data regarding the specific use of ASMANEX HFA in patients with hepatic or renal impairment.
                                    A study evaluating the administration of a single inhaled dose of 400 mcg mometasone furoate by a dry powder inhaler to subjects with mild (n=4), moderate (n=4), and severe (n=4) hepatic impairment resulted in only 1 or 2 subjects in each group having detectable peak plasma concentrations of mometasone furoate (ranging from 50-105 pg/mL). The observed peak plasma concentrations appear to increase with severity of hepatic impairment; however, the numbers of detectable levels were few.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Gender and Race: Specific studies to examine the effects of gender and race on the pharmacokinetics of ASMANEX HFA have not been specifically studied.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Geriatrics: The pharmacokinetics of ASMANEX HFA have not been specifically studied in the elderly population.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Drug-Drug Interactions
                              
                              A single-dose crossover study was conducted to compare the pharmacokinetics of 4 inhalations of the following: mometasone furoate MDI, formoterol MDI, mometasone furoate/formoterol fumarate MDI combination product, and mometasone furoate MDI plus formoterol fumarate MDI administered concurrently. The results of the study indicated that there was no evidence of a pharmacokinetic interaction between mometasone furoate and formoterol.
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Inhibitors of Cytochrome P450 Enzymes: Ketoconazole: In a drug interaction study, an inhaled dose of mometasone furoate 400 mcg delivered by a dry powder inhaler was given to 24 healthy subjects twice daily for 9 days and ketoconazole 200 mg (as well as placebo) were given twice daily concomitantly on Days 4 to 9. Mometasone furoate plasma concentrations were <150 pg/mL on Day 3 prior to coadministration of ketoconazole or placebo. Following concomitant administration of ketoconazole, 4 out of 12 subjects in the ketoconazole treatment group (n=12) had peak plasma concentrations of mometasone furoate >200 pg/mL on Day 9 (211-324 pg/mL). Mometasone furoate plasma levels appeared to increase and plasma cortisol levels appeared to decrease upon concomitant administration of ketoconazole.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         