
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
                  The drug interaction studies described below were conducted using vardenafil film-coated tablets. 
               
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           STAXYN can potentiate the hypotensive effects of nitrates, alpha-blockers, and antihypertensives. (
                                 7.1
                              )
                           Do not use STAXYN with moderate or potent CYP3A4 inhibitors as co-administration will result in significant increases in plasma vardenafil concentrations. (7.2)
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 Potential for Pharmacodynamic Interactions with STAXYN 
                     
                        
                           Nitrates: Concomitant use of STAXYN and nitrates is contraindicated. The blood pressure lowering effects of sublingual nitrates (0.4 mg) taken 1 and 4 hours after vardenafil and increases in heart rate when taken at 1, 4 and 8 hours after vardenafil were potentiated by a 20 mg dose of vardenafil in healthy middle-aged subjects. These effects were not observed when vardenafil 20 mg was taken 24 hours before the nitroglycerin (NTG). Potentiation of the hypotensive effects of nitrates for patients with ischemic heart disease has not been evaluated, and concomitant use of STAXYN and nitrates is contraindicated [see Contraindications (4.1) and Clinical Pharmacology (12.2)].
                        
                           Alpha-Blockers: Patients taking alpha-blockers should not initiate vardenafil therapy with STAXYN.  Patients treated with alpha-blockers who have previously used vardenafil film-coated tablets may be switched to STAXYN at the advice of their healthcare provider. Caution is advised when PDE5 inhibitors are co-administered with alpha-blockers. PDE5 inhibitors, including STAXYN and alpha-adrenergic blocking agents are both vasodilators with blood-pressure-lowering effects. When vasodilators are used in combination, an additive effect on blood pressure may be anticipated. Clinical pharmacology studies have been conducted with co-administration of vardenafil with terazosin or tamsulosin. [See Dosage and Administration (2.4), Warnings and Precautions (5.6), and Clinical Pharmacology (12.2).]
                        
                        
                           Antihypertensives: STAXYN may add to the blood pressure lowering effect of antihypertensive agents. In a clinical pharmacology study of patients with erectile dysfunction, single doses of 20 mg vardenafil caused a mean maximum decrease in supine blood pressure of 7 mmHg systolic and 8 mmHg diastolic (compared to placebo), accompanied by a mean maximum increase of heart rate of 4 beats per minute. The maximum decrease in blood pressure occurred between 1 and 4 hours after dosing. Following multiple dosing for 31 days, similar blood pressure responses were observed on Day 31 as on Day 1. 
                        
                           Alcohol: Vardenafil 20 mg did not potentiate the hypotensive effects of alcohol during the 4-hour observation period in healthy volunteers when administered with alcohol (0.5 g/kg body weight: approximately 40 mL of absolute alcohol in a 70 kg person). Alcohol and vardenafil plasma levels were not altered when dosed simultaneously. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 Effect of Other Drugs on Vardenafil
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           In vitro studies
                           
                              Studies in human liver microsomes showed that vardenafil is metabolized primarily by cytochrome P450 (CYP) isoforms 3A4/5, and to a lesser degree by CYP2C9. Therefore, inhibitors of these enzymes are expected to reduce vardenafil clearance [see Dosage and Administration (2.4) and Warnings and Precautions (5.2)].
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           In vivo studies
                           
                              Do not use STAXYN with moderate and potent CYP3A4 inhibitors such as erythromycin, grapefruit juice, clarithromycin, ketoconazole, itraconazole, indinavir, saquinavir, atazanavir, ritonavir as the systemic concentration of vardenafil is increased in their presence [see Warnings and Precautions (5) and Dosage and Administration (2.4)].
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Potent CYP3A4 inhibitors 
                                 
                                    Ketoconazole (200 mg once daily) produced a 10-fold increase in vardenafil area under the curve (AUC) and a 4-fold increase in maximum concentration (Cmax) when co-administered with vardenafil 5 mg in healthy volunteers. [See Dosage and Administration (2.4) and Warnings and Precautions (5).]
                                    
                                    Indinavir (800 mg t.i.d.) co-administered with vardenafil 10 mg resulted in a 16-fold increase in vardenafil AUC, a 7-fold increase in vardenafil Cmax and a 2-fold increase in vardenafil half-life. [See Dosage and Administration (2.4) and Warnings and Precautions (5).] 
                                    
                                    Ritonavir (600 mg b.i.d.) co-administered with vardenafil 5 mg resulted in a 49-fold increase in vardenafil AUC and a 13-fold increase in vardenafil Cmax. The interaction is a consequence of blocking hepatic metabolism of vardenafil by ritonavir, a highly potent CYP3A4 inhibitor, which also inhibits CYP2C9. [See Dosage and Administration (2.4) and Warnings and Precautions (5).]
                                    
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Moderate CYP3A4 inhibitors 
                                 
                                    Erythromycin (500 mg t.i.d.) produced a 4-fold increase in vardenafil AUC and a 3-fold increase in vardenafil Cmax when co-administered with vardenafil 5 mg in healthy volunteers [see Dosage and Administration (2) and Warnings and Precautions (5)]. 
                                    
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Other Drug Interactions
                           
                              No pharmacokinetic interactions were observed between vardenafil and the following drugs: glyburide, warfarin, digoxin, an antacid based on magnesium-aluminum hydroxide, and ranitidine. In the warfarin study, vardenafil had no effect on the prothrombin time or other pharmacodynamic parameters.
                              Cimetidine (400 mg b.i.d.) had no effect on AUC and Cmax of vardenafil when co-administered with 20 mg vardenafil in healthy volunteers.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3 Effects of Vardenafil on Other Drugs
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           In vitro studies
                           
                              Vardenafil and its metabolites had no effect on CYP1A2, 2A6, and 2E1 (Ki >100 micromolar). Weak inhibitory effects toward other isoforms (CYP2C8, 2C9, 2C19, 2D6, 3A4) were found, but Ki values were in excess of plasma concentrations achieved following dosing. The most potent inhibitory activity was observed for vardenafil metabolite M1, which had a Ki of 1.4 micromolar toward CYP3A4, which is about 20 times higher than the M1 Cmax values after an 80 mg vardenafil dose.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           In vivo studies 
                           
                              
                                 Nifedipine: Vardenafil 20 mg, when co-administered with slow-release nifedipine 30 mg or 60 mg once daily, did not affect the relative AUC or Cmax of nifedipine, a drug that is metabolized via CYP3A4. Nifedipine did not alter the plasma levels of vardenafil when taken in combination. In these patients whose hypertension was controlled with nifedipine, vardenafil 20 mg produced mean additional supine systolic/diastolic blood pressure reductions of 6/5 mmHg compared to placebo.
                              
                                 Ritonavir and Indinavir: Upon concomitant administration of 5 mg vardenafil with 600 mg b.i.d. ritonavir, the Cmax and AUC of ritonavir were reduced by approximately 20%. Upon administration of 10 mg of vardenafil (film-coated tablets) with 800 mg t.i.d. indinavir, the Cmax and AUC of indinavir were reduced by 40% and 30%, respectively.
                              
                                 Aspirin: Vardenafil 10 mg and 20 mg did not potentiate the increase in bleeding time caused by aspirin (two 81 mg tablets).
                              
                                 Other Interactions: Vardenafil had no effect on the pharmacodynamics of glyburide (glucose and insulin concentrations) and warfarin (prothrombin time or other pharmacodynamic parameters).
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         