
                     
                     
                     Drug Interactions
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Diuretics: Patients on diuretics, especially those in whom diuretic therapy was recently instituted, may occasionally experience an excessive reduction of blood pressure after initiation of therapy with benazepril hydrochloride tablets. The possibility of hypotensive effects with benazepril hydrochloride tablets can be minimized by either discontinuing the diuretic or increasing the salt intake prior to initiation of treatment with benazepril hydrochloride tablets. If this is not possible, the starting dose should be reduced (see 
           
 
  
                                    DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION
                                 ).
          

 
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Potassium Supplements and Potassium-Sparing Diuretics: Concomitant use with benazepril hydrochloride tablets may effect potassium levels. Monitor potassium periodically.  
          

 
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Oral Anticoagulants: Interaction studies with warfarin and acenocoumarol failed to identify any clinically important effects on the serum concentrations or clinical effects of these anticoagulants.
          

 
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Lithium: Increased serum lithium levels and symptoms of lithium toxicity have been reported in patients receiving ACE inhibitors (including benazepril) during therapy with lithium.  Monitor lithium levels when used concomitantly with benazepril hydrochloride tablets.
          

 
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Gold: Nitritoid reactions (symptoms include facial flushing, nausea, vomiting and hypotension) have been reported rarely in patients on therapy with injectable gold (sodium aurothiomalate) and concomitant ACE inhibitor therapy.
          

 
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Anti-diabetics: In rare cases, diabetic patients receiving an ACE inhibitor (including benazepril) concomitantly with insulin or oral anti-diabetics may develop hypoglycemia. Such patients should therefore be advised about the possibility of hypoglycemic reactions and should be monitored accordingly.
          

 
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Non-Steroidal Anti-Inflammatory Drugs (NSAIDs) including Selective Cyclooxygenase-2 Inhibitors (COX-2 Inhibitors): In patients who are elderly, volume-depleted (including those on diuretic therapy), or with compromised renal function, co-administration of NSAIDs, including selective COX-2 inhibitors, with ACE inhibitors, including benazepril, may result in deterioration of renal function, including possible acute renal failure. These effects are usually reversible. Monitor renal function periodically in patients receiving benazepril and NSAID therapy. 
          

 
                              The antihypertensive effect of ACE inhibitors, including benazepril, may be attenuated by NSAIDs. 
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Dual Blockade of the Renin-Angiotensin System (RAS): Dual Blockade of the RAS with angiotensin receptor blockers, ACE inhibitors, or aliskiren is associated with increased risks of hypertension, hyperkalemia, and changes in renal function (including acute renal failure) compared to monotherapy. Most patients receiving the combination of two RAS inhibitors do not obtain any additional benefit compared to monotherapy. In general, avoid combined use of RAS inhibitors. Closely monitor blood pressure, renal function and electrolytes in patients on benazepril hydrochloride and other agents that affect the RAS.
          

 
                              Do not co-administer aliskiren with benazepril hydrochloride in patients with diabetes. Avoid use of aliskiren with benazepril hydrochloride in patients with renal impairment (GFR <60 ml/min).
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Other: Benazepril hydrochloride tablets have been used concomitantly with beta-adrenergic-blocking agents, calcium-channel-blocking agents, diuretics, digoxin, and hydralazine, without evidence of clinically important adverse interactions. Benazepril, like other ACE inhibitors, has had less than additive effects with beta-adrenergic blockers, presumably because both drugs lower blood pressure by inhibiting parts of the renin-angiotensin system.
          

 
                              The pharmacokinetics of benazepril are not affected by the following drugs: hydrochlorothiazide, furosemide, chlorthalidone, digoxin, propranolol, atenolol, nifedipine, amlodipine, naproxen, acetylsalicylic acid, or cimetidine. Likewise the administration of benazepril does not substantially affect the pharmacokinetics of these medications (cimetidine kinetics were not studied).
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               