
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  For additional information on Mechanism of Action, Antiviral Activity, Resistance and Cross Resistance, please consult the SUSTIVA, EMTRIVA and VIREAD prescribing information.
               
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        ATRIPLA is a fixed-dose combination of antiviral drugs efavirenz, emtricitabine and tenofovir disoproxil fumarate. [See Clinical Pharmacology (12.4)].
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 ATRIPLA:  One ATRIPLA tablet is bioequivalent to one SUSTIVA tablet (600 mg) plus one EMTRIVA capsule (200 mg) plus one VIREAD tablet (300 mg) following single-dose administration to fasting healthy subjects (N=45).
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Efavirenz:  In HIV-1 infected subjects time-to-peak plasma concentrations were approximately 3–5 hours and steady-state plasma concentrations were reached in 6–10 days. In 35 HIV-1 infected subjects receiving efavirenz 600 mg once daily, steady-state Cmax was 12.9 ± 3.7 µM (mean ± SD), Cmin was 5.6 ± 3.2 µM, and AUC was 184 ± 73 µM•hr. Efavirenz is highly bound (approximately 99.5–99.75%) to human plasma proteins, predominantly albumin. Following administration of 14C-labeled efavirenz, 14–34% of the dose was recovered in the urine (mostly as metabolites) and 16–61% was recovered in feces (mostly as parent drug). In vitro studies suggest CYP3A and CYP2B6 are the major isozymes responsible for efavirenz metabolism. Efavirenz has been shown to induce CYP enzymes, resulting in induction of its own metabolism. Efavirenz has a terminal half-life of 52–76 hours after single doses and 40–55 hours after multiple doses.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Emtricitabine:  Following oral administration, emtricitabine is rapidly absorbed with peak plasma concentrations occurring at 1–2 hours post-dose. Following multiple dose oral administration of emtricitabine to 20 HIV-1 infected subjects, the steady-state plasma emtricitabine Cmax was 1.8 ± 0.7 µg/mL (mean ± SD) and the AUC over a 24-hour dosing interval was 10.0 ± 3.1 µg•hr/mL. The mean steady state plasma trough concentration at 24 hours post-dose was 0.09 µg/mL. The mean absolute bioavailability of emtricitabine was 93%. Less than 4% of emtricitabine binds to human plasma proteins in vitro and the binding is independent of concentration over the range of 0.02–200 µg/mL. Following administration of radiolabelled emtricitabine, approximately 86% is recovered in the urine and 13% is recovered as metabolites. The metabolites of emtricitabine include 3'-sulfoxide diastereomers and their glucuronic acid conjugate. Emtricitabine is eliminated by a combination of glomerular filtration and active tubular secretion with a renal clearance in adults with normal renal function of 213 ± 89 mL/min (mean ± SD). Following a single oral dose, the plasma emtricitabine half-life is approximately 10 hours.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Tenofovir Disoproxil Fumarate:  Following oral administration of a single 300 mg dose of tenofovir DF to HIV-1 infected subjects in the fasted state, maximum serum concentrations (Cmax) were achieved in 1.0 ± 0.4 hrs (mean ± SD) and Cmax and AUC values were 296 ± 90 ng/mL and 2287 ± 685 ng•hr/mL, respectively. The oral bioavailability of tenofovir from tenofovir DF in fasted subjects is approximately 25%. Less than 0.7% of tenofovir binds to human plasma proteins in vitro and the binding is independent of concentration over the range of 0.01–25 µg/mL. Approximately 70–80% of the intravenous dose of tenofovir is recovered as unchanged drug in the urine. Tenofovir is eliminated by a combination of glomerular filtration and active tubular secretion with a renal clearance in adults with normal renal function of 243 ± 33 mL/min (mean ± SD). Following a single oral dose, the terminal elimination half-life of tenofovir is approximately 17 hours.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Effects of Food on Oral Absorption
                              
                              ATRIPLA has not been evaluated in the presence of food. Administration of efavirenz tablets with a high fat meal increased the mean AUC and Cmax of efavirenz by 28% and 79%, respectively, compared to administration in the fasted state. Compared to fasted administration, dosing of tenofovir DF and emtricitabine in combination with either a high fat meal or a light meal increased the mean AUC and Cmax of tenofovir by 35% and 15%, respectively, without affecting emtricitabine exposures [See Dosage and Administration (2) and Patient Counseling Information (17.7)].
                              
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Special Populations
                              
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Race
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                       
                                       
                                          
                                             Efavirenz:  The pharmacokinetics of efavirenz in HIV-1 infected subjects appear to be similar among the racial groups studied.
                                       
                                       
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                       
                                       
                                          
                                             Emtricitabine:  No pharmacokinetic differences due to race have been identified following the administration of emtricitabine.
                                       
                                       
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                       
                                       
                                          
                                             Tenofovir Disoproxil Fumarate:  There were insufficient numbers from racial and ethnic groups other than Caucasian to adequately determine potential pharmacokinetic differences among these populations following the administration of tenofovir DF.
                                       
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Gender
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                       
                                       
                                          
                                             Efavirenz, Emtricitabine, and Tenofovir Disoproxil Fumarate:  Efavirenz, emtricitabine, and tenofovir pharmacokinetics are similar in male and female subjects.
                                       
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Pediatric Patients
                                    
                                    ATRIPLA should only be administered to pediatric patients 12 years of age and weighing greater than or equal to 40 kg (greater than or equal to 88 lb).
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                       
                                       
                                          
                                             Efavirenz:  In an open-label trial in NRTI-experienced pediatric subjects (mean age 8 years, range 3–16), the pharmacokinetics of efavirenz in pediatric subjects were similar to the pharmacokinetics in adults who received a 600 mg daily dose of efavirenz. In 48 pediatric subjects, receiving the equivalent of a 600 mg dose of efavirenz, mean (± SD) steady-state Cmax was 14.2 ± 5.8 µM, steady-state Cmin was 5.6 ± 4.1 µM, and AUC was 218 ± 104 µM•hr.
                                       
                                       
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                       
                                       
                                          
                                             Emtricitabine:  The pharmacokinetics of emtricitabine at steady state were determined in 27 HIV-1-infected pediatric subjects 13 to 17 years of age receiving a daily dose of 6 mg/kg up to a maximum dose of 240 mg oral solution or a 200 mg capsule; 26 of 27 subjects in this age group received the 200 mg EMTRIVA capsule. Mean (± SD) Cmax and AUC were 2.7 ± 0.9 µg/mL and 12.6 ± 5.4 µg•hr/mL, respectively. Exposures achieved in pediatric subjects 12 to less than 18 years of age were similar to those achieved in adults receiving a once daily dose of 200 mg.
                                       
                                       
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                       
                                       
                                          
                                             Tenofovir Disoproxil Fumarate:  Steady-state pharmacokinetics of tenofovir were evaluated in 8 HIV-1 infected pediatric subjects (12 to less than 18 years). Mean (± SD) Cmax and AUCtau are 0.38 ± 0.13 µg/mL and 3.39 ± 1.22 µg•hr/mL, respectively. Tenofovir exposure achieved in these pediatric subjects receiving oral daily doses of VIREAD 300 mg was similar to exposures achieved in adults receiving once-daily doses of VIREAD 300 mg.
                                       
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Geriatric Patients
                                    
                                    Pharmacokinetics of efavirenz, emtricitabine and tenofovir have not been fully evaluated in the elderly (65 years of age and older) [See Use in Specific Populations (8.5)].
                                    
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Patients with Impaired Renal Function
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                       
                                       
                                          
                                             Efavirenz:  The pharmacokinetics of efavirenz have not been studied in subjects with renal insufficiency; however, less than 1% of efavirenz is excreted unchanged in the urine, so the impact of renal impairment on efavirenz elimination should be minimal.
                                       
                                       
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                       
                                       
                                          
                                             Emtricitabine and Tenofovir Disoproxil Fumarate:  The pharmacokinetics of emtricitabine and tenofovir DF are altered in subjects with renal impairment. In subjects with creatinine clearance below 50 mL/min, Cmax and AUC0–∞ of emtricitabine and tenofovir were increased [See Warnings and Precautions (5.7)].
                                          
                                       
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Patients with Hepatic Impairment
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                       
                                       
                                          
                                             Efavirenz:  A multiple-dose trial showed no significant effect on efavirenz pharmacokinetics in subjects with mild hepatic impairment (Child-Pugh Class A) compared with controls. There were insufficient data to determine whether moderate or severe hepatic impairment (Child-Pugh Class B or C) affects efavirenz pharmacokinetics. [See Warnings and Precautions (5.10) and Use in Specific Populations (8.6)].
                                          
                                       
                                       
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                       
                                       
                                          
                                             Emtricitabine:  The pharmacokinetics of emtricitabine have not been studied in subjects with hepatic impairment; however, emtricitabine is not significantly metabolized by liver enzymes, so the impact of liver impairment should be limited.
                                       
                                       
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                       
                                       
                                          
                                             Tenofovir Disoproxil Fumarate:  The pharmacokinetics of tenofovir following a 300 mg dose of tenofovir DF have been studied in non-HIV infected subjects with moderate to severe hepatic impairment. There were no substantial alterations in tenofovir pharmacokinetics in subjects with hepatic impairment compared with unimpaired subjects.
                                       
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Assessment of Drug Interactions
                              
                              The drug interaction trials described were conducted with efavirenz, emtricitabine, or tenofovir DF as individual agents; no drug interaction trials have been conducted using ATRIPLA.
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Efavirenz:  The steady-state pharmacokinetics of efavirenz and tenofovir were unaffected when efavirenz and tenofovir DF were administered together versus each agent dosed alone. Specific drug interaction trials have not been performed with efavirenz and NRTIs other than tenofovir, lamivudine, and zidovudine. Clinically significant interactions would not be expected based on NRTIs elimination pathways.
                                    Efavirenz has been shown in vivo to cause hepatic enzyme induction, thus increasing the biotransformation of some drugs metabolized by CYP3A and CYP2B6. In vitro studies have shown that efavirenz inhibited CYP isozymes 2C9, 2C19, and 3A4 with Ki values (8.5–17 µM) in the range of observed efavirenz plasma concentrations. In in vitro studies, efavirenz did not inhibit CYP2E1 and inhibited CYP2D6 and CYP1A2 (Ki values 82–160 µM) only at concentrations well above those achieved clinically. Coadministration of efavirenz with drugs primarily metabolized by 2C9, 2C19, and 3A4 isozymes may result in altered plasma concentrations of the coadministered drug. Drugs which induce CYP3A activity would be expected to increase the clearance of efavirenz resulting in lowered plasma concentrations.
                                    Drug interaction trials were performed with efavirenz and other drugs likely to be coadministered or drugs commonly used as probes for pharmacokinetic interaction. There was no clinically significant interaction observed between efavirenz and zidovudine, lamivudine, azithromycin, fluconazole, lorazepam, cetirizine, or paroxetine. Single doses of famotidine or an aluminum and magnesium antacid with simethicone had no effects on efavirenz exposures. The effects of coadministration of efavirenz on Cmax, AUC, and Cmin are summarized in Table 5 (effect of other drugs on efavirenz) and Table 6 (effect of efavirenz on other drugs). For information regarding clinical recommendations see 
                                          Drug Interactions (7).
                                    
                                    



                                 



                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Emtricitabine and Tenofovir Disoproxil Fumarate:  The steady-state pharmacokinetics of emtricitabine and tenofovir were unaffected when emtricitabine and tenofovir DF were administered together versus each agent dosed alone.
                                    In vitro and clinical pharmacokinetic drug-drug interaction studies have shown that the potential for CYP mediated interactions involving emtricitabine and tenofovir with other medicinal products is low.
                                    Emtricitabine and tenofovir are primarily excreted by the kidneys by a combination of glomerular filtration and active tubular secretion. No drug-drug interactions due to competition for renal excretion have been observed; however, coadministration of emtricitabine and tenofovir DF with drugs that are eliminated by active tubular secretion may increase concentrations of emtricitabine, tenofovir, and/or the coadministered drug.
                                    Drugs that decrease renal function may increase concentrations of emtricitabine and/or tenofovir.
                                    No clinically significant drug interactions have been observed between emtricitabine and famciclovir, indinavir, stavudine, tenofovir DF and zidovudine. Similarly, no clinically significant drug interactions have been observed between tenofovir DF and abacavir, efavirenz, emtricitabine, entecavir, indinavir, lamivudine, lopinavir/ritonavir, methadone, nelfinavir, oral contraceptives, ribavirin, saquinavir/ritonavir or tacrolimus in trials conducted in healthy volunteers.
                                    Following multiple dosing to HIV-negative subjects receiving either chronic methadone maintenance therapy, oral contraceptives, or single doses of ribavirin, steady-state tenofovir pharmacokinetics were similar to those observed in previous trials, indicating a lack of clinically significant drug interactions between these agents and tenofovir DF. The effects of coadministered drugs on the Cmax, AUC, and Cmin of tenofovir are shown in Table 7. The effects of coadministration of tenofovir DF on Cmax, AUC, and Cmin of coadministered drugs are shown in Table 8 and Table 9.
                                    



                                    


Coadministration of tenofovir DF with didanosine results in changes in the pharmacokinetics of didanosine that may be of clinical significance. Concomitant dosing of tenofovir DF with didanosine enteric-coated capsules significantly increases the Cmax and AUC of didanosine. When didanosine 250 mg enteric-coated capsules were administered with tenofovir DF, systemic exposures of didanosine were similar to those seen with the 400 mg enteric-coated capsules alone under fasted conditions. The mechanism of this interaction is unknown [for didanosine dosing adjustment recommendations see 
                                          Drug Interactions (7.3)
                                       , Table 4].
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.4	Microbiology
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Mechanism of Action
                              
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Efavirenz:  Efavirenz is a non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase (RT) inhibitor of HIV-1. Efavirenz activity is mediated predominantly by noncompetitive inhibition of HIV-1 reverse transcriptase (RT). HIV-2 RT and human cellular DNA polymerases α, β, γ, and σ are not inhibited by efavirenz.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Emtricitabine:  Emtricitabine, a synthetic nucleoside analog of cytidine, is phosphorylated by cellular enzymes to form emtricitabine 5'-triphosphate. Emtricitabine 5'-triphosphate inhibits the activity of the HIV-1 RT by competing with the natural substrate deoxycytidine 5'-triphosphate and by being incorporated into nascent viral DNA which results in chain termination. Emtricitabine 5'-triphosphate is a weak inhibitor of mammalian DNA polymerase α, β, ε, and mitochondrial DNA polymerase γ.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Tenofovir Disoproxil Fumarate:  Tenofovir DF is an acyclic nucleoside phosphonate diester analog of adenosine monophosphate. Tenofovir DF requires initial diester hydrolysis for conversion to tenofovir and subsequent phosphorylations by cellular enzymes to form tenofovir diphosphate. Tenofovir diphosphate inhibits the activity of HIV-1 RT by competing with the natural substrate deoxyadenosine 5'-triphosphate and, after incorporation into DNA, by DNA chain termination. Tenofovir diphosphate is a weak inhibitor of mammalian DNA polymerases α, β, and mitochondrial DNA polymerase γ.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Antiviral Activity
                              
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Efavirenz, Emtricitabine, and Tenofovir Disoproxil Fumarate:  In combination studies evaluating the antiviral activity in cell culture of emtricitabine and efavirenz together, efavirenz and tenofovir together, and emtricitabine and tenofovir together, additive to synergistic antiviral effects were observed.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Efavirenz:  The concentration of efavirenz inhibiting replication of wild-type laboratory adapted strains and clinical isolates in cell culture by 90–95% (EC90–95) ranged from 1.7–25 nM in lymphoblastoid cell lines, peripheral blood mononuclear cells, and macrophage/monocyte cultures. Efavirenz demonstrated additive antiviral activity against HIV-1 in cell culture when combined with non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors (NNRTIs) (delavirdine and nevirapine), nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors (NRTIs) (abacavir, didanosine, lamivudine, stavudine, zalcitabine, and zidovudine), protease inhibitors (PIs) (amprenavir, indinavir, lopinavir, nelfinavir, ritonavir, and saquinavir), and the fusion inhibitor enfuvirtide. Efavirenz demonstrated additive to antagonistic antiviral activity in cell culture with atazanavir. Efavirenz demonstrated antiviral activity against clade B and most non-clade B isolates (subtypes A, AE, AG, C, D, F, G, J, and N), but had reduced antiviral activity against group O viruses. Efavirenz is not active against HIV-2.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Emtricitabine:  The antiviral activity in cell culture of emtricitabine against laboratory and clinical isolates of HIV-1 was assessed in lymphoblastoid cell lines, the MAGI-CCR5 cell line, and peripheral blood mononuclear cells. The 50% effective concentration (EC50) values for emtricitabine were in the range of 0.0013–0.64 µM (0.0003–0.158 µg/mL). In drug combination studies of emtricitabine with NRTIs (abacavir, lamivudine, stavudine, zalcitabine, and zidovudine), NNRTIs (delavirdine, efavirenz, and nevirapine), and PIs (amprenavir, nelfinavir, ritonavir, and saquinavir), additive to synergistic effects were observed. Emtricitabine displayed antiviral activity in cell culture against HIV-1 clades A, B, C, D, E, F, and G (EC50 values ranged from 0.007–0.075 µM) and showed strain specific activity against HIV-2 (EC50 values ranged from 0.007–1.5 µM).
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Tenofovir Disoproxil Fumarate:  The antiviral activity in cell culture of tenofovir against laboratory and clinical isolates of HIV-1 was assessed in lymphoblastoid cell lines, primary monocyte/macrophage cells and peripheral blood lymphocytes. The EC50 values for tenofovir were in the range of 0.04–8.5 µM. In drug combination studies of tenofovir with NRTIs (abacavir, didanosine, lamivudine, stavudine, zalcitabine, and zidovudine), NNRTIs (delavirdine, efavirenz, and nevirapine), and PIs (amprenavir, indinavir, nelfinavir, ritonavir, and saquinavir), additive to synergistic effects were observed. Tenofovir displayed antiviral activity in cell culture against HIV-1 clades A, B, C, D, E, F, G and O (EC50 values ranged from 0.5–2.2 µM) and showed strain specific activity against HIV-2 (EC50 values ranged from 1.6 µM to 5.5 µM).
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Resistance
                              
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Efavirenz, Emtricitabine, and Tenofovir Disoproxil Fumarate:  HIV-1 isolates with reduced susceptibility to the combination of emtricitabine and tenofovir have been selected in cell culture and in clinical trials. Genotypic analysis of these isolates identified the M184V/I and/or K65R amino acid substitutions in the viral RT.
                                    In a clinical trial of treatment-naive subjects [Study 934, see
                                           Clinical Studies (14)] resistance analysis was performed on HIV-1 isolates from all confirmed virologic failure subjects with greater than 400 copies/mL of HIV-1 RNA at Week 144 or early discontinuations. Genotypic resistance to efavirenz, predominantly the K103N substitution, was the most common form of resistance that developed. Resistance to efavirenz occurred in 13/19 analyzed subjects in the emtricitabine + tenofovir DF group and in 21/29 analyzed subjects in the zidovudine/lamivudine fixed-dose combination group. The M184V amino acid substitution, associated with resistance to emtricitabine and lamivudine, was observed in 2/19 analyzed subject isolates in the emtricitabine + tenofovir DF group and in 10/29 analyzed subject isolates in the zidovudine/lamivudine group. Through 144 weeks of Study 934, no subjects developed a detectable K65R substitution in their HIV-1 as analyzed through standard genotypic analysis.
                                    In a clinical trial of treatment-naive subjects, isolates from 8/47 (17%) analyzed subjects receiving tenofovir DF developed the K65R substitution through 144 weeks of therapy; 7 of these occurred in the first 48 weeks of treatment and one at Week 96. In treatment experienced subjects, 14/304 (5%) of tenofovir DF treated subjects with virologic failure through Week 96 showed greater than 1.4 fold (median 2.7) reduced susceptibility to tenofovir. Genotypic analysis of the resistant isolates showed a substitution in the HIV-1 RT gene resulting in the K65R amino acid substitution.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Efavirenz:  Clinical isolates with reduced susceptibility in cell culture to efavirenz have been obtained. The most frequently observed amino acid substitution in clinical trials with efavirenz is K103N (54%). One or more RT substitutions at amino acid positions 98, 100, 101, 103, 106, 108, 188, 190, 225, 227, and 230 were observed in subjects failing treatment with efavirenz in combination with other antiretrovirals. Other resistance substitutions observed to emerge commonly included L100I (7%), K101E/Q/R (14%), V108I (11%), G190S/T/A (7%), P225H (18%), and M230I/L (11%).
                                    HIV-1 isolates with reduced susceptibility to efavirenz (greater than 380-fold increase in EC90 value) emerged rapidly under selection in cell culture. Genotypic characterization of these viruses identified substitutions resulting in single amino acid substitutions L100I or V179D, double substitutions L100I/V108I, and triple substitutions L100I/V179D/Y181C in RT.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Emtricitabine:  Emtricitabine-resistant isolates of HIV-1 have been selected in cell culture and in clinical trials. Genotypic analysis of these isolates showed that the reduced susceptibility to emtricitabine was associated with a substitution in the HIV-1 RT gene at codon 184 which resulted in an amino acid substitution of methionine by valine or isoleucine (M184V/I).
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Tenofovir Disoproxil Fumarate:  HIV-1 isolates with reduced susceptibility to tenofovir have been selected in cell culture. These viruses expressed a K65R substitution in RT and showed a 2–4 fold reduction in susceptibility to tenofovir.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Cross Resistance
                              
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Efavirenz, Emtricitabine, and Tenofovir Disoproxil Fumarate:  Cross-resistance has been recognized among NNRTIs. Cross resistance has also been recognized among certain NRTIs. The M184V/I and/or K65R substitutions selected in cell culture by the combination of emtricitabine and tenofovir are also observed in some HIV-1 isolates from subjects failing treatment with tenofovir in combination with either lamivudine or emtricitabine, and either abacavir or didanosine. Therefore, cross-resistance among these drugs may occur in patients whose virus harbors either or both of these amino acid substitutions. 
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Efavirenz:  Clinical isolates previously characterized as efavirenz-resistant were also phenotypically resistant in cell culture to delavirdine and nevirapine compared to baseline. Delavirdine- and/or nevirapine-resistant clinical viral isolates with NNRTI resistance-associated substitutions (A98G, L100I, K101E/P, K103N/S, V106A, Y181X, Y188X, G190X, P225H, F227L, or M230L) showed reduced susceptibility to efavirenz in cell culture. Greater than 90% of NRTI-resistant isolates tested in cell culture retained susceptibility to efavirenz.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Emtricitabine:  Emtricitabine-resistant isolates (M184V/I) were cross-resistant to lamivudine and zalcitabine but retained susceptibility in cell culture to didanosine, stavudine, tenofovir, zidovudine, and NNRTIs (delavirdine, efavirenz, and nevirapine). HIV-1 isolates containing the K65R substitution, selected in vivo by abacavir, didanosine, tenofovir, and zalcitabine, demonstrated reduced susceptibility to inhibition by emtricitabine. Viruses harboring substitutions conferring reduced susceptibility to stavudine and zidovudine (M41L, D67N, K70R, L210W, T215Y/F, and K219Q/E) or didanosine (L74V) remained sensitive to emtricitabine.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Tenofovir Disoproxil Fumarate:  The K65R substitution selected by tenofovir is also selected in some HIV-1 infected patients treated with abacavir, didanosine, or zalcitabine. HIV-1 isolates with the K65R substitution also showed reduced susceptibility to emtricitabine and lamivudine. Therefore, cross-resistance among these drugs may occur in patients whose virus harbors the K65R substitution. HIV-1 isolates from subjects (N=20) whose HIV-1 expressed a mean of 3 zidovudine-associated RT amino acid substitutions (M41L, D67N, K70R, L210W, T215Y/F, or K219Q/E/N) showed a 3.1-fold decrease in the susceptibility to tenofovir. Subjects whose virus expressed an L74V substitution without zidovudine resistance associated substitutions (N=8) had reduced response to VIREAD. Limited data are available for patients whose virus expressed a Y115F substitution (N=3), Q151M substitution (N=2), or T69 insertion (N=4), all of whom had a reduced response.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         