
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1     Mechanism of Action
                     
                        The two active pharmaceutical ingredients (API) in Omidria, phenylephrine and ketorolac, act to maintain pupil size by preventing intraoperative miosis, and reducing postoperative pain.
                        Phenylephrine is an α
         
 
  1-adrenergic receptor agonist and, in the eye, acts as a mydriatic agent by contracting the radial muscle of the iris. Ketorolac is a nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory that inhibits both cyclooxygenase enzymes (COX-1 and COX-2), resulting in a decrease in tissue concentrations of prostaglandins to reduce pain due to surgical trauma. Ketorolac, by inhibiting prostaglandin synthesis secondary to ocular surgical insult or direct mechanical stimulation of the iris, also prevents surgically induced miosis.
        

 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3     Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        In a pharmacokinetic study evaluating Omidria, systemic exposure to both phenylephrine and ketorolac was low or undetectable.
                        A single-dose of Omidria as part of the irrigation solution was administered in 14 patients during lens replacement surgery. The volume of irrigation solution used during surgery ranged between 150 mL to 300 mL (median 212.5 mL). Detectable phenylephrine plasma concentrations were observed in one of 14 subjects (range 1.2 to 1.4 ng/mL) during the first two hours after the initiation of Omidria administration. The observed phenylephrine plasma concentrations could not be distinguished from the preoperative administration of phenylephrine 2.5% ophthalmic solution prior to exposure to Omidria.
                        Ketorolac plasma concentrations were detected in 10 of 14 subjects (range 1.0 to 4.2 ng/mL) during the first 8 hours after the initiation of Omidria administration. The maximum ketorolac concentration was 15 ng/mL at 24 hours after the initiation of Omidria administration, which may have been due to application of postoperative ketorolac ophthalmic solution.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         