
               
               
               12     CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1     Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Everolimus is an inhibitor of mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR), a serine-threonine kinase, downstream of the PI3K/AKT pathway. The mTOR pathway is dysregulated in several human cancers. Everolimus binds to an intracellular protein, FKBP-12, resulting in an inhibitory complex formation with mTOR complex 1 (mTORC1) and thus inhibition of mTOR kinase activity. Everolimus reduced the activity of S6 ribosomal protein kinase (S6K1) and eukaryotic initiation factor 4E-binding protein (4E-BP1), downstream effectors of mTOR, involved in protein synthesis. S6K1 is a substrate of mTORC1 and phosphorylates the activation domain 1 of the estrogen receptor which results in ligand-independent activation of the receptor. In addition, everolimus inhibited the expression of hypoxia-inducible factor (e.g., HIF-1) and reduced the expression of vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF). Inhibition of mTOR by everolimus has been shown to reduce cell proliferation, angiogenesis, and glucose uptake in in vitro and/or in vivo studies.
                        Constitutive activation of the PI3K/Akt/mTOR pathway can contribute to endocrine resistance in breast cancer. In vitro studies show that estrogen-dependent and HER2+ breast cancer cells are sensitive to the inhibitory effects of everolimus, and that combination treatment with everolimus and Akt, HER2, or aromatase inhibitors enhances the anti-tumor activity of everolimus in a synergistic manner.
                        Two regulators of mTORC1 signaling are the oncogene suppressors tuberin-sclerosis complexes 1 and 2 (TSC1, TSC2). Loss or inactivation of either TSC1 or TSC2 leads to activation of downstream signaling. In TSC, a genetic disorder, inactivating mutations in either the TSC1 or the TSC2 gene lead to hamartoma formation throughout the body. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2     Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        
                           Exposure Response Relationships
                        
                        Markers of protein synthesis show that inhibition of mTOR is complete after a 10 mg daily dose.
                        In patients with SEGA, higher everolimus trough concentrations appear to be associated with larger reductions in SEGA volume. However, as responses have been observed at trough concentrations as low as 5 ng/mL, once acceptable efficacy has been achieved, additional dose increase may not be necessary.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3     Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        
                           Absorption
                        
                        After administration of AFINITOR tablets in patients with advanced solid tumors, peak everolimus concentrations are reached 1 to 2 hours after administration of oral doses ranging from 5 mg to 70 mg. Following single doses, Cmax is dose-proportional with daily dosing between 5 mg and 10 mg. With single doses of 20 mg and higher, the increase in Cmax is less than dose-proportional, however AUC shows dose-proportionality over the 5 mg to 70 mg dose range. Steady-state was achieved within 2 weeks following once-daily dosing.
                        Dose Proportionality in Patients with SEGA and TSC: In patients with SEGA and TSC, everolimus Cmin was approximately dose-proportional within the dose range from 1.35 mg/m2 to 14.4 mg/m2.
                        Food effect: In healthy subjects, high-fat meals reduced systemic exposure to AFINITOR 10 mg tablet (as measured by AUC) by 22% and the peak blood concentration Cmax by 54%. Light-fat meals reduced AUC by 32% and Cmax by 42%. 
                        In healthy subjects who received 9 mg of AFINITOR DISPERZ, high-fat meals (containing approximately 1000 calories and 55 grams of fat) reduced everolimus AUC by 12% and Cmax by 60% and low-fat meals (containing approximately 500 calories and 20 grams of fat) reduced everolimus AUC by 30% and Cmax by 50%.
                        Relative bioavailability of AFINITOR DISPERZ (everolimus tablets for oral suspension): The AUC0-∞ of AFINITOR DISPERZ was equivalent to that of AFINITOR Tablets; the Cmax of this dosage form was 20%-36% lower than that of AFINITOR Tablets. The predicted trough concentrations at steady-state were similar after daily administration.
                        
                           Distribution
                        
                        The blood-to-plasma ratio of everolimus, which is concentration-dependent over the range of 5 to 5000 ng/mL, is 17% to 73%. The amount of everolimus confined to the plasma is approximately 20% at blood concentrations observed in cancer patients given AFINITOR 10 mg/day. Plasma protein binding is approximately 74% both in healthy subjects and in patients with moderate hepatic impairment.
                        
                           Metabolism
                        
                        Everolimus is a substrate of CYP3A4 and PgP. Following oral administration, everolimus is the main circulating component in human blood. Six main metabolites of everolimus have been detected in human blood, including three monohydroxylated metabolites, two hydrolytic ring-opened products, and a phosphatidylcholine conjugate of everolimus. These metabolites were also identified in animal species used in toxicity studies, and showed approximately 100-times less activity than everolimus itself.
                        
                           In vitro, everolimus competitively inhibited the metabolism of CYP3A4 and was a mixed inhibitor of the CYP2D6 substrate dextromethorphan. 
                        
                           Elimination
                        
                        No specific elimination studies have been undertaken in cancer patients. Following the administration of a 3 mg single dose of radiolabeled everolimus in patients who were receiving cyclosporine, 80% of the radioactivity was recovered from the feces, while 5% was excreted in the urine. The parent substance was not detected in urine or feces. The mean elimination half-life of everolimus is approximately 30 hours.
                        
                           Patients with Renal Impairment
                        
                        Approximately 5% of total radioactivity was excreted in the urine following a 3 mg dose of [14C]-labeled everolimus. In a population pharmacokinetic analysis which included 170 patients with advanced cancer, no significant influence of creatinine clearance (25–178 mL/min) was detected on oral clearance (CL/F) of everolimus [see Use in Specific Populations (8.7)].
                        
                           Patients with Hepatic Impairment
                        
                        The safety, tolerability and pharmacokinetics of AFINITOR were evaluated in a single oral dose study of everolimus in subjects with impaired hepatic function relative to subjects with normal hepatic function. Compared to normal subjects (N=13), there was a 1.8-fold, 3.2-fold, and 3.6-fold increase in exposure (i.e. AUC) for subjects with mild (Child-Pugh class A, n=6), moderate (Child-Pugh class B, n=9), and severe (Child-Pugh class C, n=6) hepatic impairment, respectively. In another study, the average AUC of everolimus in eight subjects with moderate hepatic impairment (Child-Pugh class B) was twice that found in eight subjects with normal hepatic function. 
                        For advanced HR+ BC, advanced PNET, advanced RCC, and renal angiomyolipoma with TSC patients with severe hepatic impairment, AFINITOR may be used at a reduced dose if the desired benefit outweighs the risk. For patients with moderate or mild hepatic impairment, a dose reduction is recommended [see Dosage and Administration (2.2)]. 
                        For patients with SEGA and mild or moderate hepatic impairment, adjust the dose of AFINITOR Tablets or AFINITOR DISPERZ based on therapeutic drug monitoring. For patients with SEGA and severe hepatic impairment, reduce the starting dose of AFINITOR Tablets or AFINITOR DISPERZ by approximately 50% and adjust subsequent doses based on therapeutic drug monitoring [see Dosage and Administration (2.4, 2.5)]. 
                        
                           Effects of 
                           A
                           ge and 
                           G
                           ender
                        
                        In a population pharmacokinetic evaluation in cancer patients, no relationship was apparent between oral clearance and patient age or gender.
                        In patients with SEGA, the geometric mean Cmin values normalized to mg/m2 dose in patients aged < 10 years and 10 to 18 years were lower by 54% and 40%, respectively, than those observed in adults (> 18 years of age), suggesting that everolimus clearance normalized to body surface area was higher in pediatric patients as compared to adults.
                        
                           Ethnicity
                        
                        Based on a cross-study comparison, Japanese patients (n=6) had on average exposures that were higher than non-Japanese patients receiving the same dose. 
                        Based on analysis of population pharmacokinetics, oral clearance (CL/F) is on average 20% higher in black patients than in Caucasians.
                        The significance of these differences on the safety and efficacy of everolimus in Japanese or black patients has not been established.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.6     QT/QTc Prolongation Potential
                     
                        In a randomized, placebo-controlled, cross-over study, 59 healthy subjects were administered a single oral dose of AFINITOR (20 mg and 50 mg) and placebo. There is no indication of a QT/QTc prolonging effect of AFINITOR in single doses up to 50 mg.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         