
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  Oxycodone hydrochloride is a full opioid
agonist and is relatively selective for the mu receptor, although
it can bind to other opioid receptors at higher doses. The principal
therapeutic action of oxycodone is analgesia. Like all full opioid
agonists, there is no ceiling effect to analgesia for oxycodone. Clinically,
dosage is titrated to provide adequate analgesia and may be limited
by adverse reactions, including respiratory and CNS depression.
               
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        
                           
                              Central Nervous
System
                           
                        
                        The precise mechanism of the analgesic action
is unknown.  However, specific CNS opioid receptors for endogenous
compounds with opioid-like activity have been identified throughout
the brain and spinal cord and are thought to play a role in the analgesic
effects of this drug.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        A single-dose, double-blind, placebo- and
dose-controlled study was conducted using OXYCONTIN (10, 20, and 30
mg) in an analgesic pain model involving 182 patients with moderate
to severe pain.  OXYCONTIN doses of 20 mg and 30 mg produced statistically
significant pain reduction compared to placebo.
                        
                           
                              Effects on the Central
Nervous System
                           
                        
                        Oxycodone produces respiratory depression
by direct action on brain stem respiratory centers. The respiratory
depression involves both a reduction in the responsiveness of the
brain stem respiratory centers to increases in CO2 tension and to electrical stimulation.
                        Oxycodone depresses the cough reflex by direct
effect on the cough center in the medulla.  Antitussive effects may
occur with doses lower than those usually required for analgesia.
                        Oxycodone causes miosis, even
in total darkness.  Pinpoint pupils are a sign of opioid overdose
but are not pathognomonic (e.g., pontine lesions of hemorrhagic or
ischemic origin may produce similar findings).  Marked mydriasis rather
than miosis may be seen with hypoxia in the setting of oxycodone overdose [see Overdosage (10)].
                        
                           
                              Effects on
the Gastrointestinal Tract and Other Smooth Muscle
                           
                        
                        Oxycodone causes
a reduction in motility associated with an increase in smooth muscle
tone in the antrum of the stomach and duodenum.  Digestion of food
in the small intestine is delayed and propulsive contractions are
decreased.  Propulsive peristaltic waves in the colon are decreased,
while tone may be increased to the point of spasm resulting in constipation.
 Other opioid-induced effects may include a reduction in gastric,
biliary and pancreatic secretions, spasm of sphincter of Oddi, and
transient elevations in serum amylase.
                        
                           
                              Effects on the Cardiovascular
System
                           
                        
                        Oxycodone may produce release of histamine
with or without associated peripheral vasodilation.  Manifestations
of histamine release and/or peripheral vasodilation may include pruritus,
flushing, red eyes, sweating, and/or orthostatic hypotension.
                        
                           
                              Effects on
the Endocrine System
                           
                        
                        Opioids inhibit the secretion of ACTH, cortisol,
testosterone, and luteinizing hormone (LH) in humans.  They also stimulate
prolactin, growth hormone (GH) secretion, and pancreatic secretion
of insulin and glucagon.
                        
                           
                              Effects on the Immune System
                           
                        
                        Opioids have been
shown to have a variety of effects on components of the immune system
in in vitro and animal models.  The clinical significance
of these findings is unknown. Overall, the effects of opioids appear
to be modestly immunosuppressive.
                        
                           
                              Concentration –Efficacy
Relationships
                           
                        
                        Studies in normal volunteers and patients
reveal predictable relationships between oxycodone dosage and plasma
oxycodone concentrations, as well as between concentration and certain
expected opioid effects, such as pupillary constriction, sedation,
overall subjective “drug effect”, analgesia and feelings of relaxation.
                        The minimum effective analgesic
concentration will vary widely among patients, especially among patients
who have been previously treated with potent agonist opioids.  As
a result, patients must be treated with individualized titration of
dosage to the desired effect.  The minimum effective analgesic concentration
of oxycodone for any individual patient may increase over time due
to an increase in pain, the development of a new pain syndrome and/or
the development of analgesic tolerance.
                        
                           
                              Concentration –Adverse
Reaction Relationships
                           
                        
                        There is a relationship between increasing
oxycodone plasma concentration and increasing frequency of dose-related
opioid adverse reactions such as nausea, vomiting, CNS effects, and
respiratory depression.  In opioid-tolerant patients, the situation
may be altered by the development of tolerance to opioid-related side
effects.
                        The dose of
OXYCONTIN must be individualized because the effective analgesic dose
for some patients will be too high to be tolerated by other patients [see Dosage and Administration (2.1)].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        The activity of OXYCONTIN is primarily due
to the parent drug oxycodone.  OXYCONTIN is designed to provide delivery
of oxycodone over 12 hours.
                        Cutting, breaking, chewing, crushing or dissolving
OXYCONTIN impairs the controlled-release delivery mechanism and results
in the rapid release and absorption of a potentially fatal dose of
oxycodone.
                        Oxycodone
release from OXYCONTIN is pH independent.  The oral bioavailability
of oxycodone is 60% to 87%.  The relative oral bioavailability of
oxycodone from OXYCONTIN to that from immediate-release oral dosage
forms is 100%.  Upon repeated dosing with OXYCONTIN in healthy subjects
in pharmacokinetic studies, steady-state levels were achieved within
24-36 hours. Oxycodone is extensively metabolized and eliminated primarily
in the urine as both conjugated and unconjugated metabolites.  The
apparent elimination half-life (t½) of oxycodone
following the administration of OXYCONTIN was 4.5 hours compared to
3.2 hours for immediate-release oxycodone.
                        
                           
                              Absorption
                           
                        
                        About 60%
to 87% of an oral dose of oxycodone reaches the central compartment
in comparison to a parenteral dose.  This high oral bioavailability
is due to low pre-systemic and/or first-pass metabolism.
                        
                           
                              Plasma Oxycodone
Concentration over Time
                           
                        
                        Dose proportionality has been established
for OXYCONTIN 10 mg, 15 mg, 20 mg, 30 mg, 40 mg, 60 mg, and 80 mg
tablet strengths for both peak plasma concentrations (Cmax) and extent of absorption (AUC) (see Table
3).  Given the short elimination t½ of oxycodone, steady-state plasma concentrations of oxycodone are
achieved within 24-36 hours of initiation of dosing with OXYCONTIN.
 In a study comparing 10 mg of OXYCONTIN every 12 hours to 5 mg of
immediate-release oxycodone every 6 hours, the two treatments were
found to be equivalent for AUC and Cmax, and
similar for Cmin (trough) concentrations.
                        


                        



                           
                              Food
Effects
                           
                        
                        Food has no significant effect on the extent
of absorption of oxycodone from OXYCONTIN.
                        
                           
                              Distribution
                           
                        
                        Following
intravenous administration, the steady-state volume of distribution
(Vss) for oxycodone was 2.6 L/kg.  Oxycodone binding to plasma protein
at 37°C and a pH of 7.4 was about 45%.  Once absorbed, oxycodone is
distributed to skeletal muscle, liver, intestinal tract, lungs, spleen,
and brain.  Oxycodone has been found in breast milk [see Use
in Specific Populations (8.3)].
                        
                           
                              Metabolism
                           
                        
                        Oxycodone is extensively metabolized by multiple
metabolic pathways to produce noroxycodone, oxymorphone and noroxymorphone,
which are subsequently glucuronidated.  Noroxycodone and noroxymorphone
are the major circulating metabolites. CYP3A mediated N-demethylation to noroxycodone is the primary metabolic pathway of
oxycodone with a lower contribution from CYP2D6 mediated O-demethylation to oxymorphone. Therefore, the formation of these
and related metabolites can, in theory, be affected by other drugs [see Drug Interactions (7.3)].
                        Noroxycodone exhibits
very weak anti-nociceptive potency compared to oxycodone, however,
it undergoes further oxidation to produce noroxymorphone, which is
active at opioid receptors.  Although noroxymorphone is an active
metabolite and present at relatively high concentrations in circulation,
it does not appear to cross the blood-brain barrier to a significant
extent.  Oxymorphone is present in the plasma only at low concentrations
and undergoes further metabolism to form its glucuronide and noroxymorphone.
 Oxymorphone has been shown to be active and possessing analgesic
activity but its contribution to analgesia following oxycodone administration
is thought to be clinically insignificant.  Other metabolites (α-
and ß-oxycodol, noroxycodol and oxymorphol) may be present at very
low concentrations and demonstrate limited penetration into the brain
as compared to oxycodone.  The enzymes responsible for keto-reduction
and glucuronidation pathways in oxycodone metabolism have not been
established.
                        
                           
                              Excretion
                           
                        
                        Oxycodone and its metabolites are excreted
primarily via the kidney.  The amounts measured in the urine have
been reported as follows: free and conjugated oxycodone 8.9%, free
noroxycodone 23%, free oxymorphone less than 1%, conjugated oxymorphone
10%, free and conjugated noroxymorphone 14%, reduced free and conjugated
metabolites up to 18%.  The total plasma clearance was approximately
1.4 L/min in adults.
                        
                           
                              Specific Populations
                           
                        
                        
                           Geriatric Use
                        
                        The plasma concentrations
of oxycodone are only nominally affected by age, being 15% greater
in elderly as compared to young subjects (age 21-45).
                        
                           Gender
                        
                        Across individual pharmacokinetic studies,
average plasma oxycodone concentrations for female subjects were up
to 25% higher than for male subjects on a body weight-adjusted basis.
 The reason for this difference is unknown [see Use in Specific
Populations (8.8)].
                        
                           Renal Impairment
                        
                        Data from a pharmacokinetic
study involving 13 patients with mild to severe renal dysfunction
(creatinine clearance <60 mL/min) showed peak plasma oxycodone
and noroxycodone concentrations 50% and 20% higher, respectively,
and AUC values for oxycodone, noroxycodone, and oxymorphone 60%, 50%,
and 40% higher than normal subjects, respectively.  This was accompanied
by an increase in sedation but not by differences in respiratory rate,
pupillary constriction, or several other measures of drug effect.
 There was an increase in mean elimination t½ for oxycodone of 1 hour.
                        
                           Hepatic Impairment
                        
                        Data from a study involving 24
patients with mild to moderate hepatic dysfunction show peak plasma
oxycodone and noroxycodone concentrations 50% and 20% higher, respectively,
than healthy subjects.  AUC values are 95% and 65% higher, respectively.
 Oxymorphone peak plasma concentrations and AUC values are lower by
30% and 40%.  These differences are accompanied by increases in some,
but not other, drug effects. The mean elimination t½ for oxycodone increased by 2.3 hours.
                        
                           
                              Drug-Drug Interactions
                           
                        
                        
                           CYP3A4 Inhibitors
                        
                        CYP3A4 is the major enzyme involved in noroxycodone
formation. Co-administration of OXYCONTIN (10 mg single dose) and
the CYP3A4 inhibitor ketoconazole (200 mg BID) increased oxycodone
AUC and Cmax by 170% and 100%, respectively [see Drug Interactions (7.3)].
                        
                        
                           CYP3A4 Inducers
                        
                        A published study
showed that the co-administration of rifampin, a drug metabolizing
enzyme inducer, decreased oxycodone AUC and Cmax values by 86% and 63%, respectively [see Drug Interactions
(7.3)].
                        
                        
                           CYP2D6 Inhibitors
                        
                        Oxycodone is metabolized in part
to oxymorphone via CYP2D6. While this pathway may be blocked by a
variety of drugs such as certain cardiovascular drugs (e.g., quinidine)
and antidepressants (e.g., fluoxetine), such blockade has not been
shown to be of clinical significance with OXYCONTIN [see Drug
Interactions (7.3)].
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         