
               
               
               
12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY

               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        The exact mechanism of action of NORTHERA in the treatment of neurogenic orthostatic hypotension is unknown. NORTHERA is a synthetic amino acid analog that is directly metabolized to norepinephrine by dopa­-decarboxylase, which is extensively distributed throughout the body. NORTHERA is believed to exert its pharmacological effects through norepinephrine and not through the parent molecule or other metabolites. Norepinephrine increases blood pressure by inducing peripheral arterial and venous vasoconstriction.  NORTHERA in humans induces small and transient rises in plasma norepinephrine. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        Peak droxidopa plasma concentrations are associated with increases in systolic and diastolic blood pressures.  Droxidopa has no clinically significant effect on standing or supine heart rates in patients with autonomic failure.
                        
                           
                              Cardiac Electrophysiology
                           
                           
                              

                           No prolongation of the QTc interval was observed with NORTHERA at single oral doses up to 2,000 mg, as shown in a dedicated thorough QT study.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        
                           
                              Absorption

                              
                           Peak plasma concentrations (Cmax) of droxidopa were reached by 1 to 4 hours post-dose (mean of approximately 2 hours) in healthy volunteers.  High-fat meals have a moderate impact on droxidopa exposure with Cmax and area under the plasma concentration-time curve (AUC) decreasing by 35% and 20%, respectively. The Cmax was delayed by approximately 2 hours with a high-fat meal.   
                        
                           
                              Distribution

                              
                           Pre-clinical studies suggest that droxidopa can cross the blood brain barrier. Droxidopa exhibits plasma protein binding of 75% at 100 ng/mL and 26% at 10,000 ng/mL.  The estimated apparent volume of distribution of droxidopa is about 200 L in humans.
                        
                           
                              Metabolism

                              
                           The metabolism of droxidopa is mediated by catecholamine pathway and not through the cytochrome P450 system. Droxidopa is initially converted to methoxylated dihydroxyphenylserine (3-OM-DOPS), a major metabolite, by catechol-O-methyltransferase (COMT), to norepinephrine by DOPA decarboxylase (DDC), or to protocatechualdehyde by DOPS aldolase. After oral dosing in humans, plasma norepinephrine levels peak within 3 to 4 hours but are generally very low (less than 1 ng/mL) and variable with no consistent relationship with dose. The contribution of the metabolites of droxidopa other than norepinephrine to its pharmacological effects is not well understood. 
                        
                           
                              Excretion

                              
                           The mean elimination half-life of droxidopa is approximately 2.5 hours in humans. The major route of elimination of droxidopa and its metabolites is via the kidneys in both animals and in humans. Studies in animals showed that ~75% of the radiolabeled dose was excreted in urine within 24 hours of oral dosing.  
                        
                           
                              Special Populations

                              
                           There are no clinically relevant effects of age, body mass index, or sex on the pharmacokinetics of droxidopa. A population pharmacokinetic analysis suggests that hepatic function, assessed by aspartate aminotransferase (AST), alanine aminotransferase (ALT), alkaline phosphatase, and total bilirubin, did not influence the exposure to droxidopa. The controlled clinical trials included patients with mild to moderate renal impairment.  No dose adjustments are required in patients with mild to moderate renal impairment.  
                        
                           
                              Drug Interactions

                              
                           No dedicated drug-drug interaction studies were performed for droxidopa. Patients in the Phase 3 trials with NORTHERA received concomitant levodopa/carbidopa, dopamine agonists, MAO-B inhibitors, COMT inhibitors and other medications used to treat Parkinson’s disease.  Carbidopa, a peripheral dopa-decarboxylase inhibitor, could prevent the conversion of NORTHERA to norepinephrine outside of the central nervous system (CNS).  Patients taking NORTHERA with L-DOPA/dopa-decarboxylase inhibitor combination drugs had decreased clearance of NORTHERA, an increase in exposure (AUC) to droxidopa of approximately 100%, and an increase in exposure to 3-OM-DOPS of approximately 50%.  However, in clinical trials, it was found that the decreased clearance was not associated with a significant need for a different treatment dose or increases in associated adverse events.  Dopamine agonists, amantadine derivatives, and MAO-B inhibitors do not appear to affect NORTHERA clearance, and no dose adjustments are required.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         