
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS

               
                  Other short-acting sympathomimetic aerosol bronchodilators or epinephrine should not be used concomitantly with XOPENEX HFA.  If additional adrenergic drugs are to be administered by any route, they should be used with caution to avoid deleterious cardiovascular effects.

               
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              Other short-acting sympathomimetic aerosol bronchodilators and adrenergic drugs: May potentiate effect. (7)

                           
                              Beta-blockers: May block bronchodilatory effects of beta-agonists and produce severe bronchospasm.  Patients with asthma should not normally be treated with beta-blockers. (7.1)

                           
                              Diuretics: May worsen electrocardiographic changes or hypokalemia associated with diuretics may worsen. Consider monitoring potassium levels. (7.2)

                           
                              Digoxin: May decrease serum digoxin levels. Consider monitoring digoxin levels. (7.3)

                           
                              Monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOs) or tricyclic antidepressants: May potentiate effect of albuterol on the cardiovascular system. (7.4)

                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 Beta-blockers

                     
                        Beta-blockers:  Beta-adrenergic receptor blocking agents not only block the pulmonary effect of beta-adrenergic agonists, such as XOPENEX HFA, but may produce severe bronchospasm in asthmatic patients.  Therefore, patients with asthma should not normally be treated with beta-blockers.  However, under certain circumstances, e.g., as prophylaxis after myocardial infarction, there may be no acceptable alternatives to the use of beta-adrenergic blocking agents in patients with asthma.  In this setting, cardioselective beta-blockers should be considered, although they should be administered with caution.

                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 Diuretics

                     
                        The ECG changes or hypokalemia that may result from the administration of non-potassium-sparing diuretics (such as loop and thiazide diuretics) can be acutely worsened by beta-agonists, especially when the recommended dose of the beta-agonist is exceeded.  Although the clinical significance of these effects is not known, caution is advised in the coadministration of beta-agonists with non-potassium-sparing diuretics.  Consider monitoring potassium levels.

                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3 Digoxin

                     
                        Mean decreases of 16% to 22% in serum digoxin levels were demonstrated after single-dose intravenous and oral administration of racemic albuterol, respectively, to normal volunteers who had received digoxin for 10 days.  The clinical significance of these findings for patients with obstructive airway disease who are receiving XOPENEX HFA and digoxin on a chronic basis is unclear.  Nevertheless, it would be prudent to carefully evaluate the serum digoxin levels in patients who are currently receiving digoxin and XOPENEX HFA.

                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4 Monoamine Oxidase Inhibitors or Tricyclic Antidepressants

                     
                        XOPENEX HFA should be administered with extreme caution to patients being treated with monoamine oxidase inhibitors or tricyclic antidepressants, or within 2 weeks of discontinuation of such agents, because the action of albuterol on the vascular system may be potentiated. Consider alternative therapy in patients taking MAO inhibitors or tricyclic antidepressants.

                     
                     
                  
               
            
         