
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY

               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action

                     
                        Activation of beta2-adrenergic receptors on airway smooth muscle leads to the activation of adenylate cyclase and to an increase in the intracellular concentration of cyclic-3', 5'-adenosine monophosphate (cyclic AMP).  The increase in cyclic AMP is associated with the activation of protein kinase A, which in turn, inhibits the phosphorylation of myosin and lowers intracellular ionic calcium concentrations, resulting in muscle relaxation.  Levalbuterol relaxes the smooth muscles of all airways, from the trachea to the terminal bronchioles.  Increased cyclic AMP concentrations are also associated with the inhibition of the release of mediators from mast cells in the airways.  Levalbuterol acts as a functional antagonist to relax the airway irrespective of the spasmogen involved, thus protecting against all bronchoconstrictor challenges.  While it is recognized that beta2-adrenergic receptors are the predominant receptors on bronchial smooth muscle, data indicate that there are beta-receptors in the human heart, 10% to 50% of which are beta2-adrenergic receptors.  The precise function of these receptors has not been established [see Warnings and Precautions (5)].  However, all beta-adrenergic agonist drugs can produce a significant cardiovascular effect in some patients, as measured by pulse rate, blood pressure, symptoms, and/or electrocardiographic changes.

                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacokinetics

                     
                        A population pharmacokinetic model was developed using plasma concentrations of (R)-albuterol obtained from 632 asthmatic patients aged 4 to 81 years in three large trials.  For adolescent and adult patients 12 years and older, following 90 mcg dose of XOPENEX HFA, yielded mean peak plasma concentrations (Cmax) and systemic exposure (AUC0-6) of approximately 199 pg/mL and 695 pg•h/mL, respectively, compared to approximately 238 pg/mL and 798 pg•h/mL, respectively, following 180 mcg dose of Racemic Albuterol HFA metered-dose inhaler.  For pediatric patients from 4 to 11 years of age, following 90 mcg dose of XOPENEX HFA, yielded Cmax and AUC0-6 of approximately 163 pg/mL and 579 pg•h/mL, respectively, compared to approximately 238 pg/mL and 828 pg•h/mL, respectively, following 180 mcg dose of Racemic Albuterol HFA metered-dose inhaler.

                        These pharmacokinetic data indicate that mean exposure to (R)-albuterol was 13% to 16% less in adult and 30% to 32% less in pediatric patients given XOPENEX HFA as compared to those given a comparable dose of racemic albuterol.  When compared to adult patients, pediatric patients given 90 mcg of levalbuterol have a 17% lower mean exposure to (R)-albuterol.

                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Metabolism and Elimination
                              
                              Information available in the published literature suggests that the primary enzyme responsible for the metabolism of albuterol enantiomers in humans is SULT1A3 (sulfotransferase).  When racemic albuterol was administered either intravenously or via inhalation after oral charcoal administration, there was a 3- to 4-fold difference in the area under the concentration-time curves between the (R)- and (S)-albuterol enantiomers, with (S)-albuterol concentrations being consistently higher.  However, without charcoal pretreatment, after either oral or inhalation administration the differences were 8- to 24-fold, suggesting that (R)-albuterol is preferentially metabolized in the gastrointestinal tract, presumably by SULT1A3.

                              The primary route of elimination of albuterol enantiomers is through renal excretion (80% to 100%) of either the parent compound or the primary metabolite.  Less than 20% of the drug is detected in the feces.  Following intravenous administration of racemic albuterol, between 25% and 46% of the (R)-albuterol fraction of the dose was excreted as unchanged (R)-albuterol in the urine.

                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Special Populations
                              
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Hepatic Impairment
                                    
                                    The effect of hepatic impairment on the pharmacokinetics of XOPENEX HFA has not been evaluated.

                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Renal Impairment
                                    
                                    The effect of renal impairment on the pharmacokinetics of racemic albuterol was evaluated in 5 subjects with creatinine clearance of 7 to 53 mL/min, and the results were compared with those from healthy volunteers.  Renal disease had no effect on the half-life, but there was a 67% decline in racemic albuterol clearance.  Caution should be used when administering high doses of XOPENEX HFA to patients with renal impairment [see Use in Specific Populations (8.6)].

                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         