
               
               
               PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  It is well established that fluoridation of the water supply (1 ppm fluoride) during period of tooth development leads to a significant decrease in the incidence of dental caries. Escavite multi-vitamin with Iron and Fluoride Chewable Tablets provide sodium fluoride, magnesium, zinc, copper, twelve essential vitamins, and iron in a chewable tablet. Because tablets are chewable, they provide a topical as well as systemic source of fluoride.
                  Hydroxyapatite is the principal crystal for all calcified tissue in the human body. The fluoride ion reacts with the hydroxyapatite in the tooth as it is formed to produce the more caries-resistant crystal fluorapatite. The reaction may be expressed by the equation:
                  


                  


Three stages of fluoride deposition in tooth enamel can be distinguished:
                  
                     Small amounts (reflecting the low levels of fluoride in tissue fluids) are incorporated into the enamel crystals while they are being formed.
                     After enamel has been laid down, fluoride deposition continues in the surface enamel. Diffusion of fluoride from the surface inward is apparently restricted.
                     After eruption, the surface enamel acquires fluoride from water, food supplementary fluoride and smaller amounts from saliva.
                  
                  Escavite multi-vitamin with Iron and Fluoride Chewable Tablets is a prescription product for the dietary management of the metabolic processes of caries prophylaxis, and provides supplementation of the diet with twelve essential vitamins, magnesium, zinc, copper and iron.
                  Escavite multi-vitamin with Iron and Fluoride 0.25mg Chewable Tablets provide 0.25mg of fluoride in tablet form for children 4-6 years of age where the drinking water contains 0.3 through 0.6 ppm of fluoride.
                  Escavite multi-vitamin with Iron and Fluoride Chewable Tablets supply significant amounts of Vitamins A, C, D, E, thiamine, riboflavin, niacin, vitamin B6, vitamin B12, folate, biotin, pantothenic acid, magnesium, zinc, copper to supplement the diet, and to help assure that nutritional deficiencies of these vitamins will not develop. Thus, in a single easy-to-use preparation, children obtain twelve essential vitamins and the important minerals, magnesium, zinc, copper, iron, and fluoride.
                  The American Academy of Pediatrics recommends that children up to the age of 16, in areas where drinking water contains less than optimal levels of fluoride, receive daily fluoride supplementation.
                  Children using Escavite multi-vitamin with Iron and Fluoride Chewable Tablets regularly should receive semiannual dental examinations. The regular brushing of teeth and attention to good oral hygiene practices are also essential.
               
               
            
         