
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
                  Lanthanum in FOSRENOL has the potential to bind to drugs with anionic (e.g., carboxyl, carbonyl, and hydroxyl) groups. FOSRENOL may decrease the bioavailability of tetracyclines or fluoroquinolones via this mechanism.
                  There are no empirical data on avoiding drug interactions between FOSRENOL and most concomitant drugs. When administering an oral medication where a reduction in the bioavailability of that medication would have a clinically significant effect on its safety or efficacy, administer the drug at least one hour before or three hours after FOSRENOL. Monitor blood levels of the concomitant drugs that have a narrow therapeutic range.
               
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           There is a potential for FOSRENOL to interact with compounds which bind to cationic antacids (i.e. aluminum-, magnesium-, or calcium-based). Therefore, do not take such compounds within 2 hours of dosing with FOSRENOL. (
                                 7.1
                              )
                           Oral quinolone antibiotics must be taken at least 1 hour before or 4 hours after FOSRENOL. (
                                 7.2
                              )
                           Do not take thyroid hormone replacement therapy within 2 hours of dosing with FOSRENOL. Monitoring of TSH levels is recommended in patients receiving both medicinal agents. (
                                 7.3
                              )
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                      7.1 Drugs Binding to Antacids 
                     
                        There is a potential for FOSRENOL to interact with compounds which bind to cationic antacids (i.e. aluminium-, magnesium-, or calcium-based). Therefore, do not administer such compounds within 2 hours of dosing with FOSRENOL. Examples of relevant classes of compounds where antacids have been demonstrated to reduce bioavailability include antibiotics (such as quinolones, ampicillin and tetracyclines), thyroid hormones, ACE-inhibitors, statin lipid regulators and anti-malarials.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                      7.2 Quinolone Antibiotics 
                     
                        Co-administration of FOSRENOL with quinolone antibiotics may reduce the extent of their absorption. The bioavailability of oral ciprofloxacin was decreased by approximately 50% when taken with FOSRENOL in a single dose study in healthy volunteers. Administer oral quinolone antibiotics at least 1 hour before or 4 hours after FOSRENOL. When oral quinolones are given for short courses, consider eliminating the doses of FOSRENOL that would be normally scheduled near the time of quinolone intake to improve quinolone absorption [
                              see Pharmacokinetics (12.3)
                           ].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                      7.3 Levothyroxine 
                     
                        The bioavailability of levothyroxine was decreased by approximately 40% when taken together with FOSRENOL. Administer thyroid hormone replacement therapy at least 2 hours before or 2 hours after dosing with FOSRENOL and monitor thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH) levels [
                              see Pharmacokinetics (12.3)
                           ].
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         