
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        FOSRENOL is a phosphate binder that reduces absorption of phosphate by forming insoluble lanthanum phosphate complexes that pass through the gastrointestinal (GI) tract unabsorbed. Both serum phosphate and calcium phosphate product are reduced as a consequence of the reduced dietary phosphate absorption.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        
                           In vitro studies have shown that lanthanum effectively binds phosphate in the physiologically relevant pH range of 3 to 7. In simulated gastric fluid, lanthanum binds approximately 97% of the available phosphate at pH 3-5 and 67% at pH 7, when lanthanum is present in a two-fold molar excess to phosphate. Bile acids have not been shown to affect the phosphate binding affinity of lanthanum. In order to bind dietary phosphate efficiently, FOSRENOL must be administered with or immediately after food.
                        In five Phase I pharmacodynamic studies comparing the reduction from baseline of urinary phosphorus excretion in healthy volunteers (N=143 taking lanthanum carbonate), it was shown that the mean intestinal phosphate binding capacity of lanthanum ranged from 235 to 468 mg phosphorus/day when lanthanum was administered at a dose of 3 g per day with food. By comparison, in one study with an untreated control group (n=10) and another study with a placebo group (n=3), the corresponding mean changes from baseline were 3 mg phosphorus/day and 87 mg phosphorus/day, respectively.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        
                           Absorption and Distribution - Following single or multiple dose oral administration of FOSRENOL to healthy subjects, the concentration of lanthanum in plasma was very low (bioavailability <0.002%). Following oral administration in patients, the mean lanthanum Cmax was 1.0 ng/mL. During long-term administration (52 weeks) in ESRD patients, the mean lanthanum concentration in plasma was approximately 0.6 ng/mL. There was minimal increase in plasma lanthanum concentrations with increasing doses within the therapeutic dose range. The timing of food intake relative to lanthanum administration (during and 30 minutes after food intake) has a negligible effect on the systemic level of lanthanum.
                        
                           In vitro, lanthanum is highly bound (>99%) to human plasma proteins, including human serum albumin, α1-acid glycoprotein, and transferrin. Binding to erythrocytes in vivo is negligible in rats.
                        In animal studies, lanthanum concentrations in several tissues, particularly gastrointestinal tract, mesenteric lymph nodes, bone and liver, increased over time to levels several orders of magnitude higher than those in plasma. The level of lanthanum in the liver was higher in renally impaired rats due to higher intestinal absorption. Lanthanum was found in the lysosomes and the biliary canal consistent with transcellular transport. Steady state tissue concentrations in bone and liver were achieved in dogs between 4 and 26 weeks. Relatively high levels of lanthanum remained in these tissues for longer than 6 months after cessation of dosing in dogs. There is no evidence from animal studies that lanthanum crosses the blood-brain barrier.
                        In 105 bone biopsies from patients treated with FOSRENOL for up to 4.5 years, rising levels of lanthanum were noted over time. Estimates of elimination half-life from bone ranged from 2.0 to 3.6 years. Steady state bone concentrations were not reached during the period studied.
                        
                           Metabolism and Elimination - Lanthanum is not metabolized. Lanthanum was cleared from plasma of patients undergoing dialysis with an elimination half-life of 53 hours following discontinuation of therapy.
                        No information is available regarding the mass balance of lanthanum in humans after oral administration. In rats and dogs, the mean recovery of lanthanum after an oral dose was about 99% and 94% respectively and was essentially all from feces. Biliary excretion is the predominant route of elimination for circulating lanthanum in rats. In healthy volunteers administered intravenous lanthanum as the soluble chloride salt (120 μg), renal clearance was less than 2% of total plasma clearance. Quantifiable amounts of lanthanum were not measured in the dialysate of treated ESRD patients.
                        
                           Drug Interactions
                        
                        FOSRENOL has a low potential for systemic drug-drug interactions because of the very low bioavailability of lanthanum and because it is not a substrate or inhibitor of major cytochrome P450 enzyme groups involved in drug metabolism (CYP1A2, CYP2C9/10, CYP2C19, CYP2D6 and CYP3A4/5).
                        FOSRENOL does not alter gastric pH. Therefore, FOSRENOL drug interactions based on altered gastric pH are not expected.
                        In an in vitro investigation, lanthanum did not form insoluble complexes when mixed in simulated gastric fluid with warfarin, digoxin, furosemide, phenytoin, metoprolol and enalapril. Clinical studies have shown that FOSRENOL (three doses of 1000 mg on the day prior to exposure and one dose of 1000 mg on the day of co-administration) administered 30 minutes earlier did not alter the pharmacokinetics of oral warfarin (10 mg), digoxin (0.5 mg), or metoprolol (100 mg). Potential pharmacodynamic interactions between lanthanum and these drugs (e.g., bleeding time or prothrombin time) were not evaluated. None of the drug interaction studies were done with the maximum recommended therapeutic dose of lanthanum carbonate. No drug interaction studies assessed the effects of drugs on phosphate binding by lanthanum carbonate.
                        Ciprofloxacin
                        In a randomized, two-way crossover study in healthy volunteers examining the interaction potential of a single oral dose of ciprofloxacin (750 mg) alone and with lanthanum carbonate (1 g TID), the maximum plasma concentration of ciprofloxacin was reduced by 56% and the area under the ciprofloxacin plasma concentration-time curve was reduced by 54%. The 24-h urinary recovery of ciprofloxacin was reduced 52% by FOSRENOL [
                              see Drug Interactions (7.2)
                           ].
                        Levothyroxine
                        In a single-dose crossover study of levothyroxine (1 mg) with or without simultaneous administration of a single dose of FOSRENOL (500 mg) in six euthyroid normal healthy volunteers, the area under the serum T4 concentration-time curve was decreased by 40% [
                              see Drug Interactions (7.3)
                           ].
                        Fat Soluble Vitamins
                        FOSRENOL appears not to affect the availability of fat soluble vitamins (A, D, E and K) or other nutrients [
                              see Clinical Studies (14.2)
                           ].
                        Citrate
                        Citrate did not increase the absorption of lanthanum.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         