
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        The active ingredient of DOXIL is doxorubicin HCl. The mechanism of action of doxorubicin HCl is thought to be related to its ability to bind DNA and inhibit nucleic acid synthesis. Cell structure studies have demonstrated rapid cell penetration and perinuclear chromatin binding, rapid inhibition of mitotic activity and nucleic acid synthesis, and induction of mutagenesis and chromosomal aberrations.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        The pharmacokinetic parameters for total doxorubicin following a single dose of DOXIL infused over 30 minutes are presented in Table 8.
                        


                        


DOXIL displayed linear pharmacokinetics over the range of 10 to 20 mg/m2. Relative to DOXIL doses at or below 20 mg/m2, the pharmacokinetics of total doxorubicin following a 50 mg/m2 DOXIL dose are nonlinear. At this dose, the elimination half-life of DOXIL is longer and the clearance lower compared to a 20 mg/m2 dose.
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Distribution:
                              Direct measurement of liposomal doxorubicin shows that at least 90% of the drug (the assay used cannot quantify less than 5–10% free doxorubicin) remains liposome-encapsulated during circulation.
                              In contrast to doxorubicin, which displays a large volume of distribution (range 700 to 1100 L/m2), the small steady state volume of distribution of liposomal doxorubicin suggests that DOXIL is largely confined to vascular fluid. Doxorubicin becomes available after the liposomes are extravasated. Plasma protein binding of DOXIL has not been determined; the plasma protein binding of doxorubicin is approximately 70%.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Metabolism:
                              Doxorubicinol, the major metabolite of doxorubicin, was detected at concentrations of 0.8 to 26.2 ng/mL in the plasma of patients who received 10 or 20 mg/m2 DOXIL.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Elimination:
                              The plasma clearance of total doxorubicin from DOXIL was 0.041 L/h/m2 at a dose of 20 mg/m2. Following administration of doxorubicin HCl, the plasma clearance of doxorubicin is 24 to 35 L/h/m2.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         