
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  Like other narcotic analgesics, morphine exerts its principal pharmacological effects on the central nervous system and gastrointestinal tract. Its primary actions of therapeutic value are analgesia and sedation. Opiate analgesia involves at least three anatomical areas of the central nervous system: the periaqueductal-periventricular gray matter, the ventromedial medulla and the spinal cord. A systemically administered opiate may produce analgesia by acting at any, all or some combination of these distinct regions. Morphine interacts predominantly with the µ-receptor. The µ-binding sites of opioids are very discretely distributed in the human brain, with high densities of sites found in the posterior amygdala, hypothalamus, thalamus, nucleus caudatus, putamen and certain cortical areas. They are also found on the terminal axons of primary afferents within laminae I and II (substantia gelatinosa) of the spinal cord and in the spinal nucleus of the trigeminal nerve. Morphine appears to increase the patient's tolerance for pain and to decrease the perception of suffering, although the presence of the pain itself may still be recognized.
                  In addition to analgesia, alterations in mood, including euphoria and dysphoria, drowsiness and mental clouding commonly occur. Morphine depresses various respiratory centers, depresses the cough reflex and constricts the pupils. Morphine may cause nausea and vomiting by stimulating the chemoreceptor trigger zone (CTZ); however, it also depresses the vomiting center, so that subsequent doses are unlikely to produce vomiting. Nausea and vomiting are significantly more common in ambulatory than in recumbent patients.
                  Morphine increases the tone and decreases the propulsive contractions of the smooth muscle of the gastrointestinal tract. The resultant prolongation in gastrointestinal transit time is responsible for the constipating effect of morphine. Because morphine may increase biliary tract pressure, some patients with biliary colic may experience worsening rather than relief of pain. Morphine also decreases gastric, pancreatic and biliary secretions.
                  While morphine generally increases the tone of urinary tract smooth muscle, the net effect tends to be variable, in some cases producing urinary urgency, in others, difficulty in urination. Morphine has been reported to cause antidiuretic hormone (ADH) to be released, thereby reducing urine output.
                  In therapeutic dosage, morphine does not usually exert major effects on the cardiovascular system. However, some patients exhibit a propensity to develop orthostatic hypotension and fainting. Rapid intravenous injection is more likely to precipitate a fall in blood pressure than are intramuscular or subcutaneous injections.
                  Narcotic analgesics cause histamine release, which appears to be responsible for wheals or urticaria sometimes seen at the site of injection. Histamine release may also produce dilation of cutaneous blood vessels, with resultant flushing of the face and neck, pruritus and sweating.
                  Morphine is well absorbed after intramuscular and subcutaneous injection. It is relatively ineffective orally, reportedly because of extensive "first-pass" biotransformation by the intestinal mucosa and the liver.
                  Morphine is metabolized principally in the liver and undergoes conjugation with glucuronic acid at the 3-hydroxyl group. Secondary conjugation may also occur at the 6-hydroxyl group to form the 3,6-diglucuronide. Morphine is excreted in the urine mainly as morphine-3-glucuronide and smaller amounts of morphine-3,6-diglucuronide and unchanged drug. About 90% of total urinary excretion occurs within 24 hours after the last dose is given. Approximately 7-10% of a dose of morphine is excreted in the feces with a large portion of this excreted via the bile.
                  The elimination half-life of morphine administered by various parenteral routes has been reported to be in the range of 2.1 to about 2.6 hours.
                  Onset of analgesia following subcutaneous or intramuscular administration occurs within 10 to 30 minutes.
                  Peak analgesia occurs within 50 to 90 minutes following subcutaneous injection, 30 to 60 minutes after intramuscular injection and 20 minutes after intravenous injection. The duration of analgesia is usually 3 to 6 hours. Following intramuscular administration of morphine sulfate, maximal respiratory depression occurs within 30 minutes. Maximal respiratory depression following intravenous and subcutaneous injections occurs within 7 minutes and 90 minutes, respectively. Sensitivity of the respiratory center returns to normal within 2 to 3 hours, but respiratory minute volume may remain below normal for 4 to 5 hours.
               
               
            
         