
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  A comparative study of the pharmacokinetics of clindamycin phosphate and benzoyl peroxide gel, 1.2%/5% and 1% clindamycin solution alone in 78 patients indicated that mean plasma clindamycin levels during the four week dosing period were < 0.5 ng/ml for both treatment groups.
                  Benzoyl peroxide has been shown to be absorbed by the skin where it is converted to benzoic acid. Less than 2% of the dose enters systemic circulation as benzoic acid.
               
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Microbiology
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Mechanism of Action
                           
                              Clindamycin binds to the 50S ribosomal subunits of susceptible bacteria and prevents elongation of peptide chains by interfering with peptidyl transfer, thereby suppressing protein synthesis.
                              Benzoyl peroxide is a potent oxidizing agent.
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 In Vivo Activity
                                 
                                    No microbiology studies were conducted in the clinical trials with this product.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 In Vitro Activity
                                 
                                    The clindamycin and benzoyl peroxide components individually have been shown to have in vitro activity against Propionibacterium acnes, an organism which has been associated with acne vulgaris; however, the clinical significance of this is not known.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Drug Resistance
                           
                              There are reports of an increase of P. acnes resistance to clindamycin in the treatment of acne. In patients with P. acnes resistant to clindamycin, the clindamycin component may provide no additional benefit beyond benzoyl peroxide alone.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         