
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  Enter section text here
               
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Lubiprostone is a locally acting chloride channel activator that enhances a 
chloride-rich intestinal fluid secretion without altering sodium and potassium 
concentrations in the serum. Lubiprostone acts by specifically activating ClC-2, 
which is a normal constituent of the apical membrane of the human intestine, in 
a protein kinase A–independent fashion. By increasing intestinal fluid 
secretion, lubiprostone increases motility in the intestine, thereby 
facilitating the passage of stool and alleviating symptoms associated with 
chronic idiopathic constipation. Patch clamp cell studies in human cell lines 
have indicated that the majority of the beneficial biological activity of 
lubiprostone and its metabolites is observed only on the apical (luminal) 
portion of the gastrointestinal epithelium. Additionally, activation of ClC-2 by 
lubiprostone has been shown to stimulate recovery of mucosal barrier function 
via the restoration of tight junction protein complexes in ex vivo studies of ischemic porcine intestine.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        Although the pharmacologic effects of lubiprostone in humans have not been fully 
evaluated, animal studies have shown that oral administration of lubiprostone 
increases chloride ion transport into the intestinal lumen, enhances fluid 
secretion into the bowels, and improves fecal transit.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        Lubiprostone has low systemic availability following oral 
administration and concentrations of lubiprostone in plasma are below the level 
of quantitation (10 pg/mL). Therefore, standard pharmacokinetic parameters such 
as area under the curve (AUC), maximum concentration (Cmax), and half-life (t½) cannot be 
reliably calculated. However, the pharmacokinetic parameters of M3 (only 
measurable active metabolite of lubiprostone) have been characterized. Gender 
has no effect on the pharmacokinetics of M3 following the oral administration of 
lubiprostone.
                        
                           Absorption
                        
                        Concentrations of lubiprostone in plasma are below the level of quantitation 
(10 pg/mL) because lubiprostone has a low systemic availability following oral 
administration. Peak plasma levels of M3, after a single oral dose with 24 mcg 
of lubiprostone, occurred at approximately 1.10 hours. The Cmax was 41.5 pg/mL and the mean AUC0–t 
was 57.1 pg∙hr/mL. The AUC0–t of M3 increases dose 
proportionally after single 24-mcg and 144-mcg doses of lubiprostone.
                        
                           Distribution
                        
                        
                           In vitro protein binding studies indicate 
lubiprostone is approximately 94% bound to human plasma proteins. Studies in 
rats given radiolabeled lubiprostone indicate minimal distribution beyond the 
gastrointestinal tissues. Concentrations of radiolabeled lubiprostone at 48 
hours post-administration were minimal in all tissues of the rats.
                        
                           Metabolism
                        
                        The results of both human and animal studies indicate that lubiprostone is 
rapidly and extensively metabolized by 15-position reduction, α-chain 
β-oxidation, and ω-chain ω-oxidation. These biotransformations are not mediated 
by the hepatic cytochrome P450 system but rather appear to be mediated by the 
ubiquitously expressed carbonyl reductase. M3, a metabolite of lubiprostone 
found in both humans and animals, is formed by the reduction of the carbonyl 
group at the 15-hydroxy moiety that consists of both α-hydroxy and β-hydroxy 
epimers. M3 makes up less than 10% of the dose of radiolabeled lubiprostone. 
Animal studies have shown that metabolism of lubiprostone rapidly occurs within 
the stomach and jejunum, most likely in the absence of any systemic absorption. 
This is presumed to be the case in humans as well.
                        
                           Elimination
                        
                        Lubiprostone could not be detected in plasma; however, M3 has a t½ ranging from 0.9 to 1.4 hours. After a single oral dose of 72 
mcg of 3H-labeled lubiprostone, 60% of total administered 
radioactivity was recovered in the urine within 24 hours and 30% of total 
administered radioactivity was recovered in the feces by 168 hours. Lubiprostone 
and M3 are only detected in trace amounts in human feces.
                        
                           Food Effect
                        
                        A study was conducted with a single 72-mcg dose of 3H-labeled lubiprostone to evaluate the potential of a food 
effect on lubiprostone absorption, metabolism, and excretion. Pharmacokinetic 
parameters of total radioactivity demonstrated that Cmax 
decreased by 55% while AUC0–∞ was unchanged when 
lubiprostone was administered with a high-fat meal. The clinical relevance of 
the effect of food on the pharmacokinetics of lubiprostone is not clear. 
However, lubiprostone was administered with food and water in a majority of 
clinical trials.
                     
                  
               
            
         