
               
               
               
                  7
                    
                  DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           Potassium supplements / Potassium-sparing diuretics: risk of hyperkalemia
                                        

                           
                           Lithium: Increased serum Lithium levels; toxicity symptoms
                                        

                           
                           Injectable gold: facial flushing, nausea, vomiting, or hypotension may occur
                           NSAID: Risk of renal dysfunction, loss of antihypertensive effect ( )
                                        7.1
                           
                           If simvastatin is co-administered with amlodipine, do not exceed doses greater than 20 mg daily of simvastatin ( )
                                        7.1
                           
                           Dual inhibition of the renin-angiotensin system: Increased risk of renal impairment, hypotension, and hyperkalemia ( )
                                        7.1
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        7.1
                        Drug/Drug interactions
                     
                     
                        
                           Amlodipine
                        
                        Co-administration of simvastatin with amlodipine increases the systemic exposure of simvastatin.  Limit the dose of simvastatin in patients on amlodipine to 20 mg daily.
                                    Simvastatin:
                        
                        Co-administration with CYP3A inhibitors (moderate and strong) results in increased systemic exposure to amlodipine and may require dose reduction. Monitor for symptoms of hypotension and edema when amlodipine is co-administered with CYP3A4 inhibitors to determine the need for dose adjustment.
                                    CYP3A4 Inhibitors:
                        
                        No information is available on the quantitative effects of CYP3A4 inducers on amlodipine. Blood pressure should be monitored when amlodipine is co-administered with CYP3A4 inducers.
                                    CYP3A4 Inducers:
                        
                        
                           Benazepril
                        
                         Benazepril can attenuate potassium loss caused by thiazide diuretics. Potassium-sparing diuretics (spironolactone, amiloride, triamterene, and others) or potassium supplements can increase the risk of hyperkalemia. If concomitant use of such agents is indicated, the patient’s serum potassium should be monitored frequently.
                                    Potassium Supplements and Potassium-Sparing Diuretics:
                        
                        Increased serum lithium levels and symptoms of lithium toxicity have been reported in patients receiving ACE inhibitors during therapy with lithium. When coadministering amlodipine besylate and benazepril hydrochloride and lithium, frequent monitoring of serum lithium levels is recommended.
                                    Lithium:
                        
                        Nitritoid reactions (symptoms include facial flushing, nausea, vomiting and hypotension) have been reported rarely in patients on therapy with injectable gold (sodium aurothiomalate) and concomitant ACE inhibitor therapy.
                                    Gold:
                            
                        
                        In patients who are elderly, volume-depleted (including those on diuretic therapy), or with compromised renal function, co-administration of NSAIDs, including selective COX-2 inhibitors, with ACE inhibitors, including benazepril, may result in deterioration of renal function, including possible acute renal failure. These effects are usually reversible. Monitor renal function periodically in patients receiving benazepril and NSAID therapy.
                                    Non-Steroidal Anti-Inflammatory Agents including Selective Cyclooxygenase-2 Inhibitors (COX-2 Inhibitors):
                        
                        The antihypertensive effect of ACE inhibitors, including benazepril, may be attenuated by NSAIDs.
                        In rare cases, diabetic patients receiving an ACE inhibitor (including benazepril) concomitantly with insulin or oral antidiabetics may develop hypoglycemia. Such patients should therefore be advised about the possibility of hypoglycemic reactions, and should be monitored accordingly.
                                    Antidiabetic agents:
                        
                        Dual blockade of the RAS with angiotensin receptor blockers, ACE inhibitors, or aliskiren is associated with increased risks of hypotension, hyperkalemia, and changes in renal function (including acute renal failure) compared to monotherapy. Closely monitor blood pressure, renal function and electrolytes in patients on amlodipine besylate and benazepril hydrochloride capsules and other agents that block the RAS.
                                    Dual Blockade of the Renin-Angiotensin System (RAS):
                        
                        Do not co-administer aliskiren with amlodipine besylate and benazepril hydrochloride capsules in patients with diabetes. Avoid use of aliskiren with amlodipine besylate and benazepril hydrochloride capsules in patients with renal impairment (GFR <60 ml/min).
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         