
               
               
               12   CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY 
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1  Mechanism of Action
                     
                        CTLA-4 is a negative regulator of T-cell activity. Ipilimumab is a monoclonal antibody that binds to CTLA-4 and blocks the interaction of CTLA-4 with its ligands, CD80/CD86. Blockade of CTLA-4 has been shown to augment T-cell activation and proliferation, including the activation and proliferation of tumor infiltrating T-effector cells. Inhibition of CTLA-4 signaling can also reduce T-regulatory cell function, which may contribute to a general increase in T cell responsiveness, including the anti-tumor immune response.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3  Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        The pharmacokinetics of ipilimumab were studied in 785 patients with unresectable or metastatic melanoma who received doses of 0.3, 3, or 10 mg/kg once every 3 weeks for 4 doses. Peak concentration (Cmax), trough concentration (Cmin), and area under the plasma concentration versus time curve (AUC) of ipilimumab increased dose proportionally within the dose range examined. Upon repeated dosing every 3 weeks, the clearance (CL) of ipilimumab was found to be time-invariant, and systemic accumulation was 1.5-fold or less. Steady-state concentrations of ipilimumab were reached by the third dose; the mean Cmin at steady-state was 19.4 mcg/mL following repeated doses of 3 mg/kg. The mean value (% coefficient of variation) generated through population pharmacokinetic analysis for the terminal half-life (t1/2) was 15.4 days (34%) and for CL was 16.8 mL/h (38%).
                        
                           Specific Populations: The effects of various covariates on the pharmacokinetics of ipilimumab were assessed in population pharmacokinetic analyses. The CL of ipilimumab increased with increasing body weight; however, no dose adjustment is recommended for body weight after administration on a mg/kg basis. The following factors had no clinically important effect on the CL of ipilimumab: age (range: 23–88 years), gender, performance status, renal impairment, mild hepatic impairment, previous cancer therapy, and baseline lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) levels. The effect of race was not examined due to limited data available in non-Caucasian ethnic groups.
                        
                           Renal Impairment: The effect of renal impairment on the CL of ipilimumab was evaluated in patients with mild (GFR <90 and ≥60 mL/min/1.73 m2; n=349), moderate (GFR <60 and ≥30 mL/min/1.73 m2; n=82), or severe (GFR <30 and ≥15 mL/min/1.73 m2; n=4) renal impairment compared to patients with normal renal function (GFR ≥90 mL/min/1.73 m2; n=350) in population pharmacokinetic analyses. No clinically important differences in the CL of ipilimumab were found between patients with renal impairment and patients with normal renal function. [See Use in Specific Populations (8.6).]
                        
                        
                           Hepatic Impairment: The effect of hepatic impairment on the CL of ipilimumab was evaluated in patients with mild hepatic impairment (TB 1.0 × to 1.5 × ULN or AST >ULN as defined using the National Cancer Institute criteria of hepatic dysfunction; n=76) compared to patients with normal hepatic function (TB and AST ≤ULN; n=708) in the population pharmacokinetic analyses. No clinically important differences in the CL of ipilimumab were found between patients with mild hepatic impairment and normal hepatic function. YERVOY has not been studied in patients with moderate (TB >1.5 × to 3 × ULN and any AST) or severe hepatic impairment (TB >3 × ULN and any AST). [See Use in Specific Populations (8.7).]
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         