
               
               
               7. DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           Do not initiate G-CSF until 24 hours after completion of treatment with Topotecan Hydrochloride for Injection. Concomitant administration can prolong duration of neutropenia. (7) 
                           Greater myelosuppression is likely to be seen when used in combination with other cytotoxic agents. (7)  
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           G-CSF: Concomitant administration of G-CSF can prolong the duration of neutropenia, so if G-CSF is to be used, do not initiate it until day 6 of the course of therapy, 24 hours after completion of treatment with Topotecan Hydrochloride for Injection. 
                        
                           Platinum and Other Cytotoxic Agents: Myelosuppression was more severe when Topotecan Hydrochloride for Injection, at a dose of 1.25 mg/m2/day for 5 days, was given in combination with cisplatin at a dose of 50 mg/m2 in Phase 1 studies. In one study, 1 of 3 patients had severe neutropenia for 12 days and a second patient died with neutropenic sepsis. 
                        Greater myelosuppression is also likely to be seen when Topotecan Hydrochloride for Injection is used in combination with other cytotoxic agents, thereby necessitating a dose reduction. However, when combining Topotecan Hydrochloride for Injection with platinum agents (e.g., cisplatin or carboplatin), a distinct sequence-dependent interaction on myelosuppression has been reported. Coadministration of a platinum agent on day 1 of dosing with Topotecan Hydrochloride for Injection required lower doses of each agent compared to co-administration on day 5 of the dosing schedule for Topotecan Hydrochloride for Injection. 
                        For information on the pharmacokinetics, efficacy, safety, and dosing of Topotecan Hydrochloride for Injection at a dose of 0.75 mg/m2/day on days 1, 2, and 3 in combination with cisplatin 50 mg/m2 on day 1 for cervical cancer, see Dosage and Administration (2), Adverse Reactions (6), Clinical Pharmacology (12.3), and Clinical Studies (14). 
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         