
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
                  
               
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           Patients on anticoagulant therapy may require downward adjustment of their anticoagulant dosage. (7.1)
                           Some bacteriostatic drugs may interfere with the bactericidal action of penicillin, it is advisable to avoid giving tetracycline-class drugs in conjunction with penicillin. (7.2)
                           The concurrent use of tetracycline and methoxyflurane has been reported to result in fatal renal toxicity. (7.3)
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 Anticoagulants
                     
                        Because tetracyclines have been shown to depress plasma prothrombin activity, patients who are on anticoagulant therapy may require downward adjustment of their anticoagulant dosage.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 Penicillin
                     
                        Since bacteriostatic drugs may interfere with the bactericidal action of penicillin, it is advisable to avoid giving tetracycline-class drugs in conjunction with penicillin.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3 Methoxyflurane
                     
                        The concurrent use of tetracycline and methoxyflurane has been reported to result in fatal renal toxicity.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4 Antacids and Iron Preparations
                     
                        Absorption of tetracyclines is impaired by bismuth subsalicylate, proton pump inhibitors, antacids containing aluminum, calcium or magnesium and iron-containing preparations.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.5 Low Dose Oral Contraceptives
                     
                        Doxycycline may interfere with the effectiveness of low dose oral contraceptives. To avoid contraceptive failure, females are advised to use a second form of contraceptive during treatment with doxycycline.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.6 Oral Retinoids
                     
                        There have been reports of pseudotumor cerebri (benign intracranial hypertension) associated with the concomitant use of isotretinoin and tetracyclines. Since both oral retinoids, including isotretinoin and acitretin, and the tetracyclines, primarily minocycline, can cause increased intracranial pressure, the concurrent use of an oral retinoid and a tetracycline should be avoided.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.7 Barbiturates and Anti-epileptics
                     
                        Barbiturates, carbamazepine, and phenytoin decrease the half-life of doxycycline.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.8 Drug/Laboratory Test Interactions
                     
                        False elevations of urinary catecholamine levels may occur due to interference with the fluorescence test.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         