
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        MENOPUR®, administered for 7 to 20 days, produces ovarian follicular growth and maturation in women who do not have primary ovarian failure. Treatment with MENOPUR® in most instances results only in follicular growth and maturation. When sufficient follicular maturation has occurred, hCG must be given to induce ovulation.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        Two open-label, randomized, controlled trials were conducted to assess the pharmacokinetics of MENOPUR®. Study 2003-02 compared single doses of subcutaneous administration of the US and European (EU) formulations of MENOPUR® in 57 healthy, pre-menopausal females who had undergone pituitary suppression. The study established that the two formulations are bioequivalent. Study 2000-03 assessed single and multiple doses of MENOPUR® administered subcutaneously and intramuscularly in a 3 phase cross-over design in 33 healthy, pre-menopausal females who had undergone pituitary suppression. The primary pharmacokinetic endpoints were FSH AUC and Cmax values. The results are summarized in Table 2.
                        


                     



                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Absorption
                              
                              The subcutaneous route of administration trends toward greater bioavailability than the intramuscular route for single and multiple doses of MENOPUR®.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Distribution
                              
                              Human tissue or organ distribution of FSH and LH has not been studied for MENOPUR®.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Metabolism
                              
                              Metabolism of FSH and LH has not been studied for MENOPUR® in humans.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Excretion
                              
                              The elimination half-lives for FSH in the multiple-dose phase were similar (11-13 hours) for subcutaneously administered MENOPUR® and intramuscularly administered MENOPUR®.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         