
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  
                     
                        Coadministration of didanosine delayed-release capsules can alter the concentration of other drugs and other drugs may alter the concentration of didanosine. The potential drug-drug interactions must be considered prior to and during therapy. (4, 7, 12.3)
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 Established Drug Interactions 
                     
                        Clinical recommendations based on the results of drug interaction studies are listed in Table 5. Pharmacokinetic results of drug interaction studies are shown in Tables 9 to 12 [see Contraindications (4.1 and 4.2), Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)]. 
                        


                        


↑ Indicates increase. 
                        ↓ Indicates decrease.  
                        
                           a Coadministration of didanosine with food decreases didanosine concentrations. Thus, although not studied, it is possible that coadministration with heavier meals could reduce didanosine concentrations further. 
                        Exposure to didanosine is increased when coadministered with tenofovir disoproxil fumarate 
[Table 5 and see Clinical Pharmacokinetics (12.3, Tables 9 and 10)]. Increased exposure may cause or worsen didanosine-related clinical toxicities, including pancreatitis, symptomatic hyperlactatemia/lactic acidosis, and peripheral neuropathy. Coadministration of tenofovir disoproxil fumarate with didanosine delayed-release capsules should be undertaken with caution, and patients should be monitored closely for didanosine-related toxicities and clinical response. Didanosine delayed-release capsules should be suspended if signs or symptoms of pancreatitis, symptomatic hyperlactatemia, or lactic acidosis develop [see Dosage and Administration (2.3), Warnings and Precautions (5)]. Suppression of CD4 cell counts has been observed in patients receiving tenofovir disoproxil fumarate with didanosine at a dose of 400 mg daily. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 Predicted Drug Interactions 
                     
                        Predicted drug interactions with didanosine delayed-release capsules are listed in Table 6.
                        


                        


↑ Indicates increase.
                        
                           a Only if other drugs are not available and if clearly indicated. If treatment with life-sustaining drugs that cause pancreatic toxicity is required, suspension of didanosine delayed-release capsules is recommended [see Warnings and Precautions (
                           
                              5.1)]. 
                        
                           b [See Warnings and Precautions (
                           
                              5.6)]. 
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         