
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           Mixed agonist/antagonist and partial agonist opioid analgesics: Avoid use with EXALGO because they may reduce analgesic effect of EXALGO or precipitate withdrawal symptoms. (5.12, 7.2)
                           Monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs): Avoid use of EXALGO in patients taking MAOIs or within 14 days of stopping such treatment. (7.3)
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 CNS Depressants
                     
                        The concomitant use of EXALGO with other CNS depressants including sedatives, hypnotics, tranquilizers, general anesthetics, phenothiazines, other opioids, and alcohol can increase the risk of respiratory depression, profound sedation, coma and death. Monitor patients receiving CNS depressants and EXALGO for signs of respiratory depression, sedation and hypotension.
                        When combined therapy with any of the above medications is considered, the dose of one or both agents should be reduced [see Dosage and Administration (2.2) and Warnings and Precautions (5.4)]. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 Mixed Agonist/Antagonist and Partial Agonist Opioid Analgesics
                     
                        Mixed agonist/antagonist (i.e., pentazocine, nalbuphine, and butorphanol) and partial agonist (buprenorphine) analgesics may reduce the analgesic effect of EXALGO or precipitate withdrawal symptoms. Avoid the use of mixed agonist/antagonist and partial agonist analgesics in patients receiving EXALGO.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3 Monoamine Oxidase Inhibitors (MAOI)
                     
                        The effects of opioid analgesics may be potentiated by MAOIs. EXALGO is not recommended for use in patients who have received MAOIs within 14 days. If concurrent therapy with an MAOI and EXALGO is unavoidable, monitor patients for increased respiratory and central nervous system depression.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4 Anticholinergics
                     
                        Anticholinergics or other medications with anticholinergic activity when used concurrently with EXALGO may result in increased risk of urinary retention and/or severe constipation, which may lead to paralytic ileus. Monitor patients for signs of urinary retention or reduced gastric motility when EXALGO is used concurrently with anticholinergic drugs.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         