
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  
                     

                  
               
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Ammonia N 13 Injection is a radiolabeled analog
of ammonia that is distributed to all organs of the body after
intravenous administration.  It is
extracted from the blood in the coronary capillaries into the myocardial cells
where it is metabolized to glutamine N 13 and retained in the cells.  The presence of ammonia N 13 and glutamine N
13 in the myocardium allows for PET imaging of the myocardium.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        Following intravenous injection, ammonia N 13
enters the myocardium through the coronary arteries.  The PET technique measures myocardial blood
flow based on the assumption of a three-compartmental disposition of
intravenous ammonia N 13 in the myocardium. 
In this model, the value of the rate constant, which represents the
delivery of blood to myocardium, and the fraction of ammonia N 13 extracted
into the myocardial cells, is a measure of myocardial blood flow. Optimal PET
imaging of the myocardium is generally achieved between 10 to 20 minutes after
administration.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        Following intravenous injection, Ammonia N 13
Injection is cleared from the blood with a biologic half-life of
about 2.84 minutes (effective half-life of about 2.21 minutes).  In the myocardium, its biologic half-life has
been estimated to be less than 2 minutes (effective half-life less than 1.67
minutes).

                        
                        The mass dose of Ammonia N 13 Injection is very
small as compared to the normal range of ammonia in the blood
(0.72-3.30 mg) in a healthy adult man [see Description (11.1)].

                        
                        Plasma protein binding of ammonia N 13 or its N
13 metabolites has not been
studied.

                        
                        Ammonia N 13 undergoes a five-enzyme step
metabolism in the liver to yield
urea N 13 (the main circulating metabolite). 
It is also metabolized to glutamine N 13 (the main metabolite in
tissues) by glutamine synthesis in the skeletal muscles, liver, brain,
myocardium, and other organs.  Other
metabolites of ammonia N 13 include small amounts of N 13 amino acid anions
(acidic amino acids) in the forms of glutamate N 13 or aspartate N 13.

                        
                        Ammonia N 13 is eliminated from the body by
urinary excretion mainly as urea
N 13.

                        
                        The
pharmacokinetics of Ammonia N 13 Injection have not been studied in
renally impaired, hepatically impaired, or pediatric patients.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         