
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
                  Dronedarone is metabolized primarily by CYP 3A and is a moderate inhibitor of CYP 3A and CYP 2D6 [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)]. Dronedarone's blood levels can therefore be affected by inhibitors and inducers of CYP 3A, and dronedarone can interact with drugs that are substrates of CYP 3A and CYP 2D6.
                  Dronedarone has no significant potential to inhibit CYP 1A2, CYP 2C9, CYP 2C19, CYP 2C8 and CYP 2B6. It has the potential to inhibit P-glycoprotein (P-gP) transport.
                  Pharmacodynamic interactions can be expected with beta-blockers; calcium antagonists and digoxin [see Drug Interactions (7.1)]. 
                  In clinical trials, patients treated with dronedarone received concomitant medications including beta-blockers, digoxin, calcium antagonists (including those with heart rate-lowering effects), statins and oral anticoagulants. 
               
               
               
                  
                     
                        Dronedarone is metabolized by CYP 3A and is a moderate inhibitor of 
                        CYP 3A and CYP 2D6 and has potentially important pharmacodynamic interactions (7)
                        
                           Antiarrhythmics: Avoid concomitant use (4, 7.1)
                           Digoxin: Consider discontinuation or halve dose of digoxin before treatment and monitor digoxin levels (7.1, 7.3)
                           Calcium channel blockers (CCB): Initiate CCB with low dose and increase after ECG verification of tolerability (7.1,7.2, 7.3)
                           Beta-blockers: May provoke excessive bradycardia, Initiate with low dose and increase after ECG verification of tolerability (7.1, 7.3)
                           CYP 3A inducers: Avoid concomitant use (7.2)
                           Grapefruit juice: Avoid concomitant use (7.2)
                           Statins: Follow label recommendations for concomitant use of certain statins with a CYP 3A and P-gP inhibitor like dronedarone (7.3)
                           CYP 3A substrates with a narrow therapeutic index (e.g., sirolimus and tacrolimus): Monitor and adjust dosage of concomitant drug as needed when used with MULTAQ (7.3)
                           Warfarin: Monitor INR after initiating dronedarone in patients taking warfarin. (7.3)
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 Pharmacodynamic Interactions
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Drugs prolonging the QT interval (inducing Torsade de Pointes) 
                              Co-administration of drugs prolonging the QT interval (such as certain phenothiazines, tricyclic antidepressants, certain macrolide antibiotics, and Class I and III antiarrhythmics) is contraindicated because of the potential risk of Torsade de Pointes-type ventricular tachycardia [see Contraindications (4)].
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Digoxin
                              Digoxin can potentiate the electrophysiologic effects of dronedarone (such as decreased AV-node conduction). In clinical trials, increased levels of digoxin were observed when dronedarone was co-administered with digoxin. Gastrointestinal disorders were also increased.
                              Because of the pharmacokinetic interaction [see Drug Interaction (7.3)] and possible pharmacodynamic interaction, consider the need for continued digoxin therapy. If digoxin treatment is continued, halve the dose of digoxin, monitor serum levels closely, and observe for toxicity.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Calcium channel blockers
                              Calcium channel blockers with depressant effects on the sinus and AV nodes could potentiate dronedarone's effects on conduction.
                              Give low doses of calcium channel blockers initially and increase only after ECG verification of good tolerability [see Drug Interactions (7.3)].
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Beta-blockers 
                              In clinical trials, bradycardia was more frequently observed when dronedarone was given in combination with beta-blockers.
                              Give low dose of beta-blockers initially, and increase only after ECG verification of good tolerability [see Drug Interactions (7.3)].
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 Effects of Other Drugs on Dronedarone
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Ketoconazole and other potent CYP 3A inhibitors
                              Repeated doses of ketoconazole, a strong CYP 3A inhibitor, resulted in a 17-fold increase in dronedarone exposure and a 9-fold increase in Cmax. Concomitant use of ketoconazole as well as other potent CYP 3A inhibitors such as itraconazole, voriconazole, ritonavir, clarithromycin, and nefazodone is contraindicated [see Contraindications (4)].
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Grapefruit juice
                              Grapefruit juice, a moderate inhibitor of CYP 3A, resulted in a 3-fold increase in dronedarone exposure and a 2.5-fold increase in Cmax. Therefore, patients should avoid grapefruit juice beverages while taking MULTAQ.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Rifampin and other CYP 3A inducers
                              Rifampin decreased dronedarone exposure by 80%. Avoid rifampin or other CYP 3A inducers such as phenobarbital, carbamazepine, phenytoin, and St John's wort with dronedarone because they decrease its exposure significantly.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Calcium channel blockers
                              Verapamil and diltiazem are moderate CYP 3A inhibitors and increase dronedarone exposure by approximately 1.4-to 1.7-fold [see Drug Interactions (7.1, 7.3)].
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Pantoprazole
                              Pantoprazole, a drug that increases gastric pH, did not have a significant effect on dronedarone pharmacokinetics. 
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3 Effects of Dronedarone on Other Drugs
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Statins 
                              Dronedarone increased simvastatin/simvastatin acid exposure by 4- and 2-fold, respectively. Because of multiple mechanisms of interaction with statins (CYPs and transporters), follow statin label recommendations for use with CYP 3A and P-gP inhibitors such as dronedarone. 
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Calcium channel blockers
                              Dronedarone increases calcium channel blocker (verapamil, diltiazem or nifedipine) exposure by 1.4- to 1.5-fold [see Drug Interactions (7.1)].
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Sirolimus, tacrolimus, and other CYP3A substrates with narrow therapeutic range 
                              Dronedarone can increase plasma concentrations of tacrolimus, sirolimus, and other CYP 3A substrates with a narrow therapeutic range when given orally. Monitor plasma concentrations and adjust dosage appropriately.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Beta-blockers and other CYP 2D6 substrates
                              Dronedarone increased propranolol exposure by approximately 1.3-fold following single dose administration. Dronedarone increased metoprolol exposure by 1.6-fold following multiple dose administration [see Drug Interaction (7.1)]. Other CYP 2D6 substrates, including other beta-blockers, tricyclic antidepressants, and selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) may have increased exposure upon co-administration with dronedarone.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              P-glycoprotein substrates
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Digoxin
                                    
                                    Dronedarone increased digoxin exposure by 2.5-fold by inhibiting the P-gP transporter [see Drug Interactions (7.1)
                                       ].
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Dabigatran
                                    
                                    Exposure to dabigatran is higher when it is administered with dronedarone than when it is administered alone (1.7- to 2-fold).
                                    Other P-gP substrates are expected to have increased exposure when co-administered with dronedarone.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Warfarin and losartan (CYP 2C9 substrates)
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Losartan
                                    
                                    No interaction was observed between dronedarone and losartan.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Warfarin
                                    
                                    When healthy subjects were administered dronedarone 600 mg twice daily, exposure to S-warfarin was higher than when warfarin was administered alone (1.2-fold). Exposure to R-warfarin was unchanged and there were no clinically significant increases in INR.
                                    More patients experienced clinically significant INR elevations (≥ 5) usually within 1 week after starting dronedarone vs. placebo in patients taking oral anticoagulants in ATHENA. However, no excess risk of bleeding was observed in the dronedarone group.
                                    Postmarketing cases of increased INR with or without bleeding events have been reported in warfarin-treated patients initiated on dronedarone. Monitor INR after initiating dronedarone in patients taking warfarin.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Theophylline (CYP 1A2 substrate)
                              Dronedarone does not increase steady state theophylline exposure.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Oral contraceptives
                              No decreases in ethinylestradiol and levonorgestrel concentrations were observed in healthy subjects receiving dronedarone concomitantly with oral contraceptives.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         