
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  Orally administered erythromycin ethylsuccinate tablets are readily and reliably absorbed. Comparable serum levels of erythromycin are achieved in the fasting state and nonfasting states.
                  Erythromycin diffuses readily into most body fluids. Only low concentrations are normally achieved in the spinal fluid, but passage of the drug across the bloodbrain barrier increases in meningitis. In the presence of normal hepatic function, erythromycin is concentrated in the liver and excreted in the bile; the effect of hepatic dysfunction on excretion of erythromycin by the liver into the bile is not known. Less than 5 percent of the orally administered dose of erythromycin is excreted in active form in the urine.
                  Erythromycin crosses the placental barrier, but fetal plasma levels are low. The drug is excreted in human milk.
               
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Microbiology
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Mechanism of Action
                           
                              Erythromycin acts by inhibition of protein synthesis by binding 50S ribosomal subunits of susceptible organisms. It does not affect nucleic acid synthesis.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Mechanism of Resistance
                           
                              The major route of resistance is modification of the 23S rNA in the 50S ribosomal subunit to insensitivity while efflux can also be significant.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Interactions with Other Antibiotics
                           
                              Antagonism exists in vitro between erythromycin and clindamycin, lincomycin, and chloramphenicol.
                              Erythromycin has been shown to be active against most isolates of the following bacteria both in vitro and in clinical infections as described in the INDICATIONS AND USAGE section.
                              
                                 Gram-positive Bacteria:
                              
                              
                                 Corynebacterium diphtheriae
Corynebacterium minutissimum
Listeria monocytogenes
Staphylococcus aureus (resistant organisms may emerge during treatment)
Streptococcus pneumoniae
Streptococcus pyogenes
                              
                              
                                 Gram-negative Bacteria:
                              
                              
                                 Bordetella pertussis
Haemophilus influenzae
Legionella pneumophila
Neisseria gonorrhoeae
                              
                              
                                 Other Microorganisms:
                              
                              
                                 Chlamydia trachomatis
Entamoeba histolytica
Mycoplasma pneumoniae
Treponema pallidum
Ureaplasma urealyticum
                              
                              The following in vitro data are available, but their clinical significance is unknown.
                              
                              At least 90% of the following bacteria exhibit in vitro minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) less than or equal to the susceptible breakpoint for erythromycin. However, the efficacy of erythromycin in treating clinical infections due to these bacteria has not been established in adequate and well controlled clinical trials.
                              
                                 Gram-positive Bacteria:
                              
                              
                                 Viridans group streptococci
                              
                              
                                 Gram-negative Bacteria:
                              
                              
                                 Moraxella catarrhalis
                              
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Susceptibility Test Methods
                                 
                                    When available the clinical microbiology laboratory should provide the results of in vitro susceptibility test results for antimicrobial drug products used in resident hospitals to the physician as periodic reports that describe the susceptibility profile of nosocomial and community-acquired pathogens. These reports should aid the physician in selecting an antibacterial drug product for treatment.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Dilution Techniques
                           
                              Quantitative methods are used to determine antimicrobial minimum inhibitory concentrations (MIC's). These MICs provide estimates of the susceptibility of bacteria to antimicrobial compounds. The MICs should be determined using a standardized test method1, 2 (broth and/or agar). The MIC values should be interpreted according to criteria provided in Table 1.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Diffusion techniques
                           
                              Quantitative methods that require measurement of zone diameters can also provide reproducible estimates of the susceptibility of bacteria to antimicrobial compounds. The zone size provides an estimate of the susceptibility of bacteria to antimicrobial compounds. The zone size should be determined using a standardized test method.2,3 This procedure uses paper disks impregnated with 15 mcg erythromycin to test the susceptibility of microorganisms to erythromycin. The disc diffusion interpretive criteria are provided in Table 1.
                              


                              


A report of "Susceptible" indicates that the antimicrobial is likely to inhibit growth of the pathogen if the antimicrobial compound reaches the concentrations at the site of infection necessary to inhibit growth of the pathogen. A report of "Intermediate" indicates that the result should be considered equivocal, and, if the microorganism is not fully susceptible to alternative, clinically feasible drugs, the test should be repeated. This category implies possible clinical applicability in body sites where the drug product is physiologically concentrated or in situations where high dosage of drug can be used. This category also provides a buffer zone which prevents small uncontrolled technical factors from causing major discrepancies in interpretation. A report of "Resistant" indicates that the antimicrobial is not likely to inhibit growth of the pathogen if the antimicrobial compound reaches the concentrations usually achievable at the infection site; other therapy should be selected.
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Quality Control
                                 
                                    Standardized susceptibility test procedures require the use of laboratory controls to monitor and ensure the accuracy and precision of supplies and reagents used in the assay, and the techniques of the individuals performing the test.1, 2, 3, 4 Standard erythromycin powder should provide the following range of MIC values noted in Table 2. For the diffusion technique using the 15 mcg disk, the criteria in Table 2 should be achieved.
                                    


