
                     
                     
                     
                        
                        
                           
Drug/Drug Interactions with Oxycodone
                        Opioid analgesics may enhance the neuromuscular-blocking action 
of skeletal muscle relaxants and produce an increase in the degree of 
respiratory depression. 
                        Patients receiving CNS depressants such as other opioid analgesics, general 
anesthetics, phenothiazines, other tranquilizers, centrally-acting anti-emetics, 
sedative-hypnotics or other CNS depressants (including alcohol) concomitantly 
with ENDODAN tablets may exhibit an additive CNS depression. When such combined 
therapy is contemplated, the dose of one or both agents should be reduced.
                        Agonist/antagonist analgesics (i.e., pentazocine, nalbuphine, naltrexone, and 
butorphanol) should be administered with caution to a patient who has received 
or is receiving a pure opioid agonist such as oxycodone. These 
agonist/antagonist analgesics may reduce the analgesic effect of oxycodone or 
may precipitate withdrawal symptoms. 
                        
                        
                        
                        
                           
Drug/Drug Interactions with Aspirin
                        Angiotensin Converting Enzyme (ACE) Inhibitors: The hyponatremic 
and hypotensive effects of ACE inhibitors may be diminished by the concomitant 
administration of aspirin due to its indirect effect on the renin-angiotensin 
conversion pathway. 
                        Acetazolamide: Concurrent use of aspirin and acetazolamide can lead to high 
serum concentrations of acetazolamide (and toxicity) due to competition at the 
renal tubule for secretion. 
                        Anticoagulant Therapy (Heparin and Warfarin): Patients on anticoagulation 
therapy are at increased risk for bleeding because of drug-drug interactions and 
the effect on platelets. Aspirin can displace warfarin from protein binding 
sites, leading to prolongation of both the prothrombin time and the bleeding 
time. Aspirin can increase the anticoagulant activity of heparin, increasing 
bleeding risk. 
                        Anticonvulsants: Salicylate can displace protein-bound phenytoin and valproic 
acid, leading to a decrease in the total concentration of phenytoin and an 
increase in serum valproic acid levels.
                        Beta Blockers: The hypotensive effects of beta blockers may be diminished by 
the concomitant administration of aspirin due to inhibition of renal 
prostaglandins, leading to decreased renal blood flow, and salt and fluid 
retention.
                        Diuretics: The effectiveness of diuretics in patients with underlying renal 
or cardiovascular disease may be diminished by the concomitant administration of 
aspirin due to inhibition of renal prostaglandins, leading to decreased renal 
blood flow and salt and fluid retention. 
                        Methotrexate: Aspirin may enhance the serious side and toxicity of 
methotrexate due to displacement from its plasma protein binding sites and/or 
reduced renal clearance. 
                        Nonsteroidal Anti-inflammatory Drugs (NSAID's): The concurrent use of aspirin 
with other NSAID's should be avoided because this may increase bleeding or lead 
to decreased renal function. Aspirin may enhance the serious side effects and 
toxicity of ketorolac, due to displacement from its plasma protein binding sites 
and/or reduced renal clearance.
                        Oral Hypoglycemics Agents: Aspirin may increase the serum glucose-lowering 
action of insulin and sulfonylureas leading to hypoglycemia. 
                        Uricosuric Agents: Salicylates antagonize the uricosuric action of probenecid 
or sulfinpyrazone. 
                        
                        
                        
                        
                           
Drug/Laboratory Test Interactions
                        Depending on the sensitivity/specificity and the test 
methodology, the individual components of ENDODAN tablets may cross-react with 
assays used in the preliminary detection of cocaine (primary urinary metabolite, 
benzoylecgonine) or marijuana (cannabinoids) in human urine. A more specific 
alternate chemical method must be used in order to obtain a confirmed analytical 
result. The preferred confirmatory method is gas chromatography/mass 
spectrometry (GC/MS). Moreover, clinical considerations and professional 
judgment should be applied to any drug-of-abuse test result, particularly when 
preliminary positive results are used.
                        Salicylates may increase the protein bound iodine (PBI) result by competing 
for the protein binding sites on pre-albumin and possibly thyroid-binding 
globulins.
                     
                  
               