
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              •Clindamycin Phosphate and Benzoyl Peroxide Gel, 1.2%/5% should not be used in combination with erythromycin-containing products because of its clindamycin component. (7.1)
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 Erythromycin
                     
                        Avoid using Clindamycin Phosphate and Benzoyl Peroxide Gel, 1.2%/5% in combination with erythromycin-containing products due to its clindamycin component.  In vitro studies have shown antagonism between erythromycin and clindamycin. The clinical significance of this in vitro antagonism is not known.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 Concomitant Topical Medications
                     
                        Concomitant topical acne therapies should be used with caution since a possible cumulative irritancy effect may occur, especially with the use of peeling, desquamating, or abrasive agents. If irritancy or dermatitis occurs, reduce frequency of application or temporarily interrupt treatment and resume once the irritation subsides. Treatment should be discontinued if the irritation persists.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3 Neuromuscular Blocking Agents
                     
                        Clindamycin has been shown to have neuromuscular blocking properties that may enhance the action of other neuromuscular blocking agents. Clindamycin Phosphate and Benzoyl Peroxide Gel, 1.2%/5% should be used with caution in patients receiving such agents.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4 Topical Sulfone Products
                     
                        Use of topical benzoyl-peroxide-containing preparations with topical sulfone products may cause skin and facial hair to temporarily change color (yellow/orange).
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         