
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  After an intravenous infusion of penicillin G, peak serum concentrations are attained immediately after completion of the infusion. In a study of ten patients administered a single 5 million unit dose of penicillin G intravenously over 3 to 5 minutes, the mean serum concentrations were 400 mcg/mL, 273 mcg/mL and 3 mcg/mL at 5 to 6 minutes, 10 minutes and 4 hours after completion of the injection, respectively. In a separate study, five healthy adults were administered one million units of penicillin G intravenously, either as a bolus over 4 minutes or as an infusion over 60 minutes. The mean serum concentration eight minutes after completion of the bolus was 45 mcg/mL and eight minutes after completion of the infusion was 14.4 mcg/mL.
                  The mean β-phase serum half-life of penicillin G administered by the intravenous route in ten patients with normal renal function was 42 minutes, with a range of 31 to 50 minutes.
                  The clearance of penicillin G in normal individuals is predominantly via the kidney. The renal clearance, which is extremely rapid, is the result of glomerular filtration and active tubular transport, with the latter route predominating. Urinary recovery is reported to be 58 to 85% of the administered dose. Renal clearance of penicillin is delayed in premature infants, neonates and in the elderly due to decreased renal function. The serum half-life of penicillin G correlates inversely with age and clearance of creatinine and ranges from 3.2 hours in infants 0 to 6 days of age to 1.4 hours in infants 14 days of age or older.
                  Nonrenal clearance includes hepatic metabolism and, to a lesser extent, biliary excretion. The latter routes become more important with renal impairment.
                  Probenecid blocks the renal tubular secretion of penicillin. Therefore, the concurrent administration of probenecid prolongs the elimination of penicillin G and, consequently, increases the serum concentrations.
                  Penicillin G is distributed to more areas of the body including lung, liver, kidney, muscle, bone and placenta. In the presence of inflammation, levels of penicillin in abscesses, middle ear, pleural, peritoneal and synovial fluids are sufficient to inhibit most susceptible bacteria. Penetration into the eye, brain, cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) or prostate is poor in the absence of inflammation. With inflamed meninges, the penetration of penicillin G into the CSF improves, such that the CSF/serum ratio is 2 to 6%. Inflammation also enhances its penetration into the pericardial fluid. Penicillin G is actively secreted into the bile resulting in levels at least 10 times those achieved simultaneously in serum. Penicillin G penetrates poorly into human polymorphonuclear leukocytes.
                  In the presence of impaired renal function, the β-phase serum half-life of penicillin G is prolonged. β-phase serum half-lives of one to two hours were observed in azotemic patients with serum creatinine concentrations <3 mg/100 mL and ranged as high as 20 hours in anuric patients. A linear relationship, including the lowest range of renal function, is found between the serum elimination rate constant and renal function as measured by creatinine clearance.
                  In patients with altered renal function, the presence of hepatic insufficiency further alters the elimination of penicillin G. In one study, the serum half-lives in two anuric patients (excreting <400 mL urine/day) were 7.2 and 10.1 hours. A totally anuric patient with terminal hepatic cirrhosis had a penicillin half-life of 30.5 hours, while another patient with anuria and liver disease had a serum half-life of 16.4 hours.The dosage of penicillin G should be reduced in patients with severe renal impairment, with additional modifications when hepatic disease accompanies the renal impairment.
                  Hemodialysis has been shown to reduce penicillin G serum levels.
               
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Microbiology
                     
                        Penicillin G is bactericidal against penicillin-susceptible microorganisms during the stage of active multiplication. It acts by inhibiting biosynthesis of cell-wall mucopeptide. It is not active against the penicillinase-producing bacteria, which include many strains of staphylococci. Penicillin G is highly active in vitro against staphylococci (except penicillinase-producing strains), streptococci (groups A, B, C, G, H, L and M), pneumococci and Neisseria 
                           meningitidis
                           . Other organisms susceptible in vitro to penicillin G are Neisseria 
                           gonorrhoeae
                           , 
                           Corynebacterium
                           
                           diphtheriae
                           , Bacillus 
                           anthracis
                           , clostridia, 
                           Actinomyces
                            species, 
                           Spirillum
                            minus, 
                           Streptobacillus
                           
                           monillformis
                           , Listeria 
                           monocytogenes
                           , and leptospira; Treponema
                           
                           pallidum is extremely susceptible.
                        Some species of gram-negative bacilli were previously considered susceptible to very high intravenous doses of penicillin G (up to 80 million units/day) including some strains of Escherichia coli, Proteus mirabilis, salmonella, shigella, Enterobacter
                           
                           aerogenes (formerly Aerobacter
                           
                           aerogenes) and Alcaligenes
                           
                           faecalis
                           . Penicillin G is no longer considered a drug of choice for infections caused by these organisms.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Susceptibility Testing
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Diffusion Techniques
                           
                              Quantitative methods that require measurement of zone diameters provide reproducible estimates of the susceptibility of bacteria to antimicrobial compounds. One such standardized procedure1
                                 ,2 which has been recommended for use with disks to test susceptibility of organisms to penicillin G uses the 10 Unit (U) penicillin disk. Interpretation involves the correlation of the diameters obtained in the disk test with the minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) for penicillin G.
                              Reports from the laboratory providing results of the standard single-disk susceptibility test with a 10 U penicillin disk should be interpreted according to the criteria provided in 
                                    Table 1
                                 .
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Dilution Techniques
                           
                              Quantitative methods that are used to determine minimum inhibitory concentrations (MICs) provide reproducible estimates of the susceptibility of bacteria to antimicrobial compounds. One such standardized procedure1
                                 ,3 uses a standardized dilution method (broth or agar) or equivalent with penicillin powder. The MIC values obtained should be interpreted according to the criteria provided in 
                                    Table 1
                                 .
                              


                              


A report of “susceptible” indicates that the pathogen is likely to be inhibited by usually achievable concentrations of the antimicrobial compound in the blood. A report of “Intermediate” (I) indicates that the result should be considered equivocal, if the microorganism is not fully susceptible to alternative, clinically feasible drugs, the test should be repeated. This category implies possible clinical applicability in body sites where the drug is physiologically concentrated or in situations where high dosage of the drug can be used. This category also provides a buffer zone that prevents small uncontrolled technical factors from causing major discrepancies in interpretation. A report of “resistant” indicates that the pathogen is not likely to be inhibited if the antimicrobial compound in the blood reaches the concentrations usually achievable; other therapy should be selected.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Quality Control
                           
                              Standardized susceptibility test procedures require the use of laboratory control microorganisms1
                                 ,2,3. The 10 U penicillin G disk and the standard penicillin powder should provide respectively the following zone diameters and MIC values in these laboratory test quality control strains:
                              


