
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Ado-trastuzumab emtansine is a HER2-targeted antibody-drug conjugate. The antibody is the humanized anti-HER2 IgG1, trastuzumab. The small molecule cytotoxin, DM1, is a microtubule inhibitor. Upon binding to sub-domain IV of the HER2 receptor, ado-trastuzumab emtansine undergoes receptor-mediated internalization and subsequent lysosomal degradation, resulting in intracellular release of DM1-containing cytotoxic catabolites. Binding of DM1 to tubulin disrupts microtubule networks in the cell, which results in cell cycle arrest and apoptotic cell death. In addition, in vitro studies have shown that similar to trastuzumab, ado-trastuzumab emtansine inhibits HER2 receptor signaling, mediates antibody-dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity and inhibits shedding of the HER2 extracellular domain in human breast cancer cells that overexpress HER2.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        The pharmacokinetics of KADCYLA was evaluated in a phase 1 study and in a population pharmacokinetic analysis for the ado-trastuzumab emtansine conjugate (ADC) using pooled data from 5 trials in patients with breast cancer. A linear two-compartment model with first-order elimination from the central compartment adequately describes the ADC concentration-time profile. In addition to ADC, the pharmacokinetics of total antibody (conjugated and unconjugated trastuzumab), DM1 were also determined. The pharmacokinetics of KADCYLA are summarized below.
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Distribution
                              
                              Maximum concentrations (Cmax) of ADC and DM1 were observed close to the end of infusion. In Study 1, mean (SD) ADC and DM1 Cycle 1 Cmax following KADCYLA administration was 83.4 (16.5) mg/mL and 4.61 (1.61) ng/mL, respectively.
                              
                                 In vitro, the mean binding of DM1 to human plasma proteins was 93%. In vitro, DM1 was a substrate of P-glycoprotein (P-gp).
                              Based on population pharmacokinetic analysis, the central volume of distribution of ADC was 3.13 L.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Metabolism
                              
                              
                                 In vitro studies indicate that DM1, the small molecule component of KADCYLA, undergoes metabolism by CYP3A4/5. DM1 did not inhibit or induce major CYP450 enzymes in vitro. In human plasma, ado-trastuzumab emtansine catabolites MCC-DM1, Lys-MCC-DM1, and DM1 were detected at low levels.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Elimination
                              
                              Based on population pharmacokinetic analysis, following intravenous infusion of KADCYLA, the clearance of the ADC was 0.68 L/day and the elimination half-life (t1/2) was approximately 4 days. No accumulation of KADCYLA was observed after repeated dosing of intravenous infusion every 3 weeks.
                              Based on population pharmacokinetic analysis (n=671), body weight, sum of longest diameter of target lesions by RECIST, HER2 extracellular domain (ECD) concentrations, AST, albumin, and baseline trastuzumab concentrations were identified as statistically significant covariates for ado-trastuzumab emtansine clearance. However, the magnitude of effect of these covariates on ado-trastuzumab emtansine exposure suggests that, with the exception of body weight, these covariates are unlikely to have a clinically meaningful effect on KADCYLA exposure. Therefore, the body weight based dose of 3.6 mg/kg every 3 weeks without correction for other covariates is considered appropriate.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Effect of Renal Impairment
                              
                              Based on population pharmacokinetic analysis in 668 patients, including moderate (CLcr 30 - 59 mL/min, n=53) and mild (CLcr 60 - 89 mL/min, n=254) renal impairment, indicate that pharmacokinetics of the ADC is not affected by mild to moderate renal impairment as compared to normal renal function (CLcr ≥ 90 mL/min, n=361). Data from only one patient with severe renal impairment (CLcr < 30 mL/min) is available [see Use in Specific Populations (8.7)].
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Effects of Age and Race
                              
                              Based on population pharmacokinetic analysis, age (< 65 (n=577); 65 - 75 (n=78); > 75 (n=16)) and race (Asian (n=73); non-Asian (n=598)) do not have a clinically meaningful effect on the pharmacokinetics of ado-trastuzumab emtansine.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.6 Cardiac Electrophysiology
                     
                        The effect of multiple doses of KADCYLA (3.6 mg/kg every 3 weeks) on the QTc interval was evaluated in an open label, single arm study in 51 patients with HER2-positive metastatic breast cancer. No large changes in the mean QT interval (i.e., > 20 ms) were detected in the study.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         