
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
                  Based on varenicline characteristics and clinical experience to date, CHANTIX has no clinically meaningful pharmacokinetic drug interactions
                            [see ].
                                Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)
                     
                  
               
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           Other smoking cessation therapies: Safety and efficacy in combination with other smoking cessation therapies has not been established.  Coadministration of varenicline and transdermal nicotine resulted in a high rate of discontinuation due to adverse events. ( )
                                        7.1
                           
                           Effect of smoking cessation: Pharmacokinetics or pharmacodynamics of certain drugs may be altered due to smoking cessation with CHANTIX, necessitating dose adjustment. ( )
                                        7.2
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1  Use With Other Drugs for Smoking Cessation
                     
                        Safety and efficacy of CHANTIX in combination with other smoking cessation therapies have not been studied.
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Varenicline (1 mg twice daily) did not alter the steady-state pharmacokinetics of bupropion (150 mg twice daily) in 46 smokers. The safety of the combination of bupropion and varenicline has not been established.
                                            Bupropion
                                 :
                              
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              :  Although co-administration of varenicline (1 mg twice daily) and transdermal nicotine (21 mg/day) for up to 12 days did not affect nicotine pharmacokinetics, the incidence of nausea, headache, vomiting, dizziness, dyspepsia, and fatigue was greater for the combination than for NRT alone. In this study, eight of twenty-two (36%) patients treated with the combination of varenicline and NRT prematurely discontinued treatment due to adverse events, compared to 1 of 17 (6%) of patients treated with NRT and placebo.
                                            Nicotine replacement therapy (NRT
                                 )
                              
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2  Effect of Smoking Cessation on Other Drugs
                     
                        Physiological changes resulting from smoking cessation, with or without treatment with CHANTIX, may alter the pharmacokinetics or pharmacodynamics of certain drugs (e.g., theophylline, warfarin, insulin) for which dosage adjustment may be necessary.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         