
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        ABRAXANE is a microtubule inhibitor that promotes the assembly of microtubules from tubulin dimers and stabilizes microtubules by preventing depolymerization. This stability results in the inhibition of the normal dynamic reorganization of the microtubule network that is essential for vital interphase and mitotic cellular functions. Paclitaxel induces abnormal arrays or “bundles” of microtubules throughout the cell cycle and multiple asters of
									microtubules during mitosis.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        
                           Absorption
                           
The pharmacokinetics of total paclitaxel following 30 and 180-minute infusions of ABRAXANE at dose levels of 80 to 375 mg/m2 were determined in clinical studies. Dose levels of mg/m2 refer to mg of paclitaxel in ABRAXANE. Following intravenous administration of ABRAXANE, paclitaxel plasma concentrations declined in a biphasic manner, the initial rapid decline representing distribution to the peripheral compartment and the slower second phase representing drug elimination.
                        The drug exposure (AUCs) was dose proportional over 80 to 300 mg/m2 and the pharmacokinetics of paclitaxel for ABRAXANE were independent of the duration of intravenous administration.
                        The pharmacokinetic data of 260 mg/m2 ABRAXANE administered over a 30-minute infusion was compared to the pharmacokinetics of 175 mg/m2 paclitaxel injection over a 3-hour infusion.  Clearance was larger (43%) and the volume of distribution was higher (53%) for ABRAXANE than for paclitaxel injection. There were no differences in terminal half-lives.
                        
                           Distribution
                              

                           Following ABRAXANE administration to patients with solid tumors, paclitaxel is evenly distributed into blood cells and plasma and is highly bound to plasma proteins (94%). In a within-patient comparison study, the fraction of unbound paclitaxel in plasma was significantly higher with ABRAXANE (6.2%) than with solvent-based paclitaxel (2.3%). This contributes to significantly higher exposure to unbound paclitaxel with ABRAXANE compared with solvent-based paclitaxel, when the total exposure is comparable. In vitro studies of binding to human serum proteins, using paclitaxel concentrations ranging from 0.1 to 50 µg/mL, indicated that the presence of cimetidine, ranitidine, dexamethasone, or diphenhydramine did not affect protein binding of paclitaxel. The total volume of distribution is approximately 1741 L; the large volume of distribution indicates extensive extravascular distribution and/or tissue binding of paclitaxel.
                        
                           Metabolism
                              
In vitro studies with human liver microsomes and tissue slices showed that paclitaxel was metabolized primarily to 6α-hydroxypaclitaxel by CYP2C8; and to two minor metabolites, 3’-p-hydroxypaclitaxel and 6α, 3’-p-dihydroxypaclitaxel, by CYP3A4. In vitro, the metabolism of paclitaxel to
                           6α-hydroxypaclitaxel was inhibited by a number of agents (ketoconazole, verapamil, diazepam, quinidine, dexamethasone, cyclosporin, teniposide, etoposide, and vincristine), but the concentrations used exceeded those found in vivo following normal therapeutic doses. Testosterone, 17α-ethinyl estradiol, retinoic acid, and quercetin, a specific inhibitor of CYP2C8, also inhibited the formation of
                           6α-hydroxypaclitaxel in vitro. The pharmacokinetics of paclitaxel may also be altered in vivo as a result of interactions with compounds that are substrates, inducers, or inhibitors of CYP2C8 and/or CYP3A4 [see Drug Interactions (7)].
                        
                        
                           Elimination
                           
At the clinical dose range of 80 to 300 mg/m2, the mean total clearance of paclitaxel ranges from 13 to 30 L/h/m2, and the mean terminal half-life ranges from 13 to 27 hours.
                        After a 30-minute infusion of 260 mg/m2 doses of ABRAXANE, the mean values for cumulative urinary recovery of unchanged drug (4%) indicated extensive non-renal clearance.  Less than 1% of the total administered dose was excreted in urine as the metabolites 6α-hydroxypaclitaxel and 3’-p-hydroxypaclitaxel.
                        Fecal excretion was approximately 20% of the total dose administered.
                        Specific Populations
                        
                           Pharmacokinetics in Hepatic Impairment
                           
The effect of hepatic impairment on the pharmacokinetics of paclitaxel following ABRAXANE administration was studied in patients with advanced solid tumors. The results showed that mild hepatic impairment (total bilirubin >1 to ≤1.5 x ULN, AST ≤10 x ULN, n=8) had no clinically important effect on pharmacokinetics of paclitaxel.  Patients with moderate (total bilirubin >1.5 to ≤ 3 x ULN, AST ≤10 x ULN, n=7) or severe (total bilirubin >3 to ≤5 x ULN, n=5) hepatic impairment had a 22% to 26% decrease in the maximum elimination rate of paclitaxel and approximately 20% increase in mean paclitaxel AUC compared with patients with normal hepatic function (total bilirubin ≤ULN, AST ≤ULN, n=130). [see Dosage and Administration (2.4) and Use in Specific Populations (8.6)].
                        Elimination of paclitaxel shows an inverse correlation with total bilirubin and a positive correlation with serum albumin. Pharmacokinetic/pharmacodynamic modeling indicates that there is no correlation between hepatic function (as indicated by the baseline albumin or total bilirubin level) and neutropenia after adjusting for ABRAXANE exposure. Pharmacokinetic data are not available for patients with total bilirubin >5 x ULN or for patients with metastatic adenocarcinoma of the pancreas [see Dosage and Administration (2.4) and Use in Specific Populations (8.6)].
                        
                           Pharmacokinetics in Renal Impairment
                           
The effect of pre-existing mild (creatinine clearance ≥60 to <90 mL/min, n=61) or moderate (creatinine clearance ≥30 to <60 mL/min, n=23) renal impairment on the pharmacokinetics of paclitaxel following ABRAXANE administration was studied in patients with advanced solid tumors. Mild to moderate renal impairment had no clinically important effect on the maximum elimination rate and systemic exposure (AUC and Cmax) of paclitaxel [see Use in Specific Populations (8.7)].
                        
                           Other Intrinsic Factors
                           
Population pharmacokinetic analyses for ABRAXANE show that body weight (40 to 143 kg), body surface area (1.3 to 2.4 m2), gender, race (Asian vs. White), age (24 to 85 years) and type of solid tumors do not have a clinically important effect on the maximum elimination rate and systemic exposure (AUC and Cmax) of paclitaxel.
                        
                           Pharmacokinetic Interactions between ABRAXANE and Carboplatin
                           
Administration of carboplatin immediately after the completion of the ABRAXANE infusion to patients with NSCLC did not cause clinically meaningful changes in paclitaxel exposure.  The observed mean AUCinf of free carboplatin was approximately 23% higher than the targeted value (6 min*mg/mL), but its mean half-life and clearance were consistent with those reported in the absence of paclitaxel.
                        
                           Pharmacokinetic Interactions between ABRAXANE and Gemcitabine
                           
Pharmacokinetic interactions between ABRAXANE and gemcitabine have not been studied in humans.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         