
                     
                     
                     Drug-Drug Interactions
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Fluoxetine
                           
                              Fluoxetine is a selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor and a potent inhibitor of CYP2D6 activity. In a study to assess the effect of fluoxetine on the pharmacokinetics of tolterodine immediate-release and its metabolites, it was observed that fluoxetine significantly inhibited the metabolism of tolterodine immediate-release in extensive metabolizers, resulting in a 4.8-fold increase in tolterodine AUC. There was a 52% decrease in Cmax and a 20% decrease in AUC of the 5-hydroxymethyl metabolite. Fluoxetine thus alters the pharmacokinetics in patients who would otherwise be extensive metabolizers of tolterodine immediate release to resemble the pharmacokinetic profile in poor metabolizers. The sums of unbound serum concentrations of tolterodine immediate release and the 5-hydroxymethyl metabolite are only 25% higher during the interaction. No dose adjustment is required when DETROL and fluoxetine are coadministered. 
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Other Drugs Metabolized by Cytochrome P450 Isoenzymes
                           
                              Tolterodine immediate-release does not cause clinically significant interactions with other drugs metabolized by the major drug metabolizing CYP enzymes. In vivo drug-interaction data show that tolterodine immediate-release does not result in clinically relevant inhibition of CYP1A2, 2D6, 2C9, 2C19, or 3A4 as evidenced by lack of influence on the marker drugs caffeine, debrisoquine, S-warfarin, and omeprazole. In vitro data show that tolterodine immediate-release is a competitive inhibitor of CYP2D6 at high concentrations (Ki 1.05 μM), while tolterodine immediate-release as well as the 5-hydroxymethyl metabolite are devoid of any significant inhibitory potential regarding the other isoenzymes. 
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           CYP3A4 Inhibitors
                           
                              The effect of 200 mg daily dose of ketoconazole on the pharmacokinetics of tolterodine immediate-release was studied in eight healthy volunteers, all of whom were poor metabolizers (see Pharmacokinetics: Variability in Metabolism for discussion of poor metabolizers). In the presence of ketoconazole, the mean Cmax and AUC of tolterodine increased by 2 and 2.5 fold, respectively. Based on these findings, other potent CYP3A inhibitors such as other azole antifungals (e.g., itraconazole, miconazole) or macrolide antibiotics (e.g., erythromycin, clarithromycin) or cyclosporine or vinblastine may also lead to increases of tolterodine plasma concentrations (see PRECAUTIONS and DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION). 
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Warfarin
                           
                              In healthy volunteers, coadministration of tolterodine immediate-release 4 mg (2 mg bid) for 7 days and a single dose of warfarin 25 mg on day 4 had no effect on prothrombin time, Factor VII suppression, or on the pharmacokinetics of warfarin.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Oral Contraceptives
                           
                              Tolterodine immediate-release 4 mg (2 mg bid) had no effect on the pharmacokinetics of an oral contraceptive (ethinyl estradiol 30 mcg/levonorgestrel 150 mcg) as evidenced by the monitoring of ethinyl estradiol and levonorgestrel over a 2-month cycle in healthy female volunteers. 
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Diuretics
                           
                              Coadministration of tolterodine immediate-release up to 8 mg (4 mg bid) for up to 12 weeks with diuretic agents, such as indapamide, hydrochlorothiazide, triamterene, bendroflumethiazide, chlorothiazide, methylchlorothiazide, or furosemide, did not cause any adverse electrocardiographic (ECG) effects.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               