
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  

               
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Pharmacokinetics
                     
Following oral administration of a single 500 mg dose (two 250 mg tablets) to 36 fasted healthy male volunteers, the mean (SD) pharmacokinetic parameters were AUC0-72 = 4.3 (1.2) mcg•h/mL; Cmax = 0.5 (0.2) mcg/mL; Tmax = 2.2 (0.9) hours.

                        
With a regimen of 500 mg (two 250 mg capsules*) on day 1, followed by 250 mg daily (one 250 mg capsule) on days 2 through 5, the pharmacokinetic parameters of azithromycin in plasma in healthy young adults (18-40 years of age) are portrayed in the chart below. Cmin and Cmax remained essentially unchanged from day 2 through day 5 of therapy.

                        
Pharmacokinetic Parameters (Mean)                                        Total n=12
                                                                                          Day 1                        Day 5
                        
Cmax (mcg/mL)                                                                0.41                          0.24
Tmax (h)                                                                            2.5                             3.2
AUC0-24 (mcg•h/mL)                                                      2.6                             2.1
Cmin (mcg/mL)                                                                0.05                           0.05
Urinary Excret. (% dose)                                               4.5                             6.5

                        
*Azithromycin 250 mg tablets are bioequivalent to 250 mg capsules in the fasted state. Azithromycin 250 mg capsules are no longer commercially available.

                        
In a two-way crossover study, 12 adult healthy volunteers (6 males, 6 females) received 1,500 mg of azithromycin administered in single daily doses over either 5 days (two 250 mg tablets on day 1, followed by one 250 mg tablet on days 2-5) or 3 days (500 mg per day for days 1-3). Due to limited serum samples on day 2 (3-day regimen) and days 2-4 (5-day regimen), the serum concentration-time profile of each subject was fit to a 3-compartment model and the AUC0–∞- for the fitted concentration profile was comparable between the 5-day and 3-day regimens.

                        
                                                                                                    3-Day Regimen                                                5-Day Regimen
Pharmacokinetic Parameter [mean (SD)]                    Day 1                        Day 3                                    Day 1                  Day 5
Cmax (serum, mcg/mL)                                                   0.44 (0.22)                0.54 (0.25)                           0.43 (0.20)          0.24 (0.06)
SerumAUC0–∞ (mcg•hr/mL)                                                           17.4 (6.2)*                                                            14.9 (3.1)*
Serum T1/2                                                                                          71.8 hr                                                                 68.9 hr

                        
*Total AUC for the entire 3-day and 5-day regimens

                        
Median azithromycin exposure (AUC0-288) in mononuclear (MN) and polymorphonuclear (PMN) leukocytes following either the 5-day or 3-day regimen was more than a 1000-fold and 800-fold greater than in serum, respectively. Administration of the same total dose with either the 5-day or 3-day regimen may be expected to provide comparable concentrations of azithromycin within MN and PMN leukocytes.

                        
Two azithromycin 250 mg tablets are bioequivalent to a single 500 mg tablet.

                        
Absorption
The absolute bioavailability of azithromycin 250 mg capsules is 38%.

                        
In a two-way crossover study in which 12 healthy subjects received a single 500 mg dose of azithromycin (two 250 mg tablets) with or without a high fat meal, food was shown to increase Cmax by 23% but had no effect on AUC.

                        
When azithromycin suspension was administered with food to 28 adult healthy male subjects, Cmax increased by 56% and AUC was unchanged.

                        
The AUC of azithromycin was unaffected by co-administration of an antacid containing aluminum and magnesium hydroxide with azithromycin capsules; however, the Cmax was reduced by 24%. Administration of cimetidine (800 mg) two hours prior to azithromycin had no effect on azithromycin absorption.

                        
Distribution
The serum protein binding of azithromycin is variable in the concentration range approximating human exposure, decreasing from 51% at 0.02 mcg/mL to 7% at 2 mcg/mL.

                        
Following oral administration, azithromycin is widely distributed throughout the body with an apparent steady-state volume of distribution of 31.1 L/kg. Greater azithromycin concentrations in tissues than in plasma or serum were observed. High tissue concentrations should not be interpreted to be quantitatively related to clinical efficacy. The antimicrobial activity of azithromycin is pH related and appears to be reduced with decreasing pH. However, the extensive distribution of drug to tissues may be relevant to clinical activity.
Selected tissue (or fluid) concentration and tissue (or fluid) to plasma/serum concentration ratios are shown in the following table:

                        

                        AZITHROMYCIN CONCENTRATIONS FOLLOWING 
                        A 500 mg DOSE (TWO 250 mg CAPSULES) IN ADULTS1
                        
                        

                        

                        


                        


1 Azithromycin tissue concentrations were originally determined using 250 mg capsules.
* Sample was obtained 2-4 hours after the first dose.
** Sample was obtained 10-12 hours after the first dose.
*** Dosing regimen of two doses of 250 mg each, separated by 12 hours.
**** Sample was obtained 19 hours after a single 500 mg dose.

                        
The extensive tissue distribution was confirmed by examination of additional tissues and fluids (bone, ejaculum, prostate, ovary, uterus, salpinx, stomach, liver, and gallbladder). As there are no data from adequate and well-controlled studies of azithromycin treatment of infections in these additional body sites, the clinical importance of these tissue concentration data is unknown.

                        
Following a regimen of 500 mg on the first day and 250 mg daily for 4 days, only very low concentrations were noted in cerebrospinal fluid (less than 0.01 mcg/mL) in the presence of non-inflamed meninges.

                        
Metabolism
In vitro and in vivo studies to assess the metabolism of azithromycin have not been performed.

                        
Elimination
Plasma concentrations of azithromycin following single 500 mg oral and i.v. doses declined in a polyphasic pattern with a mean apparent plasma clearance of 630 mL/min and terminal elimination half-life of 68 hours. The prolonged terminal half-life is thought to be due to extensive uptake and subsequent release of drug from tissues.
Biliary excretion of azithromycin, predominantly as unchanged drug, is a major route of elimination. Over the course of a week, approximately 6% of the administered dose appears as unchanged drug in urine.

                        
Special Populations
Renal Insufficiency
Azithromycin pharmacokinetics were investigated in 42 adults (21 to 85 years of age) with varying degrees of renal impairment. Following the oral administration of a single 1,000 mg dose of azithromycin, mean Cmax and AUC0-120 increased by 5.1% and 4.2%, respectively in subjects with mild to moderate renal impairment (GFR 10 to 80 mL/min) compared to subjects with normal renal function (GFR >80 mL/min). The mean Cmax and AUC0-120 increased 61% and 35%, respectively in subjects with severe renal impairment (GFR <10 mL/min) compared to subjects with normal renal function (GFR >80 mL/min). (See DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION.)

                        
Hepatic Insufficiency
The pharmacokinetics of azithromycin in subjects with hepatic impairment have not been established.

                        
Gender
There are no significant differences in the disposition of azithromycin between male and female subjects. No dosage adjustment is recommended based on gender.

                        
Geriatric Patients
When studied in healthy elderly subjects aged 65 to 85 years, the pharmacokinetic parameters of azithromycin in elderly men were similar to those in young adults; however, in elderly women, although higher peak concentrations (increased by 30 to 50%) were observed, no significant accumulation occurred.

                        
Pediatric Patients
In two clinical studies, azithromycin for oral suspension was dosed at 10 mg/kg on day 1, followed by 5 mg/kg on days 2 through 5 to two groups of pediatric patients (aged 1-5 years and 5-15 years, respectively). The mean pharmacokinetic parameters on day 5 were Cmax=0.216 mcg/mL, Tmax=1.9 hours, and AUC0-24=1.822 mcg•hr/mL for the 1- to 5-year-old group and were Cmax=0.383 mcg/mL, Tmax=2.4 hours, and AUC0-24=3.109 mcg•hr/mL for the 5- to 15-year-old group. 

                        
Two clinical studies were conducted in 68 pediatric patients aged 3-16 years to determine the pharmacokinetics and safety of azithromycin for oral suspension. Azithromycin was administered following a low-fat breakfast.

                        
The first study consisted of 35 pediatric patients treated with 20 mg/kg/day (maximum daily dose 500 mg) for 3 days of whom 34 patients were evaluated for pharmacokinetics.
In the second study, 33 pediatric patients received doses of 12 mg/kg/day (maximum daily dose 500 mg) for 5 days of whom 31 patients were evaluated for pharmacokinetics.
In both studies, azithromycin concentrations were determined over a 24 hour period following the last daily dose. Patients weighing above 25 kg in the 3-day study or 41.7 kg in the 5-day study received the maximum adult daily dose of 500 mg. Eleven patients (weighing 25.0 kg or less) in the first study and 17 patients (weighing 41.7 kg or less) in the second study received a total dose of 60 mg/kg. The following table shows pharmacokinetic data in the subset of pediatric patients who received a total dose of 60 mg/kg.

                        

                        

The similarity of the overall exposure (AUC


0–∞) between the 3-day and 5-day regimens in pediatric patients is unknown.
Single dose pharmacokinetics in pediatric patients given doses of 30 mg/kg have not been studied. (See DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION.)

                        

                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Drug-Drug Interactions
                     
Drug interaction studies were performed with azithromycin and other drugs likely to be co-administered. The effects of co-administration of azithromycin on the pharmacokinetics of other drugs are shown in Table 1 and the effect of other drugs on the pharmacokinetics of azithromycin are shown in Table 2.

                        
Co-administration of azithromycin at therapeutic doses had a modest effect on the pharmacokinetics of the drugs listed in Table 1. No dosage adjustment of drugs listed in Table 1 is recommended when co-administered with azithromycin.

                        
Co-administration of azithromycin with efavirenz or fluconazole had a modest effect on the pharmacokinetics of azithromycin. Nelfinavir significantly increased the Cmax and AUC of azithromycin. No dosage adjustment of azithromycin is recommended when administered with drugs listed in Table 2. (See PRECAUTIONS - Drug Interactions.)

                        
Table 1. Drug Interactions: Pharmacokinetic Parameters for Co-administered Drugs in the Presence of Azithromycin

                        

NA - Not Available



* - 90% Confidence interval not reported

                        
Mean rifabutin concentrations one-half day after the last dose of rifabutin were 60 ng/mL when co-administered with azithromycin and 71 ng/mL when co-administered with placebo.

                        
Table 2. Drug Interactions: Pharmacokinetic Parameters for Azithromycin in the Presence of Co-administered Drugs (See PRECAUTIONS - Drug Interactions.)

                        

                        

NA – Not available



* - 90% Confidence interval not reported
Mean azithromycin concentrations one day after the last dose were 53 ng/mL when coadministered with  300 mg daily rifabutin and 49 ng/mL when coadministered with placebo.
             
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Microbiology:
                     
Azithromycin acts by binding to the 50S ribosomal subunit of susceptible microorganisms and, thus, interfering with microbial protein synthesis. Nucleic acid synthesis is not affected.

                        
Azithromycin concentrates in phagocytes and fibroblasts as demonstrated by in vitro incubation techniques. Using such methodology, the ratio of intracellular to extracellular concentration was >30 after one hour incubation. In vivo studies suggest that concentration in phagocytes may contribute to drug distribution to inflamed tissues.

                        
Azithromycin has been shown to be active against most isolates of the following microorganisms, both  in vitro and in clinical infections as described in the INDICATIONS AND USAGE section.

                        

                        Aerobic and facultative gram-positive microorganisms
                        

                                        Staphylococcus aureus
                Streptococcus agalactiae
                Streptococcus pneumoniae
                Streptococcus pyogenes
                        

                        
NOTE: Azithromycin demonstrates cross-resistance with erythromycin-resistant gram-positive strains. Most strains of Enterococcus faecalis and methicillin-resistant staphylococci are resistant to azithromycin.

                        

                        Aerobic and facultative gram-negative microorganisms
                        

                                        Haemophilus ducreyi
                Haemophilus influenzae
                Moraxella catarrhalis
                Neisseria gonorrhoeae
                        

                        

                        “Other” microorganisms
                        

                                        Chlamydia pneumoniae
                Chlamydia trachomatis
                Mycoplasma pneumoniae
                        

                        
Beta-lactamase production should have no effect on azithromycin activity.
The following in vitro data are available, 
                           but their clinical significance is unknown.
                        
                        
                        
At least 90% of the following microorganisms exhibit an in vitro minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) less than or equal to the susceptible breakpoints for azithromycin. However, the safety and effectiveness of azithromycin in treating clinical infections due to these microorganisms have not been established in adequate and well-controlled trials.

                        

                        Aerobic and facultative gram-positive microorganisms
                        
                Streptococci (Groups C, F, G)
                Viridans group streptococci

                        

                        Aerobic and facultative gram-negative microorganisms
                        

                                        Bordetella pertussis
                Legionella pneumophila
                        

                        

                        Anaerobic microorganisms
                        

                                        Peptostreptococcus species
                Prevotella bivia
                        

                        

                        “Other” microorganisms
                        

                                        Ureaplasma urealyticum
                        
                           
                           

                           

                           Susceptibility Testing Methods:
                        
                        
                        
When available, the results of in vitro susceptibility test results for antimicrobial drugs used in resident hospitals should be provided to the physician as periodic reports which describe the susceptibility profile of nosocomial and community-acquired pathogens. These reports may differ from susceptibility data obtained from outpatient use, but could aid the physician in selecting the most effective antimicrobial.

                        
                           

                           Dilution techniques:
                        
                        
                        
Quantitative methods are used to determine antimicrobial minimum inhibitory concentrations (MICs). These MICs provide estimates of the susceptibility of bacteria to antimicrobial compounds. The MICs should be determined using a standardized procedure. Standardized procedures are based on a dilution method1,3 (broth or agar) or equivalent with standardized inoculum concentrations and standardized concentrations of azithromycin powder. The MIC values should be interpreted according to criteria provided in Table 1.

                        
                           

                           Diffusion techniques:
                        
                        
                        
Quantitative methods that require measurement of zone diameters also provide reproducible estimates of the susceptibility of bacteria to antimicrobial compounds. One such standardized procedure2,3 requires the use of standardized inoculum concentrations. This procedure uses paper disks impregnated with 15-mcg azithromycin to test the susceptibility of microorganisms to azithromycin. The disk diffusion interpretive criteria are provided in Table 1.

                        

                        Table 1. Susceptibility Interpretive Criteria for Azithromycin
                        

                        Susceptibility Test Result Interpretive Criteria
                        

                        

                                                                                Minimum Inhibitory
                                                                    Disk Diffusion
                        

                        Pathogen
                                                           Concentrations (mcg/mL)                
                                            (zone diameters in mm)
                        

                        
                        
                        
                        
                                                                           S                I                Ra                            S                        I                       Ra
                        
                        

                        Haemophilus spp                                ≤4                   --                    --                                    ≥ 12                            --                            --

                        Staphylococcus aureus                      ≤2                  4                    ≥ 8                                 ≥ 18                        14-17                    ≤ 13
Streptococci including

                        S. pneumoniaeb 
                                                        ≤0.5               1                     ≥ 2                                 ≥ 18                        14-17                     ≤ 13

                        

                        

                        a The current absence of data on resistant strains precludes defining any category other than “susceptible.” If strains yield MIC results other than susceptible, they should be submitted to a reference laboratory for further testing.

                        b Susceptibility of streptococci including S. pneumoniae to azithromycin and other macrolides can be predicted by testing erythromycin.

                        
No interpretive criteria have been established for testing Neisseria gonorrhoeae. This species is not usually tested.

                        
A report of “susceptible” indicates that the pathogen is likely to be inhibited if the antimicrobial compound reaches the concentrations usually achievable. A report of “intermediate” indicates that the result should be considered equivocal, and, if the microorganism is not fully susceptible to alternative, clinically feasible drugs, the test should be repeated. This category implies possible clinical applicability in body sites where the drug is physiologically concentrated or in situations where high dosage of drug can be used. This category also provides a buffer zone which prevents small uncontrolled technical factors from causing major discrepancies in interpretation. A report of “resistant” indicates that the pathogen is not likely to be inhibited if the antimicrobial compound reaches the concentrations usually achievable; other therapy should be selected.

                        

                        QUALITY CONTROL:
                        
Standardized susceptibility test procedures require the use of quality control microorganisms to control the technical aspects of the test procedures. Standard azithromycin powder should provide the following range of values noted in Table 2. Quality control microorganisms are specific strains of organisms with intrinsic biological properties. QC strains are very stable strains which will give a standard and repeatable susceptibility pattern. The specific strains used for microbiological quality control are not clinically significant.

                        

                        Table 2. Acceptable Quality Control Ranges for Azithromycin

                        
                        

                        QC Strain                                                         Minimum Inhibitory                                            Disk Diffusion

                        
                                                                                            Concentrations (mcg/mL)                            
                        (zone diameters in mm)
                        

                        Haemophilus influenzae                                                                                  1-4                                                                                                     13-21
ATCC 49247        

                        Staphylococcus aureus                                                                                   0.5-2
ATCC 29213    

                        Staphylococcus aureus                                                                                                                                                                                                      21-26
ATCC 25923        

                        Streptococcus pneumoniae                                                                      0.06-0.25                                                                                               19-25
ATCC 49619    
             
                  
               
            
         