
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              •Concomitant use with systemic beta-blockers may potentiate systemic beta-blockade. (7.1)
                           
                              •Oral or intravenous calcium antagonists may cause atrioventricular conduction disturbances, left ventricular failure, and hypotension. (7.2)
                           
                              •Catecholamine-depleting drugs may have additive effects and produce hypotension and/or marked bradycardia. (7.3)
                           
                              •Digitalis and calcium antagonists may have additive effects in prolonging atrioventricular conduction time. (7.4)
                           
                              •Potentiated systemic beta-blockade (e.g., decreased heart rate) has been reported during combined treatment with Quinidine and timolol. (7.5)
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 Beta-Adrenergic Blocking Agents
                     
                        Patients who are receiving a beta-adrenergic blocking agent orally and Istalol
                              ®
                            should be observed for potential additive effects of beta-blockade, both systemic and on intraocular pressure.  The concomitant use of two topical beta-adrenergic blocking agents is not recommended. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 Calcium Antagonists
                     
                        Caution should be used in the co-administration of beta-adrenergic blocking agents, such as Istalol, and oral or intravenous calcium antagonists because of possible atrioventricular conduction disturbances, left ventricular failure, and hypotension.  In patients with impaired cardiac function, co-administration should be avoided.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3 Catecholamine-Depleting Drugs
                     
                        Close observation of the patient is recommended when a beta blocker is administered to patients receiving catecholamine-depleting drugs such as reserpine, because of possible additive effects and the production of hypotension and/or marked bradycardia, which may result in vertigo, syncope, or postural hypotension.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4 Digitalis and Calcium Antagonists
                     
                        The concomitant use of beta-adrenergic blocking agents with digitalis and calcium antagonists may have additive effects in prolonging atrioventricular conduction time.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.5 CYP2D6 Inhibitors
                     
                        Potentiated systemic beta-blockade (e.g., decreased heart rate) has been reported during combined treatment with CYP2D6 inhibitors (e.g., quinidine) and timolol.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.6 Clonidine
                     
                        Oral beta-adrenergic blocking agents may exacerbate the rebound hypertension which can follow the withdrawal of clonidine.  There have been no reports of exacerbation of rebound hypertension with ophthalmic timolol maleate.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         