
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY

               
                  
                  Pharmacology
                  The analgesic ingredient, oxycodone, is a semi-synthetic narcotic 
with multiple actions qualitatively similar to those of morphine; the most 
prominent of these involves the central nervous system and organs composed of 
smooth muscle.
                  Oxycodone, as the hydrochloride salt, is a pure agonist opioid whose 
principal therapeutic action is analgesia and has been in clinical use since 
1917. Like all pure opioid agonists, there is no ceiling effect to analgesia, 
such as is seen with partial agonists or non-opioid analgesics. Based upon a 
single dose, relative-potency study conducted in humans with cancer pain, 10 to 
15 mg of oxycodone given intramuscularly produced an analgesic effect similar to 
10 mg of morphine given intramuscularly. Both drugs have a 3 to 4 hour duration 
of action. Oxycodone retains approximately one half of its analgesic activity 
when administered orally.
                  
                  
                  
                     Effects on Central Nervous System – The 
precise mechanism of the analgesic action is unknown. However, specific CNS 
opioid receptors for endogenous compounds with opioid-like activity have been 
identified throughout the brain and spinal cord and play a role in the analgesic 
effects of this drug. A significant feature of opioid-induced analgesia is that 
it occurs without loss of consciousness. The relief of pain by morphine-like 
opioids is relatively selective, in that other sensory modalities, (e.g., touch, 
vibrations, vision, hearing, etc.) are not obtunded.
                  Oxycodone produces respiratory depression by direct action on brain stem 
respiratory centers. The respiratory depression involves both a reduction in the 
responsiveness of the brain stem respiratory centers to increases in carbon 
dioxide tension and to electrical stimulation.
                  Oxycodone depresses the cough reflex by direct effect on the cough center in 
the medulla. Antitussive effects may occur with doses lower than those usually 
required for analgesia. Oxycodone causes miosis, even in total darkness. 
Pinpoint pupils are a sign of opioid overdose but are not pathognomonic (e.g., 
pontine lesions of hemorrhagic or ischemic origins may produce similar 
findings). Marked mydriasis rather than miosis may be seen due to hypoxia in 
overdose situations.
                  
                  
                  
                     Effects on Gastrointestinal Tract and Other 
Smooth Muscle – Oxycodone, like other opioid analgesics, produces some 
degree of nausea and vomiting which is caused by direct stimulation of the 
chemoreceptor trigger zone (CTZ) located in the medulla. The frequency and 
severity of emesis gradually diminishes with time.
                  Oxycodone may cause a decrease in the secretion of hydrochloric acid in the 
stomach that reduces motility while increasing the tone of the antrum, stomach, 
and duodenum. Digestion of food in the small intestine is delayed and propulsive 
contractions are decreased. Propulsive peristaltic waves in the colon are 
decreased, while tone may be increased to the point of spasm resulting in 
constipation. Other opioid-induced effects may include a reduction in biliary 
and pancreatic secretions, spasm of sphincter of Oddi, and transient elevations 
in serum amylase.
                  
                  
                  
                     Effects on Cardiovascular System – 
Oxycodone, in therapeutic doses, produces peripheral vasodilatation (arteriolar 
and venous), decreased peripheral resistance, and inhibits baroreceptor 
reflexes. Manifestations of histamine release and/or peripheral vasodilatation 
may include pruritus, flushing, red eyes, sweating, and/or orthostatic 
hypotension.
                  Caution should be used in hypovolemic patients, such as those suffering acute 
myocardial infarction, because oxycodone may cause or further aggravate their 
hypotension. Caution should also be used in patients with cor pulmonale who have 
received therapeutic doses of opioids.
               
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Pharmacokinetics

                     
                        The activity of oxycodone hydrochloride tablets is primarily due 
to the parent drug oxycodone. Oxycodone hydrochloride tablets are designed to 
provide immediate release of oxycodone.
                        


