
               
               
               Drug Interactions
               
                  Clinically meaningful drug interactions have occurred with concomitant medications and include, but are not limited to, the following:
               
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Agents That May Affect Carbamazepine Plasma Levels
                     
                        CYP 3A4 inhibitors inhibit carbamazepine metabolism and can thus increase plasma carbamazepine levels. Drugs that have been shown, or would be expected, to increase plasma carbamazepine levels include: cimetidine, danazol, diltiazem, macrolides, erythromycin, troleandomycin, clarithromycin, fluoxetine, fluvoxamine, nefazodone, loratadine, terfenadine, isoniazid, niacinamide, nicotinamide, propoxyphene, azoles (e.g., ketoconazole, itraconazole, fluconazole), acetazolamide, verapamil, grapefruit juice, protease inhibitors, valproate.*
                        
                        CYP 3A4 inducers can increase the rate of carbamazepine metabolism. Drugs that have been shown, or that would be expected, to decrease plasma carbamazepine levels include: cisplatin, doxorubicin HCl, felbamate,† rifampin, phenobarbital, phenytoin, primidone, methsuximide, theophylline.
                        When carbamazepine is given with drugs that can increase or decrease carbamazepine levels, close monitoring of carbamazepine levels is indicated and dosage adjustment may be required.
                        
                           * increased levels of the active 10,11-epoxide
                        
                           † decreased levels of carbamazepine and increased levels of the 10,11-epoxide
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Effect of Carbamazepine on Plasma Levels of Concomitant Agents
                     
                        Increased levels: clomipramine HCl, phenytoin, primidone.
                        Carbamazepine induces hepatic CYP activity. Carbamazepine causes, or would be expected to cause, decreased levels of the following: 
                        acetaminophen, alprazolam, dihydropyridine calcium channel blockers (e.g., felodipine), cyclosporine, corticosteroids (e.g., prednisolone, dexamethasone), clonazepam, clozapine, dicumarol, doxycycline, ethosuximide, haloperidol, itraconazole, lamotrigine, levothyroxine, methadone, methsuximide, midazolam, olanzapine, oral and other hormonal contraceptives, oxcarbazepine, phensuximide, phenytoin, praziquantel, protease inhibitors, risperidone, theophylline, tiagabine, topiramate, tramadol, tricyclic antidepressants (e.g., imipramine, amitriptyline, nortriptyline), valproate, warfarin,ziprasidone, zonisamide.
                        In concomitant use with Carbamazepine, dosage adjustment of the above agents may be necessary.
                        Concomitant administration of carbamazepine and lithium may increase the risk of neurotoxic side effects.
                        Co-administration of carbamazepine with nefazodone results in insufficient plasma concentrations of nefazodone and its active metabolite to achieve a therapeutic effect. Co-administration of carbamazepine with nefazodone is contraindicated. (See CONTRAINDICATIONS).
                        Alterations of thyroid function have been reported in combination therapy with other anticonvulsant medications.
                        Concomitant use of Carbamazepine with hormonal contraceptive products (e.g., oral, and levonorgestrel subdermal implant contraceptives) may render the contraceptives less effective because the plasma concentrations of the hormones may be decreased. Breakthrough bleeding and unintended pregnancies have been reported. Alternative or back-up methods of contraception should be considered.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Carcinogenesis, Mutagenesis, Impairment of Fertility
                     
                        Carbamazepine, when administered to Sprague-Dawley rats for two years in the diet at doses of 25, 75, and 250 mg/kg/day, resulted in a dose-related increase in the incidence of hepatocellular tumors in females and of benign interstitial cell adenomas in the testes of males.
                        Carbamazepine must, therefore, be considered to be carcinogenic in Sprague-Dawley rats. Bacterial and mammalian mutagenicity studies using carbamazepine produced negative results. The significance of these findings relative to the use of carbamazepine in humans is, at present, unknown.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Usage in Pregnancy
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Pregnancy Category D (See WARNINGS).
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Labor and Delivery
                     
                        The effect of carbamazepine on human labor and delivery is unknown.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Nursing Mothers
                     
                        Carbamazepine and its epoxide metabolite are transferred to breast milk. The ratio of the concentration in breast milk to that in maternal plasma is about 0.4 for carbamazepine and about 0.5 for the epoxide. The estimated doses given to the newborn during breast feeding are in the range of 2 to 5 mg daily for carbamazepine and 1 to 2 mg daily for the epoxide.
                        Because of the potential for serious adverse reactions in nursing infants from carbamazepine, a decision should be made whether to discontinue nursing or to discontinue the drug, taking into account the importance of the drug to the mother.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Pediatric Use
                     
                        Substantial evidence of carbamazepine’s effectiveness for use in the management of children with epilepsy (see INDICATIONS AND USAGE for specific seizure types) is derived from clinical investigations performed in adults and from studies in several in vitro systems which support the conclusion that (1) the pathogenetic mechanisms underlying seizure propagation are essentially identical in adults and children, and (2) the mechanism of action of carbamazepine in treating seizures is essentially identical in adults and children.
                        Taken as a whole, this information supports a conclusion that the generally accepted therapeutic range of total carbamazepine in plasma (i.e., 4 to 12 mcg/mL) is the same in children and adults.
                        The evidence assembled was primarily obtained from short-term use of carbamazepine. The safety of carbamazepine in children has been systematically studied up to 6 months. No longer-term data from clinical trials is available.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Geriatric Use
                     
                        No systematic studies in geriatric patients have been conducted.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         