
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Upon mixing Sealer Protein (Human) and Thrombin (Human), soluble fibrinogen is transformed into fibrin that adheres to the wound surface and to the skin graft to be affixed. Due to the low thrombin concentration, polymerization of ARTISS will take approximately 60 seconds.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        Thrombin is a highly specific protease that transforms the fibrinogen contained in Sealer Protein (Human) into fibrin (see Pharmacokinetics (12.3)). Fibrinolysis Inhibitor, Aprotinin (Synthetic), is a polyvalent protease inhibitor that prevents premature degradation of fibrin. Free Aprotinin and its metabolites have a half-life of 30 to 60 minutes and are eliminated by the kidney. Preclinical studies with different fibrin sealant preparations simulating the fibrinolytic activity generated by extracorporeal circulation in patients during cardiovascular surgery have shown that incorporation of aprotinin in the product formulation increases resistance of the fibrin sealant clot to degradation in a fibrinolytic environment. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        Pharmacokinetic studies were not conducted. Because ARTISS is applied only topically, systemic exposure or distribution to other organs or tissues is not expected. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.4 Other Clinical Pharmacology Information
                     
                        
                           Viral Clearance
                        
                        The manufacturing procedure for ARTISS includes processing steps designed to further reduce the risk of viral transmission. In particular, vapor heating and solvent/detergent treatment processes are included in the manufacturing of Sealer Protein Concentrate and Thrombin. Validation studies were conducted using samples drawn from manufacturing intermediates for each of the two human plasma derived components. These samples were spiked with stock virus suspensions of known titers followed by further processing under conditions equivalent to those in the respective manufacturing steps. The stock virus suspensions represent HIV, HBV, HCV, HAV and Human Parvovirus B19. 
                        The virus reduction factors (expressed as log10) of independent manufacturing steps are shown in Table 3 for each of the viruses tested:
                        


                        


In addition, Human Parvovirus B19 was used to investigate the upstream Thrombin precursor mass capture step, the Sealer Protein early manufacturing steps and the Thrombin and Sealer Protein vapor heating steps. Using quantitative PCR assays, the estimated log reduction factors obtained were 1.7 and 3.4 for the Thrombin precursor mass capture step and Sealer Protein early manufacturing steps and >4 / 1.0 for the Thrombin / Sealer Protein vapor heating steps, respectively.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         