
               
               
               DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
                  As a result of hyoscyamine's effects on gastrointestinal motility and gastric emptying, absorption of other oral medications may be decreased during concurrent use with this combination medication.
                  Urinary alkalizers and thiazide diuretics: May cause the urine to become alkaline reducing the effectiveness of methenamine by inhibiting its conversion to formaldehyde.
                  Antimuscarinics: Concurrent use may intensify antimuscarinic effects of hyoscyamine because of secondary antimuscarinic activities of these medications.
                  Antacids/antidiarrheals: Concurrent use may reduce absorption of hyoscyamine resulting in decreased therapeutic effectiveness. Concurrent use with antacids may cause urine to become alkaline reducing the effectiveness of methenamine by inhibiting its conversion to formaldehyde. Doses of these medications should be spaced 1 hour apart from doses of hyoscyamine.
                  Antimyasthenics: Concurrent use with hyoscyamine may further reduce intestinal motility, therefore, caution is recommended.
                  Ketoconazole and hyoscyamine may cause increased gastrointestinal pH.
                  Concurrent administration with hyoscyamine may result in marked reduction in the absorption of ketoconazole. Patients should be advised to take this combination at least 2 hours after ketoconazole.
                  Monoamine oxidase (MAO) inhibitors: Concurrent use with hyoscyamine may intensify antimuscarinic side effects.
                  Opioid (narcotic) analgesics may result in increased risk of severe constipation.
                  Sulfonamides: These drugs may precipitate with formaldehyde in the urine increasing the danger of crystalluria.
                  Patients should be advised that the urine and/or stools may become blue to blue-green as a result of the excretion of methylene blue.
               
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Drug Abuse And Dependence 
                     
                        A dependence on the use of Uro-L Tablets has not been reported and due to the nature of its ingredients, abuse of Uro-L Tablets is not expected.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         