
                     
                     
                     Drug Interactions 
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Dual Blockade of the Renin-Angiotensin System (RAS)
                           
                           
                              Dual blockade of the RAS with angiotensin receptor blockers, ACE inhibitors, or aliskiren is associated with increased risks of hypotension, hyperkalemia, and changes in renal function (including acute renal failure) compared to monotherapy. Most patients receiving the combination of two RAS inhibitors do not obtain any additional benefit compared to monotherapy. In general, avoid combined use of RAS inhibitors. Closely monitor blood pressure, renal function and electrolytes in patients on trandolapril and other agents that affect the RAS. 
                              Do not coadminister aliskiren with trandolapril in patients with diabetes. Avoid use of aliskiren with trandolapril in patients with renal impairment (GFR < 60 mL/min).
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Concomitant Diuretic Therapy
                           
                           
                              As with other ACE inhibitors, patients on diuretics, especially those on recently instituted diuretic therapy, may experience an excessive reduction of blood pressure after initiation of therapy with trandolapril. The possibility of exacerbation of hypotensive effects with trandolapril may be minimized by either discontinuing the diuretic or cautiously increasing salt intake prior to initiation of treatment with trandolapril. If it is not possible to discontinue the diuretic, the starting dose of trandolapril should be reduced. (See DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION.)
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Agents Increasing Serum Potassium
                           
                           
                              Trandolapril can attenuate potassium loss caused by thiazide diuretics and increase serum potassium when used alone. Use of potassium-sparing diuretics (spironolactone, triamterene, or amiloride), potassium supplements, or potassium-containing salt substitutes concomitantly with ACE inhibitors can increase the risk of hyperkalemia. If concomitant use of such agents is indicated, they should be used with caution and with appropriate monitoring of serum potassium. (See PRECAUTIONS.)
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Antidiabetic Agents
                           
                           
                              Concomitant use of ACE inhibitors and antidiabetic medicines (insulin or oral hypoglycemic agents) may cause an increased blood glucose lowering effect with greater risk of hypoglycemia.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Lithium
                           
                           
                              Increased serum lithium levels and symptoms of lithium toxicity have been reported in patients receiving concomitant lithium and ACE inhibitor therapy. These drugs should be coadministered with caution, and frequent monitoring of serum lithium levels is recommended. If a diuretic is also used, the risk of lithium toxicity may be increased. 
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Non-Steroidal Anti-Inflammatory Agents Including Selective Cyclooxygenase-2 Inhibitors (COX-2 Inhibitors) 
                           
                           
                              In patients who are elderly, volume-depleted (including those on diuretic therapy), or with compromised renal function, coadministration of NSAIDs, including selective COX-2 inhibitors, with ACE inhibitors, including trandolapril, may result in deterioration of renal function, including possible acute renal failure. These effects are usually reversible. Monitor renal function periodically in patients receiving trandolapril and NSAID therapy. 
                              The antihypertensive effect of ACE inhibitors, including trandolapril may be attenuated by NSAIDs.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Gold
                           
                           
                              Nitritoid reactions (symptoms include facial flushing, nausea, vomiting and hypotension) have been reported rarely in patients on therapy with injectable gold (sodium aurothiomalate) and concomitant ACE inhibitor therapy including trandolapril.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Other
                           
                           
                              No clinically significant pharmacokinetic interaction has been found between trandolaprilat and food, cimetidine, digoxin, or furosemide.
                              The anticoagulant effect of warfarin was not significantly changed by trandolapril. 
                              The hypotensive effect of certain inhalation anesthetics may be enhanced by ACE inhibitors including trandolapril (see PRECAUTIONS, Surgery/Anesthesia).  
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               