
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS

               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           Antihypertensives/cardiac glycosides may lower blood pressure. (7.1)

                           Use with CNS depressants may result in an additive or potentiating effect. (7.2)

                           Tricyclic antidepressants may potentially blunt the hypotensive effect of systemic clonidine.  (7.3)

                           Monoamine oxidase inhibitors may result in increased hypotension. (7.4)

                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 Antihypertensives/Cardiac Glycosides

                     
                        Because ALPHAGAN
                           速

                           P may reduce blood pressure, caution in using drugs such as antihypertensives and/or cardiac glycosides with ALPHAGAN
                           速

                           P is advised.

                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 CNS Depressants

                     
                        Although specific drug interaction studies have not been conducted with ALPHAGAN
                           速

                           P, the possibility of an additive or potentiating effect with CNS depressants (alcohol, barbiturates, opiates, sedatives, or anesthetics) should be considered.

                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3 Tricyclic Antidepressants

                     
                        Tricyclic antidepressants have been reported to blunt the hypotensive effect of systemic clonidine. It is not known whether the concurrent use of these agents with ALPHAGAN
                           速

                           P in humans can lead to resulting interference with the IOP lowering effect. Caution is advised in patients taking tricyclic antidepressants which can affect the metabolism and uptake of circulating amines.

                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4 Monoamine Oxidase Inhibitors

                     
                        Monoamine oxidase (MAO) inhibitors may theoretically interfere with the metabolism of brimonidine and potentially result in an increased systemic side-effect such as hypotension. Caution is advised in patients taking MAO inhibitors which can affect the metabolism and uptake of circulating amines.

                     
                     
                  
               
            
         