
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     General
                     
                        

                        Immediately after completion of a 15-minute intravenous infusion of ampicillin and sulbactam for injection, peak serum concentrations of ampicillin and sulbactam are attained. Ampicillin serum levels are similar to those produced by the administration of equivalent amounts of ampicillin alone. Peak ampicillin serum levels ranging from 109 to 150 mcg/mL are attained after administration of 2000 mg of ampicillin plus 1000 mg sulbactam and 40 to 71 mcg/mL after administration of 1000 mg ampicillin plus 500 mg sulbactam. The corresponding mean peak serum levels for sulbactam range from 48 to 88 mcg/mL and 21 to 40 mcg/mL, respectively. After an intramuscular injection of 1000 mg ampicillin plus 500 mg sulbactam, peak ampicillin serum levels ranging from 8 to 37 mcg/mL and peak sulbactam serum levels ranging from 6 to 24 mcg/mL are attained.

                           
The mean serum half-life of both drugs is approximately 1 hour in healthy volunteers.

                           
Approximately 75 to 85% of both ampicillin and sulbactam are excreted unchanged in the urine during the first 8 hours after administration of ampicillin and sulbactam for injection to individuals with normal renal function. Somewhat higher and more prolonged serum levels of ampicillin and sulbactam can be achieved with the concurrent administration of probenecid.

                           
In patients with impaired renal function the elimination kinetics of ampicillin and sulbactam are similarly affected, hence the ratio of one to the other will remain constant whatever the renal function. The dose of ampicillin and sulbactam for injection in such patients should be administered less frequently in accordance with the usual practice for ampicillin (see 
                              
                                 DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION
                               section).

                           
Ampicillin has been found to be approximately 28% reversibly bound to human serum protein and sulbactam approximately 38% reversibly bound.

                           
The following average levels of ampicillin and sulbactam were measured in the tissues and fluids listed: 
                        

                        


                        




                        Penetration of both ampicillin and sulbactam into cerebrospinal fluid in the presence of inflamed meninges has been demonstrated after IV administration of ampicillin and sulbactam.

                           
The pharmacokinetics of ampicillin and sulbactam in pediatric patients receiving ampicillin and sulbactam are similar to those observed in adults. Immediately after a 15-minute infusion of 50 to 75 mg ampicillin and sulbactam/kg body weight, peak serum and plasma concentrations of 82 to 446 mcg ampicillin/mL and 44 to 203 mcg sulbactam/mL were obtained. Mean half-life values were approximately 1 hour.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     MICROBIOLOGY
                     
                        

                        Ampicillin is similar to benzyl penicillin in its bactericidal action against susceptible organisms during the stage of active multiplication. It acts through the inhibition of cell wall mucopeptide biosynthesis. Ampicillin has a broad spectrum of bactericidal activity against many gram-positive and gram-negative aerobic and anaerobic bacteria. (Ampicillin is, however, degraded by beta-lactamases and therefore the spectrum of activity does not normally include organisms which produce these enzymes.)

                           
A wide range of beta-lactamases found in microorganisms resistant to penicillins and cephalosporins have been shown in biochemical studies with cell free bacterial systems to be irreversibly inhibited by sulbactam. Although sulbactam alone possesses little useful antibacterial activity except against the Neisseriaceae, whole organism studies have shown that sulbactam restores ampicillin activity against beta-lactamase producing strains. In particular, sulbactam has good inhibitory activity against the clinically important plasmid mediated beta-lactamases most frequently responsible for transferred drug resistance. Sulbactam has no effect on the activity of ampicillin against ampicillin susceptible strains.

                           
The presence of sulbactam in the ampicillin and sulbactam for injection formulation effectively extends the antibacterial spectrum of ampicillin to include many bacteria normally resistant to it and to other beta-lactam antibacterials. Thus, ampicillin and sulbactam for injection possesses the properties of a broad-spectrum antibacterial and a beta-lactamase inhibitor.

                           
While in vitro studies have demonstrated the susceptibility of most strains of the following organisms, clinical efficacy for infections other than those included in the 
                              
                                 INDICATIONS AND USAGE
                              
                            section has not been documented.
                              

                              
Gram-Positive Bacteria
                           

                           

                           Staphylococcus aureus (beta-lactamase and non-beta-lactamase producing), Staphylococcus epidermidis (beta-lactamase and non-beta-lactamase producing), Staphylococcus saprophyticus (beta-lactamase and non-beta-lactamase producing), Streptococcus faecalis† 
                           (Enterococcus), Streptococcus pneumoniae† 
                           (formerly D. pneumoniae), Streptococcus pyogenes†
                           , Streptococcus viridans†
                           
                           .
                           
                              

                              
Gram-Negative Bacteria
                           

                           

                           Hemophilus influenzae (beta-lactamase and non-beta-lactamase producing), Moraxella 
                           (Branhamella) 
                           catarrhalis (beta-lactamase and non-beta-lactamase producing), Escherichia coli (beta-lactamase and non-beta-lactamase producing), Klebsiella species (all known strains are beta-lactamase producing), Proteus mirabilis (beta-lactamase and non-beta-lactamase producing), Proteus vulgaris, Providencia rettgeri, Providencia stuartii, Morganella morganii, and Neisseria gonorrhoeae (beta-lactamase and non-beta-lactamase producing). 

                           

                           Anaerobes
                           

                           

                           Clostridium species†, Peptococcus species†, Peptostreptococcus species, Bacteroides species, including B. fragilis.

                           

                            †These are not beta-lactamase producing strains and, therefore, are susceptible to ampicillin alone. 

                           

                           Susceptibility Testing
                           

                           
Diffusion Technique

                           
For the disk diffusion method of susceptibility testing, a 20 mcg (10 mcg ampicillin + 10 mcg sulbactam) disk should be used. The standardized procedure1,2 requires the use of a standardized inoculum concentration. With this procedure, a report from the laboratory of “Susceptible” indicates that the infecting organism is likely to respond to ampicillin and sulbactam for injection therapy and a report of “Resistant” indicates that the infecting organism is not likely to respond to therapy. An “Intermediate” susceptibility report suggests that the infecting organism would be susceptible to ampicillin and sulbactam for injection if a higher dosage is used or if the infection is confined to tissues or fluids (e.g., urine) in which high antibacterial levels are attained.

                           
Dilution Techniques

                           
Broth, agar, microdilution or equivalent methods may be used to determine the minimal inhibitory concentration (MIC) value for susceptibility of bacterial isolates using standardized methods, inoculums and concentrations of ampicillin/sulbactam2,3,4.

                           
The recommended dilution method employs a constant ampicillin/sulbactam ratio of 2:1 in all tubes with increasing concentrations of ampicillin. MIC's are reported in terms of ampicillin concentration in the presence of sulbactam at a constant 2 parts ampicillin to 1 part sulbactam.
                        

                        



