
                     
                     
                     Drug Interactions
                     
                        Drug-drug interactions can be pharmacodynamic (combined pharmacologic effects) or pharmacokinetic (alteration of plasma levels). The risks of using haloperidol in combination with other drugs have been evaluated as described below.
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Pharmacodynamic Interactions
                           
                              Since QT-prolongation has been observed during Haldol treatment, caution is advised when prescribing to a patient with QT-prolongation conditions (long QT-syndrome, hypokalemia, electrolyte imbalance) or to patients receiving medications known to prolong the QT-interval or known to cause electrolyte imbalance.
                              If concomitant antiparkinson medication is required, it may have to be continued after HALDOL is discontinued because of the difference in excretion rates. If both are discontinued simultaneously, extrapyramidal symptoms may occur. The physician should keep in mind the possible increase in intraocular pressure when anticholinergic drugs, including antiparkinson agents, are administered concomitantly with HALDOL.
                              As with other antipsychotic agents, it should be noted that HALDOL may be capable of potentiating CNS depressants such as anesthetics, opiates and alcohol.
                              Ketoconazole is a potent inhibitor of CYP3A4. Increases in QTc have been observed when haloperidol was given in combination with the metabolic inhibitors ketoconazole (400 mg/day) and paroxetine (20 mg/day). It may be necessary to reduce the haloperidol dosage.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Pharmacokinetic Interactions
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 The Effect of Other Drugs on Haldol®
                                 
                                 
                                    Haloperidol is metabolized by several routes, including the glucuronidation and the cytochrome P450 enzyme system. Inhibition of these routes of metabolism by another drug may result in increased haloperidol concentrations and potentially increase the risk of certain adverse events, including QT-prolongation.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Drugs Characterized as Substrates, Inhibitors or Inducers of CYP3A4, CYP2D6 or Glucuronidation
                                 
                                    In pharmacokinetic studies, mild to moderately increased haloperidol concentrations have been reported when haloperidol was given concomitantly with drugs characterized as substrates or inhibitors of CYP3A4 or CYP2D6 isoenzymes, such as itraconazole, nefazodone, buspirone, venlafaxine, alprazolam, fluvoxamine, quinidine, fluoxetine, sertraline, chlorpromazine, and promethazine.
                                    When prolonged treatment (1–2 weeks) with enzyme-inducing drugs such as rifampin or carbamazepine is added to Haldol therapy, this results in a significant reduction of haloperidol plasma levels.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Rifampin
                                 
                                    In a study of 12 schizophrenic patients coadministered oral haloperidol and rifampin, plasma haloperidol levels were decreased by a mean of 70% and mean scores on the Brief Psychiatric Rating Scale were increased from baseline. In 5 other schizophrenic patients treated with haloperidol and rifampin, discontinuation of rifampin produced a mean 3.3-fold increase in haloperidol concentrations. 
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Carbamazepine
                                 
                                    In a study in 11 schizophrenic patients co-administered haloperidol and increasing doses of carbamazepine, haloperidol plasma concentrations decreased linearly with increasing carbamazepine concentrations.
                                    Thus, careful monitoring of clinical status is warranted when enzyme inducing drugs such as rifampin or carbamazepine are administered or discontinued in haloperidol-treated patients. During combination treatment, the Haldol dose should be adjusted, when necessary. After discontinuation of such drugs, it may be necessary to reduce the dosage of Haldol.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Valproate
                                 
                                    Sodium valproate, a drug know to inhibit glucuronidation, does not affect haloperidol plasma concentrations.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               