
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
                  The intravaginal administration of a single 5 gram dose of VANDAZOLE results in relatively lower mean systemic exposure to metronidazole that is approximately 2% to 5% of that achieved following a 500 mg oral dose of metronidazole [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)]. The following drug interactions were reported for oral metronidazole.
               
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           Warfarin and other coumarin anticoagulants: Prolonged anticoagulant effects reported with oral metronidazole; monitor INR and prothrombin time. (7.3)
                           Lithium: Elevated lithium concentrations reported with oral metronidazole; monitor serum concentrations of lithium. (7.4)
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 Disulfiram
                     
                        Use of oral metronidazole has been associated with psychotic reactions in alcoholic patients who are using disulfiram concurrently. VANDAZOLE should not be used by patients who have taken disulfiram within the last two weeks [see Contraindications (4.2)].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 Alcoholic Beverages
                     
                        Use of oral metronidazole has been associated with a disulfiram-like reaction (abdominal cramps, nausea, vomiting, headaches, and flushing) to alcohol. Alcoholic beverages and preparations containing ethanol or propylene glycol should not be consumed during and for at least three days after VANDAZOLE therapy [see Contraindications (4.3)].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3 Coumarin and Other Oral Anticoagulants
                     
                        Use of oral metronidazole has been reported to potentiate the anticoagulant effect of warfarin and other coumarin anticoagulants, resulting in a prolongation of prothrombin time. This possible drug interaction should be considered when VANDAZOLE is prescribed for patients on this type of anticoagulant therapy. In patients on oral anticoagulants, consider monitoring prothrombin time, international normalized ratio (INR), and other coagulation parameters while on VANDAZOLE.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4 Lithium
                     
                        Short-term use of oral metronidazole has been associated with elevation of serum lithium concentrations and, in a few cases signs of lithium toxicity, in patients stabilized on relatively high doses of lithium. Use VANDAZOLE with caution in patients treated with lithium and consider monitoring lithium serum concentrations while on VANDAZOLE.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.5 Cimetidine
                     
                        Use of oral metronidazole with cimetidine may prolong the half-life and decrease plasma clearance of metronidazole. No dose adjustment of VANDAZOLE is necessary.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         