
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           Anticoagulant agents: May enhance or diminish anticoagulant effects. (7.4)
                           Antidiabetic agents: May increase blood glucose concentrations. Dose adjustments of antidiabetic agents may be required. (7.5)
                           CYP 3A4 inducers and inhibitors: May, respectively, increase or decrease clearance of corticosteroids, necessitating dose adjustment. (7.7, 7.8)
                           Cyclosporine: Increase in activity of both, cyclosporine and corticosteroid when administered concurrently. Convulsions have been reported with concurrent use. (7.10)
                           NSAIDs including aspirin and salicylates: Increased risk of gastrointestinal side effects. (7.13)
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 Aminoglutehimide
                     
                        Aminoglutethimide may lead to loss of corticosteroid-induced adrenal suppression.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 Amphotericin B Injection
                     
                        There have been cases reported in which concomitant use of Amphotericin B and hydrocortisone was followed by cardiac enlargement and congestive heart failure [see Drug Interactions (7.14)].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3 Anticholinesterase Agents
                     
                        Concomitant use of anticholinesterase agents and corticosteroids may produce severe weakness in patients with myasthenia gravis. If possible, anticholinesterase agents should be withdrawn at least 24 hours before initiating corticosteroid therapy.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4 Anticoagulant Agents
                     
                        Co-administration of corticosteroids and warfarin usually results in inhibition of response to warfarin, although there have been some conflicting reports. Therefore, coagulation indices should be monitored frequently to maintain the desired anticoagulant effect.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.5 Antidiabetic Agents
                     
                        Because corticosteroids may increase blood glucose concentrations, dosage adjustments of antidiabetic agents may be required.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.6 Antitubercular Drugs
                     
                        Serum concentrations of isoniazid may be decreased.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.7 CYP 3A4 Inducers (e.g., Barbiturates, Phenytoin, Carbamazepine, and Rifampin)
                     
                        Drugs such as barbiturates, phenytoin, ephedrine, and rifampin, which induce hepatic microsomal drug metabolizing enzyme activity may enhance the metabolism of corticosteroids and require that the dosage of the corticosteroid be increased.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.8 CYP 3A4 Inhibitors (e.g., Ketoconazole, Macrolide Antibiotics)
                     
                        Ketoconazole has been reported to decrease the metabolism of certain corticosteroids by up to 60% leading to increased risk of corticosteroid side effects.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.9 Cholestyramine
                     
                        Cholestyramine may increase the clearance of corticosteroids.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.10 Cyclosporine
                     
                        Increased activity of both cyclosporine and corticosteroids may occur when the two are used concurrently. Convulsions have been reported with this concurrent use.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.11 Digitalis
                     
                        Patients on digitalis glycosides may be at increased risk of arrhythmias due to hypokalemia.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.12 Estrogens, Including Oral Contraceptives
                     
                        Estrogens may decrease the hepatic metabolism of certain corticosteroids, thereby increasing their effect.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.13 Nonsteroidal Anti-Inflammatory Drugs (NSAIDS) Including Aspirin and Salicylates
                     
                        Concomitant use of aspirin or other nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs and corticosteroids increases the risk of gastrointestinal side effects. Aspirin should be used cautiously in conjunction with corticosteroids in hypoprothrombinemia. The clearance of salicylates may be increased with concurrent use of corticosteroids; this could lead to decreased salicylate serum levels or increase the risk of salicylate toxicity when corticosteroid is withdrawn.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.14 Potassium-Depleting Agents (e.g., Diuretics, Amphotericin B)
                     
                        When corticosteroids are administered concomitantly with potassium-depleting agents, patients should be observed closely for development of hypokalemia.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.15 Skin Tests
                     
                        Corticosteroids may suppress reactions to skin tests.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.16 Toxoids and Live or Attenuated Vaccines
                     
                        Patients on corticosteroid therapy may exhibit a diminished response to toxoids and live or inactivated vaccines due to inhibition of antibody response. Corticosteroids may also potentiate the replication of some organisms contained in live attenuated vaccines. Routine administration of vaccines or toxoids should be deferred until corticosteroid therapy is discontinued if possible [see Warnings and Precautions (5.8)
                           ].
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         