
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Naturally occurring corticosteroids (hydrocortisone and cortisone), which also have salt-retaining properties, are used as replacement therapy in adrenocortical deficiency states. Their synthetic analogs, such as prednisone, are primarily used for their potent anti-inflammatory effects in disorders of many organ systems.
                        Corticosteroids, such as prednisone, cause profound and varied metabolic effects. In addition, they modify the body's immune responses to diverse stimuli.
                        Prednisone is a synthetic adrenocortical steroid drug with predominantly corticosteroid properties. Some of these properties reproduce the physiological actions of endogenous glucocorticosteroids, but others do not necessarily reflect any of the adrenal hormones' normal functions; they are seen only after administration of large therapeutic doses of the drug. The pharmacological effects of prednisone which are due to its corticosteroid properties include: promotion of gluconeogenesis; increased deposition of glycogen in the liver; inhibition of the utilization of glucose; anti-insulin activity; increased catabolism of protein; increased lipolysis; stimulation of fat synthesis and storage; increased glomerular filtration rate and resulting increase in urinary excretion of urate (creatinine excretion remains unchanged); and increased calcium excretion.
                        Depressed production of eosinophils and lymphocytes occurs, but erythropoiesis and production of polymorphonuclear leukocytes are stimulated. Inflammatory processes (edema, fibrin deposition, capillary dilatation, migration of leukocytes and phagocytosis) and the later stages of wound healing (capillary proliferation, deposition of collagen, cicatrization) are inhibited.
                        Prednisone can stimulate secretion of various components of gastric juice. Suppression of the production of corticotropin may lead to suppression of endogenous corticosteroids. Prednisone has slight mineralocorticoid activity, whereby entry of sodium into cells and loss of intracellular potassium is stimulated. This is particularly evident in the kidney, where rapid ion exchange leads to sodium retention and hypertension.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        The pharmacokinetic profile of RAYOS has an approximately 4-hour lag time from that of immediate-release prednisone formulations. While the pharmacokinetic profile of RAYOS when given with food differs in terms of lag time from IR prednisone, its absorption, distribution, and elimination processes are comparable.
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Absorption
                              
                              Prednisone is released from RAYOS when taken with food approximately 4 hours after oral ingestion. This causes a delay in the time until peak plasma concentrations (Tmax) are achieved. Median Tmax of RAYOS in 27 healthy male subjects was 6.0 - 6.5 hours compared to 2.0 hours for an immediate-release (IR) formulation. Subsequently, prednisone was absorbed at the same rate as the IR formulation. Peak plasma concentrations (Cmax) and exposure, as indicated by AUC0-last and AUC0-∞, were comparable for both prednisone IR and RAYOS administered 2.5 hours after a light meal or with normal meal (Figure 1).
                              
                                 Figure 1: Mean Plasma Levels of Prednisone After a Single Dose of 5 mg Prednisone Administered as a 5 mg RAYOS Tablet or a 5 mg Immediate-Release (IR) Tablet
                              
                              
                                 
                              
                              A: 5 mg IR tablet under fasting conditions, administered at 2 am, B: 5 mg RAYOS, administered 2.5 hours after a light evening meal, and C: 5 mg RAYOS administered immediately after dinner
                              In a study with 24 healthy subjects, oral absorption of prednisone from RAYOS was significantly affected by the intake of food. Under standard fasting conditions, both the maximum plasma concentration (Cmax) and the bioavailability of RAYOS were significantly lower than under fed conditions, shortly after intake of a high fat meal.
                              RAYOS at dose levels of 1 mg, 2 mg, and 5 mg showed dose-proportionality in terms of peak and systemic exposure (Cmax, AUC0-∞, and AUC0-last) for the parent drug prednisone as well as for the active metabolite prednisolone.
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Figure 1
                                 
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Metabolism
                              
                              Prednisone is completely converted to the active metabolite prednisolone, which is further metabolized mainly in the liver and excreted in the urine as sulfate and glucuronide conjugates. The exposure of prednisolone is 4-6 fold higher than that of prednisone.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Excretion
                              
                              The terminal half-life of both prednisone and prednisolone from the administration of RAYOS was 2-3 hours, which is comparable to that from the IR formulation.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Special Populations
                              
                              The effects of gender, age, renal impairment, and hepatic impairment on the pharmacokinetics of prednisone or prednisolone after administration of RAYOS have not been evaluated.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         