
               
               
               12  CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY

               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1  Mechanism of Action

                     
                        CAPS refer to rare genetic syndromes generally caused by mutations in the NLRP-3 [Nucleotide-binding domain, leucine rich family (NLR), pyrin domain containing 3] gene  (also known as Cold-Induced Auto-inflammatory Syndrome-1 [CIAS1]).  CAPS disorders are inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern with male and female offspring equally affected. Features common to all disorders include fever, urticaria-like rash, arthralgia, myalgia, fatigue, and conjunctivitis.

                        In most cases, inflammation in CAPS is associated with mutations in the NLRP-3 gene which encodes the protein cryopyrin, an important component of the inflammasome. Cryopyrin regulates the protease caspase-1 and controls the activation of interleukin-1 beta (IL-1β). Mutations in NLRP-3 result in an overactive inflammasome resulting in excessive release of activated IL-1β that drives inflammation.

                        Rilonacept blocks IL-1β signaling by acting as a soluble decoy receptor that binds IL-1β and prevents its interaction with cell surface receptors. Rilonacept also binds IL-1α and  IL-1 receptor antagonist (IL-1ra) with reduced affinity. The equilibrium dissociation constants for rilonacept binding to IL-1β, IL-1α and IL-1ra were 0.5 pM, 1.4 pM and 6.1 pM, respectively.

                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2  Pharmacodynamics

                     
                        C-Reactive Protein (CRP) and Serum Amyloid A (SAA) are indicators of inflammatory disease activity that are elevated in patients with CAPS. Elevated SAA has been associated with the development of systemic amyloidosis in patients with CAPS. Compared to placebo, treatment with ARCALYST resulted in sustained reductions from baseline in mean serum CRP and SAA to normal levels during the clinical trial. ARCALYST also normalized mean SAA from elevated levels. 

                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3  Pharmacokinetics

                     
                        The average trough levels of rilonacept were approximately 24 mcg/mL at steady-state following weekly subcutaneous doses of 160 mg for up to 48 weeks in patients with CAPS.   The steady-state appeared to be reached by 6 weeks.

                        No pharmacokinetic data are available in patients with hepatic or renal impairment.  

                        No study was conducted to evaluate the effect of age, gender, or body weight on rilonacept exposure.  Based on limited data obtained from the clinical study, steady state trough concentrations were similar between male and female patients.  Age (26-78 years old) and body weight (50-120 kg) did not appear to have a significant effect on trough rilonacept concentrations.  The effect of race could not be assessed because only Caucasian patients participated in the clinical study, reflecting the epidemiology of the disease.  

                     
                     
                  
               
            
         