
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  In patients hospitalized with community-acquired pneumonia receiving single daily one-hour intravenous infusions for 2 to 5 days of 500 mg azithromycin at a concentration of 2 mg/mL, the mean Cmax ± S.D. achieved was 3.63 ± 1.60 mcg/mL, while the 24-hour trough level was 0.20 ± 0.15 mcg/mL, and the AUC24 was 9.60 ± 4.80 mcg·h/mL.
                  The mean Cmax, 24-hour trough and AUC24 values were 1.14 ± 0.14 mcg/mL, 0.18 ± 0.02 mcg/mL, and 8.03 ±0.86 mcg·h/mL, respectively, in normal volunteers receiving a 3-hour intravenous infusion of 500 mg azithromycin at a concentration of 1 mg/mL. Similar pharmacokinetic values were obtained in patients hospitalized with community-acquired pneumonia that received the same 3-hour dosage regimen for 2-5 days.
                  


                  


The average CLt and Vd values were 10.18 mL/min/kg and 33.3 L/kg, respectively, in 18 normal volunteers receiving 1000 to 4000-mg doses given as 1 mg/mL over 2 hours.
                  Comparison of the plasma pharmacokinetic parameters following the 1st and 5th daily doses of 500 mg intravenous azithromycin showed only an 8% increase in Cmax but a 61% increase in AUC24 reflecting a threefold rise in C24 trough levels.
                  Following single oral doses of 500 mg azithromycin to 12 healthy volunteers, Cmax, trough level, and AUC24 were reported to be 0.41 mcg/mL, 0.05 mcg/mL, and 2.6 mcg·h/mL, respectively. These oral values are approximately 38%, 83%, and 52% of the values observed following a single 500-mg I.V. 3-hour infusion (Cmax: 1.08 mcg/mL, trough: 0.06 mcg/mL, and AUC24: 5.0 mcg·h/mL). Thus, plasma concentrations are higher following the intravenous regimen throughout the 24-hour interval. The pharmacokinetic parameters on day 5 of azithromycin 250 mg capsules following a 500 mg oral loading dose to healthy young adults (age 18-40 years old) were as follows: Cmax: 0.24 mcg/mL, AUC24: 2.1 mcg·h/mL. Tissue levels have not been obtained following intravenous infusions of azithromycin.
                  Selected tissue (or fluid) concentration and tissue (or fluid) to plasma/serum concentration ratios following oral administration of azithromycin are shown in the following table:
                  


                  


Tissue levels were determined following a single oral dose of 500 mg azithromycin in 7 gynecological patients. Approximately 17 hours after dosing, azithromycin concentrations were 2.7 mcg/g in ovarian tissue, 3.5 mcg/g in uterine tissue, and 3.3 mcg/g in salpinx. Tissue levels have not been obtained following intravenous infusion of azithromycin.
                  In a multiple-dose study in 12 normal volunteers utilizing a 500 mg (1 mg/mL) one-hour intravenous-dosage regimen for five days, the amount of administered azithromycin dose excreted in urine in 24 hours was about 11% after the 1st dose and 14% after the 5th dose. These values are greater than the reported 6% excreted unchanged in urine after oral administration of azithromycin. Biliary excretion is a major route of elimination for unchanged drug, following oral administration.
                  The serum protein binding of azithromycin is variable in the concentration range approximating human exposure decreasing from 51% at 0.02 mcg/mL to 7% at 2 mcg/mL.
                  
                     Microbiology: Azithromycin acts by binding to the 50S ribosomal subunit of susceptible microorganisms and, thus, interfering with microbial protein synthesis. Nucleic acid synthesis is not affected.
                  Azithromycin concentrates in phagocytes and fibroblasts as demonstrated by in vitro incubation techniques. Using such methodology, the ratio of intracellular to extracellular concentration was >30 after one hour incubation. In vivo studies suggest that concentration in phagocytes may contribute to drug distribution to inflamed tissues.
                  Azithromycin has been shown to be active against most strains of the following microorganisms, both in vitro and in clinical infections as described in the INDICATIONS AND USAGE section of the package insert for azithromycin for injection.
                  
                     Aerobic gram-postive microorganisms
                  
                  
                     Staphylococcus aureus
                  
                  
                     Streptococcus pneumoniae
                  
                  NOTE: Azithromycin demonstrates cross-resistance with erythromycin-resistant gram-positive strains. Most strains of Enterococcus faecalis and methicillin-resistant staphylococci are resistant to azithromycin.
                  
                     Aerobic gram-negative microorganisms
                  
                  
                     Haemophilus influenzae
                  
                  
                     Moraxella catarrhalis
                  
                  
                     Neisseria gonorrhoeae
                  
                  
                     "Other" microorganisms
                  
                  
                     Chlamydia pneumoniae
                  
                  
                     Chlamydia trachomatis
                  
                  
                     Legionella pneumophila
                  
                  
                     Mycoplasma hominis
                  
                  
                     Mycoplasma pneumoniae
                  
                  Beta-lactamase production should have no effect on azithromycin activity.
                  Azithromycin has been shown to be active against most strains of the following microorganisms, both in vitro and in clinical infections as described in the 
                        INDICATIONS AND USAGE
                      section of the package insert for Azithromycin Tablets and Azithromycin for Oral Suspension.
                  
                     Aerobic gram-positive microorganisms
                  
                  
                     Staphylococcus aureus
                  
                  
                     Streptococcus agalactiae
                  
                  
                     Streptococcus pneumoniae
                  
                  
                     Streptococcus pyogenes
                  
                  
                     Aerobic gram-negative microorganisms
                  
                  
                     Haemophilus ducreyi
                  
                  
                     Haemophilus influenzae
                  
                  
                     Moraxella catarrhalis
                  
                  
                     Neisseria gonorrhoeae
                  
                  
                     "Other" microorganisms
                  
                  
                     Chlamydia pneumoniae
                  
                  
                     Chlamydia trachomatis
                  
                  
                     Mycoplasma pneumoniae
                  
                  The following in vitro data are available, 
                        but their clinical significance is unknown.
                     
                  
                  Azithromycin exhibits in vitro minimum inhibitory concentrations (MIC’s) of 0.5 mcg/mL or less against most (≥90%) strains of streptococci listed below and MIC’s of 2.0 mcg/mL or less against most (≥90%) strains of other listed microorganisms. However, the safety and effectiveness of azithromycin in treating clinical infections due to these microorganisms have not been established in adequate and well-controlled clinical trials.
                  
                     Aerobic gram-positive microorganisms
                  
                  Streptococci (Groups C, F, G)
                  Viridans group streptococci
                  
                     Aerobic gram-negative microorganisms
                  
                  
                     Bordetella pertussis
                  
                  
                     Anaerobic microorganisms
                  
                  
                     Peptostreptococcus species
                  
                  
                     Prevotella bivia
                  
                  
                     "Other" microorganisms
                  
                  
                     Ureaplasma urealyticum
                  
                  
                     Susceptibility Tests
                  
                  Azithromycin can be solubilized for in vitro susceptibility testing using dilution techniques by dissolving in a minimum amount of 95% ethanol and diluting to the working stock concentration with broth.
                  
                     
                        Dilution Techniques
                     
                     :
                  
                  Quantitative methods are used to determine antimicrobial minimum inhibitory concentrations (MIC’s). These MIC’s provide estimates of the susceptibility of bacteria to antimicrobial compounds. The MIC’s should be determined using a standardized procedure. Standardized procedures are based on a dilution method1 (broth or agar) or equivalent with standardized inoculum concentrations and standardized concentrations of azithromycin powder. The MIC values should be interpreted according to the following criteria:
                  



                  


The current absence of data on resistant strains precludes defining any categories other than "Susceptible". Strains yielding MIC results suggestive of a "nonsusceptible" category should be submitted to a reference laboratory for further testing.
                  


                  


No interpretive criteria have been established for testing Neisseria gonorrhoeae. This species is not usually tested.
                  A report of "Susceptible" indicates that the pathogen is likely to respond to monotherapy with azithromycin. A report of "Intermediate" indicates that the result should be considered equivocal, and, if the microorganism is not fully susceptible to alternative, clinically feasible drugs, the test should be repeated. This category implies possible clinical applicability in body sites where the drug is physiologically concentrated or in situations where high dosage of drug can be used. This category also provides a buffer zone which prevents small uncontrolled technical factors from causing major discrepancies in interpretation. A report of "Resistant" indicates that achievable drug concentrations are unlikely to be inhibitory; other therapy should be selected.
                  Standardized susceptibility test procedures require the use of laboratory control microorganisms to control the technical aspects of the laboratory procedures. Standard azithromycin powder should provide the following MIC values:
                  


                  



                     
                        Diffusion Techniques:
                     
                  
                  Quantitative methods that require measurement of zone diameters also provide reproducible estimates of the susceptibility of bacteria to antimicrobial compounds. One such standardized procedure2 requires the use of standardized inoculum concentrations. This procedure uses paper disks impregnated with 15 mcg azithromycin to test the susceptibility of microorganisms to azithromycin.
                  Reports from the laboratory providing results of the standard single-disk susceptibility test with a 15 mcg azithromycin disk should be interpreted according to the following criteria:
                  



                  


 The current absence of data on resistant strains precludes defining any categories other than "Susceptible". Strains yielding zone diameter results suggestive of a "nonsusceptible" category should be submitted to a reference laboratory for further testing.
                  No interpretive criteria have been established for testing Neisseria gonorrhoeae. This species is not usually tested.
                  Interpretation should be as stated above for results using dilution techniques. Interpretation involves correlation of the diameter obtained in the disk test with the MIC for azithromycin.
                  As with standardized dilution techniques, diffusion methods require the use of laboratory control microorganisms that are used to control the technical aspects of the laboratory procedures. For the diffusion technique, the 15 mcg azithromycin disk should provide the following zone diameters in these laboratory test quality control strains:
                  


