
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY

               
                  Morphine is the prototype of many narcotic drugs that interact predominantly with the opiod μ-receptor. These μ-binding sites are very discretely distributed in the human brain, with high densities in the posterior amygdala, hypothalamus, thalamus, mucleus caudatus, putamen, and certain cortical areas. They are also found on the terminal axons at primary afferents within laminae I and II (substantia gelatinosa) of the spinal cord and in the spinal nucleus at the trigeminal nerve. Morphine may produce analgesia by acting at any, all, or some combination of the periaqueductal-periventricular gray matter, the ventromedial medulla, and the spinal cord.

                  In clinical settings, morphine exerts its principal pharmacological effects on the central nervous system and gastrointestinal tract. Its primary actions of therapeutic value are analgesia and sedation. Morphine appears to increase the patient's tolerance for pain and to decrease the perception of suffering, although the presence of the pain itself may still be recognized.

                  In addition to analgesia, alterations in mood, euphoria and dysphoria, and drowsiness commonly occur. Morphine depresses various respiratory centers, depresses the cough reflex, and constricts the pupils. Analgesic blood levels of morphine may cause nausea and vomiting directly by stimulating the chemoreceptor trigger zone, but nausea and vomiting are significantly more common in ambulatory than in recumbent patients as is postural syncope.

                  Morphine increases the tone and decreases the propulsive contractions of the smooth muscle of the gastrointestinal tract. The resultant prolongation in gastrointestinal transit time is responsible for the constipating effect of morphine. Because morphine may increase biliary-tract pressure, some patients with biliary colic may experience worsening rather than relief of pain.

                  While morphine generally increases the tone of urinary-tract smooth muscle, the net effect tends to be variable, in some cases producing urinary urgency, in others, difficulty in urination.

                  In therapeutic dosage, morphine does not usually exert major effects on the cardiovascular system. However, some patients exhibit a propensity to develop orthostatic hypotension and fainting. Rapid intravenous injection is more likely to precipitate a fall in blood pressure than are intramuscular or subcutaneous injections.

                  Morphine can cause histamine release, which appears to be responsible for wheals or urticaria sometimes seen at the site of injection. Histamine release may also produce dilation of cutaneous blood vessels, with resultant flushing of the face and neck, pruritus and sweating.

               
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Pharmacokinetics

                     
                        Morphine is completely absorbed following intramuscular administration and has an apparent volume of distribution ranging from 1.0 to 4.7 L/kg. Peak plasma levels for a 70 kg adult following intramuscular administration of 10 mg of morphine are between 30-140 ng/mL (the minimum effective analgesic concentration of morphine is 20-40 ng/mL in studies of patient-controlled analgesia). A blood-brain barrier exists for the drug with plasma concentrations of morphine remaining higher than the corresponding CSF morphine levels following intramuscular administration. Morphine circulates unbound in plasma, with a mean total plasma clearance which ranges from 0.9 to 1.2 L/kg/hr in post-operative patients. The major pathway of clearance is hepatic glucuronidation to morphine-3-glucuronide, which is pharmacologically inactive. The major excretion path of the conjugate is through the kidneys, with about 10% in the feces. Morphine is also eliminated by the kidneys, 2 to 12% being excreted unchanged in the urine. The terminal half-life in normal patients is 1.5 to 2.0 hours.

                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Pharmacodynamics

                     
                        Onset of analgesia occurs within 5-20 minutes following intramuscular administration of morphine, rising to peak analgesia sixty minutes after a single intramuscular injection. The duration of analgesia after a single injection is usually three to four hours. Morphine and similar opioid analgesics rapidly induce tolerance to their effects, so that the duration of analgesia may be shorter following subsequent doses of morphine. Once patients are started on morphine, the dose required for satisfactory analgesia will rise, with the rate of development of tolerance varying depending on the patient's prior narcotic use, level of pain, degree of anxiety, use of other CNS active drugs, circulatory status, total dose, and the inter-dose interval.

                     
                     
                  
               
            
         