
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  Cimetidine competitively inhibits the action of histamine at the histamine H2 receptors of the parietal cells and thus is a histamine H2-receptor antagonist.
                  Cimetidine is not an anticholinergic agent. Studies have shown that cimetidine inhibits both daytime and nocturnal basal gastric acid secretion. Cimetidine also inhibits gastric acid secretion stimulated by food, histamine, pentagastrin, caffeine and insulin.
               
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Antisecretory Activity
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           1) Acid Secretion
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Nocturnal
                                 
                                    Cimetidine 800 mg orally at bedtime reduces mean hourly H+ activity by greater than 85% over an eight-hour period in duodenal ulcer patients, with no effect on daytime acid secretion. Cimetidine 1600 mg orally h.s. produces 100% inhibition of mean hourly H+ activity over an eight-hour period in duodenal ulcer patients, but also reduces H+ activity by 35% for an additional five hours into the following morning. Cimetidine 400 mg b.i.d. and 300 mg q.i.d. decrease nocturnal acid secretion in a dose-related manner, i.e., 47%–83% over a six- to eight-hour period and 54% over a nine-hour period, respectively.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Food Stimulated
                                 
                                    During the first hour after a standard experimental meal, oral cimetidine 300 mg inhibited gastric acid secretion in duodenal ulcer patients by at least 50%. During the subsequent two hours cimetidine inhibited gastric acid secretion by at least 75%.
                                    The effect of a 300 mg breakfast dose of cimetidine continued for at least four hours and there was partial suppression of the rise in gastric acid secretion following the luncheon meal in duodenal ulcer patients. This suppression of gastric acid output was enhanced and could be maintained by another 300 mg dose of cimetidine given with lunch.
                                    In another study, cimetidine 300 mg given with the meal increased gastric pH as compared with placebo.
                                    


                                 



                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 24-Hour Mean H+ Activity
                                 
                                    Cimetidine 800 mg h.s., 400 mg b.i.d. and 300 mg q.i.d. all provide a similar, moderate (less than 60%) level of 24-hour acid suppression. However, the 800 mg h.s. regimen exerts its entire effect on nocturnal acid, and does not affect daytime gastric physiology.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Chemically Stimulated
                                 
                                    Oral cimetidine significantly inhibited gastric acid secretion stimulated by betazole (an isomer of histamine), pentagastrin, caffeine and insulin as follows:
                                    


                                    


When food and betazole were used to stimulate secretion, inhibition of hydrogen ion concentration usually ranged from 45% to 75% and the inhibition of volume ranged from 30% to 65%.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           2) Pepsin
                           
                              Oral cimetidine 300 mg reduced total pepsin output as a result of the decrease in volume of gastric juice.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           3) Intrinsic Factor
                           
                              Intrinsic factor secretion was studied with betazole as a stimulant. Oral cimetidine 300 mg inhibited the rise in intrinsic factor concentration produced by betazole, but some intrinsic factor was secreted at all times.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Other
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Lower Esophageal Sphincter Pressure and Gastric Emptying
                           
                              Cimetidine has no effect on lower esophageal sphincter (LES) pressure or the rate of gastric emptying.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        Cimetidine is rapidly absorbed after oral administration and peak levels occur in 45 to 90 minutes. The half-life of cimetidine is approximately 2 hours. Both oral and parenteral (I.V. or I.M.) administration provide comparable periods of therapeutically effective blood levels; blood concentrations remain above that required to provide 80% inhibition of basal gastric acid secretion for 4 to 5 hours following a dose of 300 mg.
                        The principal route of excretion of cimetidine is the urine. Following parenteral administration, most of the drug is excreted as the parent compound; following oral administration, the drug is more extensively metabolized, the sulfoxide being the major metabolite. Following a single oral dose, 48% of the drug is recovered from the urine after 24 hours as the parent compound. Following IV or IM administration, approximately 75% of the drug is recovered from the urine after 24 hours as the parent compound.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         