
               
               
               12  CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  
                  12.1 Mechanism of Action
                  Pathological changes in dementia of the Alzheimer’s type and 
dementia associated with Parkinson’s disease involve cholinergic neuronal 
pathways that project from the basal forebrain to the cerebral cortex and 
hippocampus. These pathways are thought to be intricately involved in memory, 
attention, learning, and other cognitive processes. While the precise mechanism 
of action for rivastigmine is unknown, it is postulated to exert its therapeutic 
effect by enhancing cholinergic function. This is accomplished by increasing the 
concentration of acetylcholine through reversible inhibition of its hydrolysis 
by cholinesterase. If this proposed mechanism is correct, the effect of 
rivastigmine may lessen as the disease process advances and fewer cholinergic 
neurons remain functionally intact. There is no evidence that rivastigmine 
alters the course of the underlying dementing process.
                  
                  
                  12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                  After a 6-mg oral dose of rivastigmine in humans, 
anticholinesterase activity is present in CSF for about 10 hours, with a maximum 
inhibition of about 60% 5 hours after dosing.
                  
                     In-vitro and in-vivo 
studies demonstrate that the inhibition of cholinesterase by rivastigmine is not 
affected by the concomitant administration of memantine, an N-methyl-D-aspartate 
receptor antagonist.
                  
                  
                  12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                  
                  
                  12.3.1 
                  Absorption
                  

                  After the first dose, there is a lag time of 0.5-1 hour in the 
absorption of rivastigmine from Exelon Patch (rivastigmine transdermal system). 
Concentrations then rise slowly typically reaching a maximum after 8 hours, 
although maximum values (Cmax) are often reached at later 
times as well (10-16 hours). After the peak, plasma concentrations slowly 
decrease over the remainder of the 24-hour period of application. At steady 
state, trough levels are approximately 60-80% of peak levels. Fluctuation 
(between Cmax and Cmin) is lower for Exelon Patch than for the oral formulation. 
Exelon Patch 9.5 mg/24 hours exhibited exposure approximately the same as that 
provided by an oral dose of 6 mg twice daily (i.e., 12 mg/day).
                  
                  
                  Figure 2: Rivastigmine Plasma Concentrations 
Following Dermal 24-Hour Patch Application
                  Inter-subject variability in exposure was lower (43-49%) for the Exelon Patch 
formulation as compared with the oral formulations (73-103%).
                  A relationship between drug exposure at steady state (rivastigmine and 
metabolite NAP226-90) and bodyweight was observed in Alzheimer’s dementia 
patients. Compared to a patient with a body weight of 65 kg, the rivastigmine 
steady-state concentrations in a patient with a body weight of 35 kg are 
approximately doubled, while for a patient with a body weight of 100 kg the 
concentrations are approximately halved. The effect of body weight on drug 
exposure suggests special attention to patients with very low body weight during 
up-titration [see Dosage and Administration (2)].
                  Over a 24-hour dermal application, approximately 50% of the drug load is 
released from the system.
                  Exposure (AUC∞) to rivastigmine (and metabolite 
NAP266-90) was highest when the patch was applied to the upper back, chest, or 
upper arm. Two other sites (abdomen and thigh) could be used if none of the 
three other sites is available, but the practitioner should keep in mind that 
the rivastigmine plasma exposure associated with these sites was approximately 
20-30% lower.
                  There was no relevant accumulation of rivastigmine or the metabolite 
NAP226-90 in plasma in patients with Alzheimer’s disease upon multiple 
dosing.
                  
                  
                  12.3.2 
                  Distribution
                  Rivastigmine is weakly bound to plasma proteins (approximately 
40%) over the therapeutic range. It readily crosses the blood-brain barrier, 
reaching CSF peak concentrations in 1.4-2.6 hours. It has an apparent volume of 
distribution in the range of 1.8-2.7 L/kg.
                  
                  
                  12.3.3 
                  Metabolism
                  Rivastigmine is extensively metabolized primarily via 
cholinesterase-mediated hydrolysis to the decarbamylated metabolite NAP226-90. 
In 
                     vitro, this metabolite 
shows minimal inhibition of acetylcholinesterase (less than 10%). Based on evidence 
from in-vitro and animal studies, the major 
cytochrome P450 isoenzymes are minimally involved in rivastigmine 
metabolism.
                  The metabolite-to-parent AUC∞ ratio was about 0.7 
after Exelon Patch application versus 3.5 after oral administration, indicating 
that much less metabolism occurred after dermal treatment. Less NAP226-90 is 
formed following patch application, presumably because of the lack of 
presystemic (hepatic first pass) metabolism. Based on in-
                     vitro studies, no unique 
metabolic routes were detected in human skin.
                  
                  
                  12.3.4 
                  Elimination
                  Renal excretion of the metabolites is the major route of 
elimination. Unchanged rivastigmine is found in trace amounts in the urine. 
Following administration of 14C-rivastigmine, renal 
elimination was rapid and essentially complete (greater than 90%) within 24 hours. Less 
than 1% of the administered dose is excreted in the feces. The apparent 
elimination half-life in plasma is approximately 3 hours after patch removal. 
Renal clearance was approximately
2.1-2.8 L/hr.
               
               
               
                  
                     image of Figure 2
                     
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         