
               
               
               
                  CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
                  
                  
                  Mechanism of Action
                  Frovatriptan is a 5-HT receptor agonist that binds with high 
affinity for 5-HT1B and 5-HT1D 
receptors. Frovatriptan has no significant effects on GABAA mediated channel activity and has no significant affinity for 
benzodiazepine binding sites.
                  Frovatriptan is believed to act on extracerebral, intracranial arteries and 
to inhibit excessive dilation of these vessels in migraine. In anesthetized dogs 
and cats, intravenous administration of frovatriptan produced selective 
constriction of the carotid vascular bed and had no effect on blood pressure 
(both species) or coronary resistance (in dogs).
                  
                  
                  
                  Pharmacokinetics
                  Mean maximum blood concentrations (Cmax) 
in patients are achieved approximately 2 - 4 hours after administration of a 
single oral dose of frovatriptan 2.5 mg. The absolute bioavailability of an oral 
dose of frovatriptan 2.5 mg in healthy subjects is about 20% in males and 30% in 
females. Food has no significant effect on the bioavailability of frovatriptan, 
but delays tmax by one hour.
                  Binding of frovatriptan to serum proteins is low (approximately 15%). 
Reversible binding to blood cells at equilibrium is approximately 60%, resulting 
in a blood:plasma ratio of about 2:1 in both males and females. The mean steady 
state volume of distribution of frovatriptan following intravenous 
administration of 0.8 mg is 4.2 L/kg in males and 3.0 L/kg in females.
                  
                     In vitro, cytochrome P450 1A2 appears to be the 
principal enzyme involved in the metabolism of frovatriptan. Following 
administration of a single oral dose of radiolabeled frovatriptan 2.5 mg to 
healthy male and female subjects, 32% of the dose was recovered in urine and 62% 
in feces. Radiolabeled compounds excreted in urine were unchanged frovatriptan, 
hydroxylated frovatriptan, N-acetyl desmethyl frovatriptan, hydroxylated 
N-acetyl desmethyl frovatriptan and desmethyl frovatriptan, together with 
several other minor metabolites. Desmethyl frovatriptan has lower affinity for 
5-HT1B/1D receptors compared to the parent compound. The 
N-acetyl desmethyl metabolite has no significant affinity for 5-HT receptors. 
The activity of the other metabolites is unknown.
                  After an intravenous dose, mean clearance of frovatriptan was 220 and 130 
mL/min in males and females, respectively. Renal clearance accounted for about 
40% (82 mL/min) and 45% (60 mL/min) of total clearance in males and females, 
respectively. The mean terminal elimination half-life of frovatriptan in both 
males and females is approximately 26 hours.
                  The pharmacokinetics of frovatriptan are similar in migraine patients and 
healthy subjects.
                  
                  
                  
                  Special Populations
                  
                  
                  
                  Age:
                  Mean AUC of frovatriptan was 1.5- to 2-fold higher in healthy 
elderly subjects (age 65 – 77 years) compared to those in healthy younger 
subjects (age 21 - 37 years). There was no difference in tmax or t1/2 between the two 
populations.
                  
                  
                  
                  Gender:
                  There was no difference in the mean terminal elimination 
half-life of frovatriptan in males and females. Bioavailability was higher, and 
systemic exposure to frovatriptan was approximately 2-fold greater, in females 
than males, irrespective of age.
                  
                  
                  
                  Renal Impairment:
                  Since less than 10% of FROVA is excreted in urine after an oral 
dose, it is unlikely that the exposure to frovatriptan will be affected by renal 
impairment. The pharmacokinetics of frovatriptan following a single oral dose of 
2.5 mg was not different in patients with renal impairment (5 males and 6 
females, creatinine clearance 16 - 73 mL/min) and in subjects with normal renal 
function.
                  
                  
                  
                  Hepatic Impairment:
                  There is no clinical or pharmacokinetic experience with FROVA in 
patients with severe hepatic impairment. The AUC in subjects with mild 
(Child-Pugh 5 - 6) to moderate (Child-Pugh 7 - 9) hepatic impairment is about 
twice as high as the AUC in young, healthy subjects, but within the range found 
among normal elderly subjects.
                  
                  
                  
                  Race:
                  The effect of race on the pharmacokinetics of frovatriptan has 
not been examined.
                  
                  
                  
                  Drug Interactions 

                  (see also PRECAUTIONS,
                   
Drug Interactions
                  )
                  Frovatriptan is not an inhibitor of human monoamine oxidase (MAO) 
enzymes or cytochrome P450 (isozymes 1A2, 2C9, 2C19, 2D6, 2E1, 3A4) in vitro at concentrations up to 250 to 500- fold higher 
than the highest blood concentrations observed in man at a dose of 2.5 mg. No 
induction of drug metabolizing enzymes was observed following multiple dosing of 
frovatriptan to rats or on addition to human hepatocytes in 
vitro. Although no clinical studies have been performed, it is unlikely 
that frovatriptan will affect the metabolism of co-administered drugs 
metabolized by these mechanisms.
                  
                  
                  
                  Oral contraceptives:
                  Retrospective analysis of pharmacokinetic data from females 
across trials indicated that the mean Cmax and AUC of 
frovatriptan are 30% higher in those subjects taking oral contraceptives 
compared to those not taking oral contraceptives.
                  
                  
                  
                  Ergotamine:
                  The AUC and Cmax of frovatriptan (2 x 2.5 
mg dose) were reduced by approximately 25% when co-administered with ergotamine 
tartrate.
                  
                  
                  
                  Propranolol:
                  Propranolol increased the AUC of frovatriptan 2.5 mg in males by 
60% and in females by 29%. The Cmax of frovatriptan was 
increased 23% in males and 16% in females in the presence of propranolol. The 
tmax as well as half-life of frovatriptan, though slightly longer in the 
females, were not affected by concomitant administration of propranolol.
                  
                  
                  
                  Moclobemide:
                  The pharmacokinetic profile of frovatriptan was unaffected when a 
single oral dose of frovatriptan 2.5 mg was administered to healthy female 
subjects receiving the MAO-A inhibitor, moclobemide, at an oral dose of 150 mg 
bid for 8 days.
                  
                  
                  
                  Clinical Trials
                  The efficacy of FROVA in the acute treatment of migraine 
headaches was demonstrated in five randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, 
outpatient trials. Two of these were dose-finding studies in which patients were 
randomized to receive doses of frovatriptan ranging from 0.5 - 40 mg. The three 
studies evaluating only one dose studied 2.5 mg. In these controlled short-term 
studies combined, patients were predominately female (88%) and Caucasian (94%) 
with a mean age of 42 years (range 18 - 69). Patients were instructed to treat a 
moderate to severe headache. Headache response, defined as a reduction in 
headache severity from moderate or severe pain to mild or no pain, was assessed 
for up to 24 hours after dosing. The associated symptoms nausea, vomiting, 
photophobia and phonophobia were also assessed. Maintenance of response was 
assessed for up to 24 hours post dose. In two of the trials a second dose of 
FROVA was provided after the initial treatment, to treat recurrence of the 
headache within 24 hours. Other medication, excluding other 5-HT1 agonists and ergotamine containing compounds, was permitted 
from 2 hours after the first dose of FROVA. The frequency and time to use of 
additional medications were also recorded.
                  In all five placebo-controlled trials, the percentage of patients achieving a 
headache response 2 hours after treatment was significantly greater for those 
taking FROVA compared to those taking placebo (Table 1).
                  Lower doses of frovatriptan (1 mg or 0.5 mg) were not effective at 2 hours. 
Higher doses (5 mg to 40 mg) of frovatriptan showed no added benefit over 2.5 mg 
but did cause a greater incidence of adverse events
                  
                     Comparisons of drug performance based upon results obtained 
in different clinical trials are never reliable. Because trials are conducted at 
different times, with different samples of patients, by different investigators, 
employing different criteria and/or different interpretations of the same 
criteria, under different conditions (dose, dosing regimen, etc.), quantitative 
estimates of treatment response and the timing of response may be expected to 
vary considerably from study to study.
                  
                  The estimated probability of achieving an initial headache response by 2 
hours following treatment is depicted in Figure 1
               
               
            
         