
                     
                     
                     Drug Interactions
                     
                        

                        Certain drugs tend to produce hyperglycemia and may lead to loss of blood glucose control. These drugs include the thiazides and other diuretics, corticosteroids, phenothiazines, thyroid products, estrogens, oral contraceptives, phenytoin, nicotinic acid, sympathomimetics, calcium channel-blocking drugs, and isoniazid. When such drugs are administered to a patient receiving acarbose tablets, the patient should be closely observed for loss of blood glucose control. When such drugs are withdrawn from patients receiving acarbose tablets in combination with sulfonylureas or insulin, patients should be observed closely for any evidence of hypoglycemia.
                        Patients Receiving Sulfonylureas or Insulin: Sulfonylurea agents or insulin may cause hypoglycemia. Acarbose tablets given in combination with a sulfonylurea or insulin may cause a further lowering of blood glucose and may increase the potential for hypoglycemia.
                        If hypoglycemia occurs, appropriate adjustments in the dosage of these agents should be made. Very rarely, individual cases of hypoglycemic shock have been reported in patients receiving acarbose tablets therapy in combination with sulfonylureas and/or insulin.
                        Intestinal adsorbents (for example, charcoal) and digestive enzyme preparations containing carbohydrate-splitting enzymes (for example, amylase, pancreatin) may reduce the effect of acarbose tablets and should not be taken concomitantly.
                        Acarbose tablets has been shown to change the bioavailability of digoxin when they are co administered, which may require digoxin dose adjustment. (See 
                              CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY, Drug-Drug Interactions
                           ).
                     
                     
                  
               