
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  
                     
                        Coadministration of TRIUMEQ with other drugs can alter the concentration of other drugs and other drugs may alter the concentrations of TRIUMEQ. The potential drug-drug interactions must be considered prior to and during therapy. (4, 7, 12.3)
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 Effect of Dolutegravir on the Pharmacokinetics of Other Agents
                     
                        In vitro, dolutegravir inhibited the renal organic cation transporters, OCT2 (IC50 = 1.93 µM) and multidrug and toxin extrusion transporter (MATE) 1 (IC50 = 6.34 µM). In vivo, dolutegravir inhibits tubular secretion of creatinine by inhibiting OCT2 and potentially MATE1. Dolutegravir may increase plasma concentrations of drugs eliminated via OCT2 or MATE1 (dofetilide and metformin) [see Contraindications (4), Drug Interactions (7.3)].
                        
                        In vitro, dolutegravir inhibited the basolateral renal transporters, organic anion transporter (OAT) 1 (IC50 = 2.12 µM) and OAT3 (IC50 = 1.97 µM). However, in vivo, dolutegravir did not alter the plasma concentrations of tenofovir or para-amino hippurate, substrates of OAT1 and OAT3.
                        In vitro, dolutegravir did not inhibit (IC50 greater than 50 µM) the following: cytochrome P450 (CYP)1A2, CYP2A6, CYP2B6, CYP2C8, CYP2C9, CYP2C19, CYP2D6, CYP3A, UGT1A1, UGT2B7, P-glycoprotein (P-gp), breast cancer resistance protein (BCRP), bile salt export pump (BSEP), organic anion transporter polypeptide (OATP)1B1, OATP1B3, OCT1, or multidrug resistance protein (MRP)2, or MRP4. In vitro, dolutegravir did not induce CYP1A2, CYP2B6, CYP3A4. Based on these data and the results of drug interaction trials, dolutegravir is not expected to affect the pharmacokinetics of drugs that are substrates of these enzymes or transporters.
                        In drug interaction trials, dolutegravir did not have a clinically relevant effect on the pharmacokinetics of the following drugs: tenofovir, methadone, midazolam, rilpivirine, and oral contraceptives containing norgestimate and ethinyl estradiol. Using cross-study comparisons to historical pharmacokinetic data for each interacting drug, dolutegravir did not appear to affect the pharmacokinetics of the following drugs: atazanavir, darunavir, efavirenz, etravirine, fosamprenavir, lopinavir, ritonavir, and boceprevir.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 Effect of Other Agents on the Pharmacokinetics of Dolutegravir
                     
                        Dolutegravir is metabolized by UGT1A1 with some contribution from CYP3A. Dolutegravir is also a substrate of UGT1A3, UGT1A9, BCRP, and P-gp in vitro. Drugs that induce those enzymes and transporters may decrease dolutegravir plasma concentrations and reduce the therapeutic effect of dolutegravir.
                        Coadministration of dolutegravir and other drugs that inhibit these enzymes may increase dolutegravir plasma concentrations.
                        Etravirine significantly reduced plasma concentrations of dolutegravir, but the effect of etravirine was mitigated by coadministration of lopinavir/ritonavir or darunavir/ritonavir, and is expected to be mitigated by atazanavir/ritonavir (Table 5) [see Drug Interactions (7.3), Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                        In vitro, dolutegravir was not a substrate of OATP1B1, or OATP1B3.
                        Darunavir/ritonavir, lopinavir/ritonavir, rilpivirine, tenofovir, boceprevir, prednisone, rifabutin, and omeprazole had no clinically significant effect on the pharmacokinetics of dolutegravir.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3 Established and Other Potentially Significant Drug Interactions
                     
                        There were no drug-drug interaction trials conducted with the abacavir, dolutegravir, and lamivudine fixed-dose combination tablets.
                        Information regarding potential drug interactions with dolutegravir (Table 5) and abacavir are provided below. These recommendations are based on either drug interaction trials or predicted interactions due to the expected magnitude of interaction and potential for serious adverse events or loss of efficacy. [See Clinical Pharmacology (12.3).]
                        
                        
                           Table 5. Established and Other Potentially Significant Drug Interactions for Dolutegravir: Alterations in Dose May Be Recommended Based on Drug Interaction Trials or Predicted Interactions
                        
                        


                        



                           a
                           See Clinical Pharmacology (12.3) Table 8 or Table 9 for magnitude of interaction.
                        
                        
                           Ethanol
                        
                        
                           Abacavir: Abacavir has no effect on the pharmacokinetic properties of ethanol. Ethanol decreases the elimination of abacavir causing an increase in overall exposure [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                        
                           Methadone
                        
                        
                           Abacavir: The addition of methadone has no clinically significant effect on the pharmacokinetic properties of abacavir. In a trial of 11 HIV-1-infected subjects receiving methadone-maintenance therapy with 600 mg of abacavir twice daily (twice the currently recommended dose), oral methadone clearance increased [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)]. This alteration will not result in a methadone dose modification in the majority of patients; however, an increased methadone dose may be required in a small number of patients. The addition of methadone had no clinically significant effect on the pharmacokinetic properties of abacavir.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         