
               
               
               12	CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1	Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Crizotinib is an inhibitor of receptor tyrosine kinases including ALK, Hepatocyte Growth Factor Receptor (HGFR, c-Met), ROS1 (c-ros), and Recepteur d'Origine Nantais (RON). Translocations can affect the ALK gene resulting in the expression of oncogenic fusion proteins. The formation of ALK fusion proteins results in activation and dysregulation of the gene's expression and signaling which can contribute to increased cell proliferation and survival in tumors expressing these proteins. Crizotinib demonstrated concentration-dependent inhibition of ALK, ROS1, and c-Met phosphorylation in cell-based assays using tumor cell lines and demonstrated antitumor activity in mice bearing tumor xenografts that expressed EML4- or NPM-ALK fusion proteins or c-Met.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2	Pharmacodynamics
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Cardiac Electrophysiology
                              
                              The QT interval prolongation potential of crizotinib was assessed in all patients who received XALKORI 250 mg twice daily. Serial ECGs in triplicate were collected following a single dose and at steady state to evaluate the effect of crizotinib on QT intervals. Sixteen of 1167 patients (1.4%) were found to have QTcF (corrected QT by the Fridericia method) greater than or equal to 500 msec and 51 of 1136 patients (4.4%) had an increase from baseline QTcF greater than or equal to 60 msec by automated machine-read evaluation of ECG.
                              In an ECG sub-study conducted in 52 patients with ALK-positive NSCLC who received crizotinib 250 mg twice daily, the maximum mean QTcF change from baseline was 12.3 msec (two-sided 90% upper CI: 19.5 msec). An exposure-QT analysis suggested a crizotinib plasma concentration dependent increase in QTcF  [see  Warnings and Precautions (5.3)].
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3	Pharmacokinetics
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Absorption
                              
                              Following a single oral dose, crizotinib was absorbed with median time to achieve peak concentration of 4 to 6 hours. Following crizotinib 250 mg twice daily, steady state was reached within 15 days and remained stable, with a median accumulation ratio of 4.8. Steady-state systemic exposure (Cmin and AUC) appeared to increase in a greater than dose proportional manner over the dose range of 200–300 mg twice daily.
                              The mean absolute bioavailability of crizotinib was 43% (range: 32% to 66%) following a single 250 mg oral dose.
                              A high-fat meal reduced crizotinib AUCinf and Cmax by approximately 14%. XALKORI can be administered with or without food [see Dosage and Administration (2.2)].
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Distribution
                              
                              The geometric mean volume of distribution (Vss) of crizotinib was 1,772 L following intravenous administration of a 50 mg dose, indicating extensive distribution into tissues from the plasma.
                              Binding of crizotinib to human plasma proteins in vitro is 91% and is independent of drug concentration. In vitro studies suggested that crizotinib is a substrate for P-glycoprotein (P-gp). The blood-to-plasma concentration ratio is approximately 1.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Metabolism
                              
                              Crizotinib is predominantly metabolized by CYP3A4/5. The primary metabolic pathways in humans were oxidation of the piperidine ring to crizotinib lactam and O-dealkylation, with subsequent Phase 2 conjugation of O-dealkylated metabolites.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Elimination
                              
                              Following single doses of crizotinib, the mean apparent plasma terminal half-life of crizotinib was 42 hours in patients.
                              Following the administration of a single 250 mg radiolabeled crizotinib dose to healthy subjects, 63% and 22% of the administered dose was recovered in feces and urine, respectively. Unchanged crizotinib represented approximately 53% and 2.3% of the administered dose in feces and urine, respectively.
                              The mean apparent clearance (CL/F) of crizotinib was lower at steady state (60 L/h) after 250 mg twice daily than that after a single 250 mg oral dose (100 L/h), which was likely due to autoinhibition of CYP3A by crizotinib after multiple dosing.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Drug interactions
                              
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       CYP3A inhibitors:  Coadministration of a single 150 mg oral dose of crizotinib with ketoconazole (200 mg twice daily), a strong CYP3A inhibitor, increased crizotinib AUCinf and Cmax values by approximately 3.2-fold and 1.4-fold, respectively, compared to crizotinib alone. However, the magnitude of effect of CYP3A inhibitors on steady-state crizotinib exposure has not been evaluated [see Drug Interactions (7.1)].
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       CYP3A inducers:  Coadministration of a single 250 mg oral dose of crizotinib with rifampin (600 mg once daily), a strong CYP3A inducer, decreased crizotinib AUCinf and Cmax by 82% and 69%, respectively, compared to crizotinib alone. However, the magnitude of effect of CYP3A inducers on steady-state crizotinib exposure has not been evaluated [see Drug Interactions (7.2)].
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Gastric pH elevating medications:  In healthy subjects, coadministration of a single 250 mg oral dose of crizotinib following administration of esomeprazole 40 mg daily for 5 days did not result in a clinically relevant change in crizotinib exposure (AUCinf decreased by 10% and no change in Cmax).
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       CYP3A substrates:  Coadministration of crizotinib (250 mg twice daily for 28 days) in patients increased the AUCinf of oral midazolam 3.7-fold compared to midazolam alone, suggesting that crizotinib is a moderate inhibitor of CYP3A [see Drug Interactions (7.3)].
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Other CYP substrates: In vitro studies suggest that clinical drug-drug interactions as a result of crizotinib-mediated inhibition of the metabolism of substrates for CYP1A2, CYP2C8, CYP2C9, CYP2C19, or CYP2D6 are unlikely to occur.
                                    Crizotinib is an inhibitor of CYP2B6 in vitro. Therefore, crizotinib may increase plasma concentrations of coadministered drugs that are predominantly metabolized by CYP2B6.
                                    An in vitro study suggests that clinical drug-drug interactions as a result of crizotinib-mediated induction of the metabolism of substrates for CYP1A2, CYP2B6, CYP2C8, CYP2C9, CYP2C19, or CYP3A are unlikely to occur.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       UGT substrates: In vitro  studies suggest that clinical drug-drug interactions as a result of crizotinib-mediated inhibition of the metabolism of drugs that are substrates for UGT1A1, UGT1A4, UGT1A6, UGT1A9 or UGT2B7 are unlikely to occur.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Substrates of transporters:   Crizotinib inhibited P-glycoprotein (P-gp) in vitro at clinically relevant concentrations. Therefore, crizotinib has the potential to increase plasma concentrations of coadministered drugs that are substrates of P-gp.
                                    Crizotinib inhibited the hepatic uptake transporter, organic cation transporter 1 (OCT1), and renal uptake transporter, organic cation transporter 2 (OCT2), in vitro at clinically relevant concentrations. Therefore, crizotinib has the potential to increase plasma concentrations of coadministered drugs that are substrates of OCT1 or OCT2.
                                    Crizotinib did not inhibit the human hepatic uptake transport proteins OATP1B1 or OATP1B3, or the renal uptake transport proteins OAT1 or OAT3 in vitro at clinically relevant concentrations. 
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Effect on other transport proteins:  Crizotinib did not inhibit the hepatic efflux bile salt export pump transporter (BSEP) in vitro at clinically relevant concentrations.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Specific populations
                              
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Hepatic Impairment:   As crizotinib is extensively metabolized in the liver, hepatic impairment is likely to increase plasma crizotinib concentrations. However, XALKORI has not been studied in patients with hepatic impairment. Clinical studies excluded patients with ALT or AST greater than 2.5 × ULN or greater than 5 × ULN if due to liver metastases. Patients with total bilirubin greater than 1.5 × ULN were also excluded [see Use in Specific Populations (8.6)]. The population pharmacokinetic analysis using the data from Studies 1, 2 and 3 suggested that baseline total bilirubin (0.1 to 2.1 mg/dL) or AST levels (7 to 124 U/L) did not have a clinically relevant effect on the exposure of crizotinib.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Renal impairment:   The pharmacokinetics of crizotinib were evaluated using a population pharmacokinetic analysis in patients with mild (CLcr 60–89 mL/min, N=433) and moderate (CLcr 30–59 mL/min, N=137) renal impairment enrolled in Studies 1, 2, and 3. Mild or moderate renal impairment has no clinically relevant effect on the exposure of crizotinib.
                                    A study was conducted in 7 patients with severe renal impairment (CLcr <30 mL/min) who did not require dialysis and 8 patients with normal renal function (CLcr ≥ 90 mL/min). All patients received a single 250 mg oral dose of XALKORI. The mean AUCinf for crizotinib increased by 79% and the mean Cmax increased by 34% in patients with severe renal impairment compared to those with normal renal function. Similar changes in AUCinf and Cmax were observed for the active metabolite of crizotinib [see Dosage and Administration (2.2) and Use in Specific Populations (8.7)].
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Ethnicity:   No clinically relevant difference in the exposure of crizotinib between Asian patients (N=523) and non-Asian patients (N=691).
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Age:   Age has no effect on the exposure of crizotinib based on the population pharmacokinetic analysis from Studies 1, 2 and 3.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Body weight and gender:   No clinically relevant effect of body weight or gender on the exposure of crizotinib based on the population pharmacokinetic analysis from Studies 1, 2 and 3.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         