
               
               
               7	DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           CYP3A Inhibitors: Avoid concurrent use of XALKORI with strong CYP3A inhibitors. (7.1)
                           CYP3A Inducers: Avoid concurrent use of XALKORI with strong CYP3A inducers. (7.2)
                           CYP3A Substrates: Avoid concurrent use of XALKORI with CYP3A substrates with narrow therapeutic indices. (7.3)
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1	Drugs That May Increase Crizotinib Plasma Concentrations
                     
                        Coadministration of crizotinib with strong CYP3A inhibitors increases crizotinib plasma concentrations [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)]. Avoid concomitant use of strong CYP3A inhibitors, including but not limited to atazanavir, clarithromycin, indinavir, itraconazole, ketoconazole, nefazodone, nelfinavir, ritonavir, saquinavir, telithromycin, troleandomycin, and voriconazole. Avoid grapefruit or grapefruit juice which may also increase plasma concentrations of crizotinib. Exercise caution with concomitant use of moderate CYP3A inhibitors.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2	Drugs That May Decrease Crizotinib Plasma Concentrations
                     
                        Coadministration of crizotinib with strong CYP3A inducers decreases crizotinib plasma concentrations [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)]. Avoid concomitant use of strong CYP3A inducers, including but not limited to carbamazepine, phenobarbital, phenytoin, rifabutin, rifampin, and St. John's Wort.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3	Drugs Whose Plasma Concentrations May Be Altered By Crizotinib
                     
                        Crizotinib inhibits CYP3A both in vitro and in vivo 
                           [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)]. Avoid concomitant use of CYP3A substrates with narrow therapeutic range, including but not limited to alfentanil, cyclosporine, dihydroergotamine, ergotamine, fentanyl, pimozide, quinidine, sirolimus, and tacrolimus in patients taking XALKORI. If concomitant use of these CYP3A substrates with narrow therapeutic range is required in patients taking XALKORI, dose reductions of the CYP3A substrates may be required due to adverse reactions.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         