
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
                  The risks of using SEROQUEL XR in combination with other drugs have not been extensively evaluated in systematic studies.  Given the primary CNS effects of SEROQUEL XR, caution should be used when it is taken in combination with other centrally acting drugs.  Quetiapine potentiated the cognitive and motor effects of alcohol in a clinical trial in subjects with selected psychotic disorders, and alcoholic beverages should be limited while taking quetiapine.  
                  Because of its potential for inducing hypotension, SEROQUEL XR may enhance the effects of certain antihypertensive agents.  
                  SEROQUEL XR may antagonize the effects of levodopa and dopamine agonists.
                  The use of quetiapine should be avoided in combination with drugs known to increase QT interval, and caution should be exercised when quetiapine is used in combination with drugs known to cause electrolyte imbalance [see Warnings and Precautions (5.12)].
                  There have been literature reports suggesting false positive results in urine enzyme immunoassays for methadone and tricyclic antidepressants in patients who have taken quetiapine. Caution should be exercised in the interpretation of positive urine drug screen results for these drugs, and confirmation by alternative analytical technique (e.g. chromatographic methods) should be considered.
               
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              
                                 P450 3A Inhibitors: May decrease the clearance of quetiapine.  Lower doses of quetiapine  may be required. (7.1)
                           
                           
                              
                                 Hepatic Enzyme Inducers: May increase the clearance of quetiapine. Higher doses of quetiapine may be required with phenytoin or other inducers. (7.1)
                           
                           
                              
                                 Centrally Acting Drugs: Caution should be used when quetiapine is used in combination with other CNS acting drugs. (7)
                           
                           
                              
                                 Antihypertensive Agents: Quetiapine may add to the hypotensive effects of these agents. (7)
                           
                           
                              
                                 Levodopa and Dopamine Agents:  Quetiapine may antagonize the effect of these drugs. (7)
                           
                           
                              
                                 Drugs known to cause electrolyte imbalance or increase QT interval: Caution should be used when quetiapine is used concomitantly with these drugs. (7)
                           
                           
                              
                                 Interference with Urine Drug Screens: False positive urine drug screens using immunoassays for methadone or tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs) in patients taking quetiapine have been reported. (7)
                           
                        
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 The Effect of Other Drugs on Quetiapine
                     
                        Phenytoin 
                        Coadministration of quetiapine (250 mg three times/day) and phenytoin (100 mg three times/day) increased the mean oral clearance of quetiapine by 5-fold.  Increased doses of SEROQUEL XR may be required to maintain control of symptoms of schizophrenia in patients receiving quetiapine and phenytoin, or other hepatic enzyme inducers (eg, carbamazepine, barbiturates, rifampin, glucocorticoids).  Caution should be taken if phenytoin is withdrawn and replaced with a non-inducer (eg, valproate) [see Dosage and Administration (2)].
                        Divalproex 
                        Coadministration of quetiapine (150 mg twice daily) and divalproex (500 mg  twice daily) increased the mean maximum plasma concentration of quetiapine at steady-state by 17% without affecting the extent of absorption or mean oral clearance.  
                        Thioridazine
                        Thioridazine (200 mg twice daily) increased the oral clearance of quetiapine (300 mg twice daily) by 65%.  	
                        Cimetidine
                         Administration of multiple daily doses of cimetidine (400 mg three times daily for 4 days) resulted in a 20% decrease in the mean oral clearance of quetiapine (150 mg three times daily).  Dosage adjustment for quetiapine is not required when it is given with cimetidine.
                        P450 3A Inhibitors 
                        Coadministration of ketoconazole (200 mg once daily for 4 days), a potent inhibitor of  cytochrome P450 3A, reduced oral clearance of quetiapine by 84%, resulting in a 335% increase in maximum plasma concentration of quetiapine. Caution (reduced dosage) is indicated when SEROQUEL XR is administered with ketoconazole and other inhibitors of cytochrome P450 3A (eg, itraconazole, fluconazole, erythromycin, protease inhibitors).  
                        Fluoxetine, Imipramine, Haloperidol, and Risperidone 
                        Coadministration of fluoxetine (60 mg once daily), imipramine (75 mg twice daily), haloperidol (7.5 mg twice daily), or risperidone (3 mg twice daily) with quetiapine (300 mg twice daily) did not alter the steady-state pharmacokinetics of quetiapine.	
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 Effect of Quetiapine on Other Drugs
                     
                        Lorazepam 
                        The mean oral clearance of lorazepam (2 mg, single dose) was reduced by 20% in the presence of quetiapine administered as 250 mg three times daily dosing.  	
                        Divalproex  
                        The mean maximum concentration and extent of absorption of total and free valproic acid at steady-state were decreased by 10 to 12% when divalproex (500 mg twice daily) was administered with quetiapine (150 mg twice daily).  The mean oral clearance of total valproic acid (administered as divalproex 500 mg twice daily) was increased by 11% in the presence of quetiapine (150 mg twice daily).  The changes were not significant.  	
                        Lithium
                         Concomitant administration of quetiapine (250 mg three times daily) with lithium had no effect on any of the steady-state pharmacokinetic parameters of lithium.  	
                        Antipyrine
                         Administration of multiple daily doses up to 750 mg/day (on a   three times daily schedule) of quetiapine to subjects with selected psychotic disorders had no clinically relevant effect on the clearance of antipyrine or urinary recovery of antipyrine metabolites. These results indicate that quetiapine does not significantly induce hepatic enzymes responsible for cytochrome P450 mediated metabolism of antipyrine.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         