
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  
              12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY

                  
                  

                  
              12.1 Mechanism of Action

                  Divalproex sodium dissociates to the valproate ion in the gastrointestinal tract. The mechanisms by which valproate exerts its therapeutic effects have not been established. It has been suggested that its activity in epilepsy is related to increased brain concentrations of gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA).

                  

                  
              12.2 Pharmacodynamics

                  The relationship between plasma concentration and clinical response is not well documented. One contributing factor is the nonlinear, concentration dependent protein binding of valproate which affects the clearance of the drug. Thus, monitoring of total serum valproate may not provide a reliable index of the bioactive valproate species as protein binding may be affected by age and disease state (e.g., hepatic or renal insufficiency, hyperlipidemia).

                  

                  
              Epilepsy

                  The therapeutic range in epilepsy is commonly considered to be 50 to 100 mcg/mL of total valproate, although some patients may be controlled with lower or higher plasma concentrations.

                  

                  
              Mania

                  In placebo-controlled clinical trials of acute mania, patients were dosed to clinical response with trough plasma concentrations between 85 and 125 mcg/mL [seeDosage and Administration (2.1)].

                  

                  
              12.3 Pharmacokinetics

                  
                  

                  
              Absorption/Bioavailability

                  The absolute bioavailability of divalproex sodium extended-release tablets administered as a single dose after a meal was approximately 90% relative to intravenous infusion.
When given in equal total daily doses, the bioavailability of divalproex sodium extended-release tablets is less than that of divalproex sodium delayed-release tablets. In five multiple-dose studies in healthy subjects (n = 82) and in subjects with epilepsy (n = 86), when administered under fasting and nonfasting conditions, divalproex sodium extended-release tablets given once daily produced an average bioavailability of 89% relative to an equal total daily dose of divalproex sodium delayed-release tablets given BID, TID, or QID. The median time to maximum plasma valproate concentrations (Cmax) after divalproex sodium extended-release tablets administration ranged from 4 to 17 hours. After multiple once-daily dosing of divalproex sodium extended-release tablets, the peak-to-trough fluctuation in plasma valproate concentrations was 10% to 20% lower than that of regular divalproex sodium delayed-release tablets given BID, TID, or QID.

                  

                  
              Conversion from Divalproex Sodium Delayed-Release Tablets to Divalproex Sodium Extended-Release Tablets

                     

                     
Table 9 Bioavailability of Divalproex Sodium Extended-Release Tablets Relative to Divalproex Sodium Delayed-Release Tablets When Divalproex Sodium Extended-Release Tablets Dose is 8% to 20% Higher
Study PopulationRegimensRelativeBioavailablility
            Divalproex Sodium Extended-ReleasesAUCCmaxCminTablets vs. Divalproex Sodium24Delayed-Release TabletsHealthy Volunteers (n = 35)1000 mg & 1500 mg1.0590.8821.173Divalproex Sodium Extended-ReleaseTablets vs. 875mg & 1250mgDivalproex Sodium Delayed ReleaseTabletsPatients with epilepsy on concomitant enzyme-inducing1000 mg to 5000 mg Divalproex1.0080.8991.022antiepilepsy drugs (n = 64)Sodium Extended-Release Tablets vs.875 mg to 4250 mg DivalproexSodium Delayed-Release TabletsConcomitant antiepilepsy drugs (topiramate, phenobarbital, carbamazepine, phenytoin, and lamotrigine were evaluated) that induce the cytochrome P450 isozyme system did not significantly alter valproate bioavailability when converting between divalproex sodium delayed-release tablets and divalproex sodium extended-release tablets.

                  

                  
              Distribution

                  
                  

                  
              Protein Binding

                  The plasma protein binding of valproate is concentration dependent and the free fraction increases from approximately 10% at 40 mcg/mL to 18.5% at 130 mcg/mL. Protein binding of valproate is reduced in the elderly, in patients with chronic hepatic diseases, in patients with renal impairment, and in the presence of other drugs (e.g., aspirin). Conversely, valproate may displace certain protein bound drugs (e.g., phenytoin, carbamazepine, warfarin, and tolbutamide) [seeDrug Interactions (7)for more detailed information on the pharmacokinetic interactions of valproate with other drugs].

                  

                  
              CNS Distribution

                  Valproate concentrations in cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) approximate unbound concentrations in plasma (about 10% of total concentration).

                  

                  
              Metabolism

                  Valproate is metabolized almost entirely by the liver. In adult patients on monotherapy, 30% to 50% of an administered dose appears in urine as a glucuronide conjugate. Mitochondrialis the other major metabolic pathway, typically accounting for over 40% of the dose. Usually, less than 15% to 20% of the dose is eliminated by other oxidative mechanisms. Less than 3% of an administered dose is excreted unchanged in urine.

                  

                  
              Elimination

                  Mean plasma clearance and volume of distribution for total valproate are 0.56 L/hr/1.73 m2 and 11 L/1.73 m2, respectively. Mean plasma clearance and volume of distribution for free valproate are 4.6 L/hr/1.73 m2 and 92 L/1.73 m2. Mean terminal half-life for valproate monotherapy ranged from 9 to 16 hours following oral dosing regimens of 250 mg to 1000 mg.
The estimates cited apply primarily to patients who are not taking drugs that affect hepatic metabolizing enzyme systems. For example, patients taking enzyme-inducing antiepileptic drugs (carbamazepine, phenytoin, and phenobarbital) will clear valproate more rapidly. Because of these changes in valproate clearance, monitoring of antiepileptic concentrations should be intensified whenever concomitant antiepileptics are introduced or withdrawn.

                  

                  
              Special Populations

                  
                  

                  
              Effect of Age

                  
                  

                  
              Pediatric

                  The valproate pharmacokinetic profile following administration of divalproex sodium extended-release tablets was characterized in a multiple dose, nonfasting, open-label, multicenter study in children and adolescents. Divalproex sodium extended-release tablets once daily doses ranged from 250 mg to 1750 mg. Once daily administration of divalproex sodium extended-release tablets in pediatric patients (10 to 17 years) produced plasma VPA concentration-time profiles similar to those that have been observed in adults.

                  

                  
              Elderly

                     Dosage and Administration (2.4)
            ].

                  

                  
              Effect of Sex

                  There are no differences in the body surface area adjusted unbound clearance between males and females (4.80.17 and 4.70.07 L/hr per 1.73 m2, respectively).

                  

                  
              Effect of Race

                  The effects of race on the kinetics of valproate have not been studied.

                  

                  
              Effect of Disease

                  
                  

                  
              Liver Disease

                  Liver disease impairs the capacity to eliminate valproate. In one study, the clearance of free valproate was decreased by 50% in seven patients with cirrhosis and by 16% in four patients with acute hepatitis, compared with six healthy subjects. In that study, the half-life of valproate was increased from 12 to 18 hours. Liver disease is also associated with decreased albumin concentrations and larger unbound fractions (2 to 2.6 fold increase) of valproate. Accordingly, monitoring of total concentrations may be misleading since free concentrations may be substantially elevated in patients with hepatic disease whereas total concentrations may appear to be normal [seeBoxed Warning,Contraindications (4),Warnings and Precautions (5.1)].

                  

                  
              Renal Disease

                  
                  

                  

               
               
            
         