
               
               
               12	CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1	Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Pomalidomide, an analogue of thalidomide, is an immunomodulatory agent with antineoplastic activity. In in vitro cellular assays, pomalidomide inhibited proliferation and induced apoptosis of hematopoietic tumor cells. Additionally, pomalidomide inhibited the proliferation of lenalidomide-resistant multiple myeloma cell lines and synergized with dexamethasone in both lenalidomide-sensitive and lenalidomide-resistant cell lines to induce tumor cell apoptosis. Pomalidomide enhanced T cell- and natural killer (NK) cell-mediated immunity and inhibited production of pro-inflammatory cytokines (e.g., TNF-α and IL-6) by monocytes. Pomalidomide demonstrated anti-angiogenic activity in a mouse tumor model and in the in vitro umbilical cord model.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        The QTc prolongation potential of pomalidomide was evaluated in a single center, randomized, double-blind crossover study (N=72) using 4 mg pomalidomide, 20 mg pomalidomide, placebo, and 400 mg moxifloxacin (positive control). No significant QTc prolongation effect of pomalidomide was observed following pomalidomide doses of 4 and 20 mg.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3	Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        
                           Absorption
                           
Following administration of single oral doses of POMALYST, the maximum plasma concentration (Cmax) for pomalidomide occurs at 2 and 3 hours postdose.  The systemic exposure (AUC) of pomalidomide increases in an approximately dose proportional manner.
                        In patients with multiple myeloma who received POMALYST 4 mg daily alone or in combination with dexamethasone, pomalidomide steady-state drug exposure was characterized by AUC(Τ) of 400 ng•h/mL and Cmax of 75 ng/mL. Following multiple doses, pomalidomide has an accumulation ratio of 27% to 31%.
                        
                           Distribution
                           
Pomalidomide has a mean apparent volume of distribution (Vd/F) between 62 and 138 L at steady state. Pomalidomide is distributed in semen of healthy subjects at a concentration of approximately 67% of plasma level at 4 hours postdose (~Tmax) after 4 days of once-daily dosing at 2 mg.  Human plasma protein binding ranges from 12% to 44% and is not concentration dependent. Pomalidomide is a substrate for P-glycoprotein (P-gp).
                        
                           Metabolism
                           
Pomalidomide is primarily metabolized in the liver by CYP1A2 and CYP3A4.  In vitro, CYP1A2 and CYP3A4 were identified as the primary enzymes involved in the CYP-mediated hydroxylation of pomalidomide, with additional minor contributions from CYP2C19 and CYP2D6.
                        
                           Elimination
                           
Pomalidomide is eliminated with a median plasma half-life of approximately 9.5 hours in healthy subjects and approximately 7.5 hours in patients with multiple myeloma. Pomalidomide has a mean total body clearance (CL/F) of 7-10 L/h.
                        Following a single oral administration of [14C]-pomalidomide (2 mg) to healthy subjects, approximately 73% and 15% of the radioactive dose was eliminated in urine and feces, respectively, with approximately 2% and 8% of the radiolabeled dose eliminated unchanged as pomalidomide in urine and feces. 
                        
                           Drug Interactions
                        
                        Drugs that Inhibit Pomalidomide Metabolism
                        CYP1A2 Inhibitors: The effect of CYP1A2 inhibitors, in the absence of a co-administered CYP3A4 and P-gp inhibitor, is unknown.  However, co-administration of fluvoxamine (a strong CYP1A2 inhibitor) in the presence of ketoconazole (a strong CYP3A4 and P-gp inhibitor) to 12 healthy male subjects increased exposure (geometric mean AUCINF) to pomalidomide by 146% compared to pomalidomide administered alone [see Dosage and Administration (2.2) and Drug Interactions (7.1)].
                        Strong CYP3A4 and P-glycoprotein (P-gp) Inhibitors: Co-administration of ketoconazole (a strong CYP3A4 and P-gp inhibitor) in 16 healthy male subjects resulted in an increased exposure (geometric mean AUCINF) to pomalidomide of 19% compared to pomalidomide administered alone.
                        Drugs that Induce Pomalidomide Metabolism
                        Strong CYP1A2 Inducers: Co-administration of POMALYST with drugs that are CYP1A2 inducers has not been studied and may reduce pomalidomide exposure.
                        Strong CYP3A4 Inducers: Co-administration of carbamazepine to 16 healthy male subjects decreased exposure (geometric mean AUCINF) to pomalidomide by 21% compared to pomalidomide administered alone.
                        Dexamethasone: Co-administration of multiple doses of 4 mg POMALYST with 20 mg to 40 mg dexamethasone (a weak to moderate inducer of CYP3A4) to patients with multiple myeloma had no effect on the pharmacokinetics of pomalidomide compared with pomalidomide administered alone.
                        In Vitro Inhibition of Drug Metabolizing Enzymes and Transporters by Pomalidomide
                        Pomalidomide does not inhibit or induce CYP450 enzymes or transporters in vitro.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         