
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
                  
               
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           Cholestyramine: User with raloxifene hydrochloride tablets is not recommended. Reduces the absorption and enterohepatic cycling of raloxifene. (7.1, 12.3)
                  
                        
                           •	Warfarin: Monitor prothrombin time when starting or stopping Raloxifene hydrochloride tablets. (7.2, 12.3)
                     
                        
                           •	Highly Protein-Bound Drugs: Use with Raloxifene hydrochloride tablets with caution. Highly protein-bound drugs include diazepam, diazoxide, and lidocaine. Raloxifene hydrochloride is more than 95% bound to plasma proteins. (7.3, 12.3)
				  
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 Cholestyramine
                     
                        Concomitant administration of cholestyramine with raloxifene hydrochloride tablets is not recommended. Although not specifically studied, it is anticipated that other anion exchange resins would have a similar effect. Raloxifene hydrochloride tablets should not be co-administered with other anion exchange resins [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 Warfarin
                     
                        If raloxifene hydrochloride tablets are given concomitantly with warfarin or other warfarin derivatives, prothrombin time should be monitored more closely when starting or stopping therapy with raloxifene hydrochloride tablets [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3 Other Highly Protein-Bound Drugs
                     
                        Raloxifene hydrochloride tablets should be used with caution with certain other highly protein-bound drugs such as diazepam, diazoxide, and lidocaine. Although not examined, raloxifene hydrochloride tablets might affect the protein binding of other drugs. Raloxifene is more than 95% bound to plasma proteins [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4 Systemic Estrogens
                     
                        The safety of concomitant use of raloxifene hydrochloride tablets with systemic estrogens has not been established and its use is not recommended.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.5 Other Concomitant Medications
                     
                        Raloxifene hydrochloride tablets can be concomitantly administered with ampicillin, amoxicillin, antacids, corticosteroids, and digoxin [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                        The concomitant use of raloxifene hydrochloride tablets and lipid-lowering agents has not been studied.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         