
               
               
               7	DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           Do not use Daytrana in patients currently using or within 2 weeks of using an MAO inhibitor. (7.1)
                           Daytrana may increase blood pressure; use cautiously with vasopressors. (7.2)
                           Methylphenidate may decrease the effectiveness of drugs used to treat hypertension. (7.3)
                           Methylphenidate may inhibit metabolism of coumarin anticoagulants, anticonvulsants, and some antidepressants. (7.4)
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 MAO Inhibitors
                     
                        Daytrana should not be used in patients being treated (currently or within the preceding two weeks) with monoamine oxidase inhibitors [see Contraindications (4.5)
                           ].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 Vasopressor Agents
                     
                        Because of a possible effect on blood pressure, Daytrana should be used cautiously with pressor agents.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3 Hypotension Agents
                     
                        Methylphenidate may decrease the effectiveness of drugs used to treat hypertension.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4 Coumarin Anticoagulants, Antidepressants, and Selective Serotonin Reuptake Inhibitors
                     
                        Human pharmacologic studies have shown that methylphenidate may inhibit the metabolism of coumarin anticoagulants, anticonvulsants (e.g., phenobarbital, phenytoin, primidone), and some tricyclic drugs (e.g., imipramine, clomipramine, desipramine) and selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors.  Downward dose adjustments of these drugs may be required when given concomitantly with methylphenidate.  It may be necessary to adjust the dosage and monitor plasma drug concentrations (or, in the case of coumarin, coagulation times), when initiating or discontinuing methylphenidate.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         