
                     
                     
                     Drug Interactions
                     
                        When given concurrently the following drugs may interact with 
thiazide diuretics.
                        Alcohol, barbiturates, or narcoticsPotentiation of orthostatic hypotension may occur.
                        Antidiabetic drugs - (oral agents and insulin)Dosage adjustment of the antidiabetic drug may be required.
                        Other antihypertensive drugsAdditive effect or potentiation.
                        Cholestyramine and colestipol resinsAbsorption of hydrochlorothiazide is impaired in the presence of 
anionic exchange resins. Single doses of either cholestyramine or colestipol 
resins bind the hydrochlorothiazide and reduce its absorption from the 
gastrointestinal tract by up to 85 and 43 percent, respectively.
                        Corticosteroids, ACTHIntensified electrolyte depletion, particularly 
hypokalemia.
                        Pressor amines (e.g., norepinephrine)Possible decreased response to pressor amines but not sufficient 
to preclude their use.
                        Skeletal muscle relaxants, nondepolarizing (e.g., tubocurarine)Possible increased responsiveness to the muscle relaxant.
                        LithiumGenerally should not be given with diuretics. Diuretic agents 
reduce the renal clearance of lithium and add a high risk of lithium toxicity. 
Refer to the package insert for lithium preparations before use of such 
preparations with hydrochlorothiazide.
                        Non-steroidal Anti-inflammatory DrugsIn some patients, the administration of a non-steroidal 
anti-inflammatory agent can reduce the diuretic, natriuretic, and 
antihypertensive effects of loop, potassium-sparing and thiazide diuretics. 
Therefore, when hydrochlorothiazide and non-steroidal anti-inflammatory agents 
are used concomitantly, the patient should be observed closely to determine if 
the desired effect of the diuretic is obtained.
                     
                  
               