
               
               
               DRUG INTERACTIONS
               ACE-inhibitors:Reports suggest that NSAIDs may diminish the antihypertensiveeffect of ACE-inhibitors. This interaction should be given considerationin patients taking NSAIDs concomitantly with ACE-inhibitors.

                  

                  Diuretics

                  Clinical studies, as well as post marketing observations, haveshown that Ibuprofen tablets can reduce the natriuretic effect-offurosemide and thiazides in some patients. This response has beenattributed to inhibition of renal prostaglandin synthesis. During concomitanttherapy with NSAIDs, the patient should be observed closelyfor signs of renal failure (see PRECAUTIONS, Renal Effects), aswell as to assure diuretic efficacy.

                  

                  Lithium

                  Ibuprofen produced an elevation of plasma lithium levels and areduction in renal lithium clearance in a study of eleven normal volunteers.The mean minimum lithium concentration increased 15%and the renal clearance of lithium was decreased by 19% during thisperiod of concomitant drug administration.This effect has been attributed to inhibition of renal prostaglandinsynthesis by ibuprofen. Thus, when ibuprofen and lithium are administeredconcurrently, subjects should be observed carefully for signsof lithium toxicity. (Read circulars for lithium preparation before useof such concurrent therapy.)

                  

                  Methotrexate

                  NSAIDs have been reported to competitively inhibit methotrexateaccumulation in rabbit kidney slices. This may indicate that they couldenhance the toxicity of methotrexate. Caution should be used whenNSAIDs are administered concomitantly with methotrexate.

                  

                  Warfarin-type anticoagulants

                  Several short-term controlled studies failed to show that Ibuprofentablets significantly affected prothrombin times or a variety of otherclotting factors when administered to individuals on coumarin-typeanticoagulants. However, because bleeding has been reported whenIBU tablets and other NSAIDs have been administered to patients oncoumarin-type anticoagulants, the physician should be cautiouswhen administering IBU tablets to patients on anticoagulants. Theeffects of warfarin and NSAIDs on GI bleeding are synergistic, suchthat the users of both drugs together have a risk of serious GI bleedinghigher than users of either drug alone.

                  

                  H-2 Antagonists

                  In studies with human volunteers, co-administration of cimetidineor ranitidine with ibuprofen had no substantive effect on ibuprofenserum concentrations.

                  

               
               
            
         