
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action 
                     
                        Tigecycline is an antibacterial drug [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.4)].
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Cardiac Electrophysiology 
                              
                              No significant effect of a single intravenous dose of TYGACIL 50 mg or 200 mg on QTc interval was detected in a randomized, placebo- and active-controlled four-arm crossover thorough QTc study of 46 healthy subjects.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        The mean pharmacokinetic parameters of tigecycline after single and multiple intravenous doses based on pooled data from clinical pharmacology studies are summarized in Table 3. Intravenous infusions of tigecycline were administered over approximately 30 to 60 minutes.
                        


                     



                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Distribution
                              
                              The in vitro plasma protein binding of tigecycline ranges from approximately 71% to 89% at concentrations observed in clinical studies (0.1 to 1.0 mcg/mL). The steady-state volume of distribution of tigecycline averaged 500 to 700 L (7 to 9 L/kg), indicating tigecycline is extensively distributed beyond the plasma volume and into the tissues.
                              Following the administration of tigecycline 100 mg followed by 50 mg every 12 hours to 33 healthy volunteers, the tigecycline AUC0–12h (134 mcg∙h/mL) in alveolar cells was approximately 78-fold higher than the AUC0–12h in the serum, and the AUC0–12h (2.28 mcg∙h/mL) in epithelial lining fluid was approximately 32% higher than the AUC0–12h in serum. The AUC0–12h (1.61 mcg∙h/mL) of tigecycline in skin blister fluid was approximately 26% lower than the AUC0–12h in the serum of 10 healthy subjects.
                              In a single-dose study, tigecycline 100 mg was administered to subjects prior to undergoing elective surgery or medical procedure for tissue extraction. Concentrations at 4 hours after tigecycline administration were higher in gallbladder (38-fold, n=6), lung (3.7-fold, n=5), and colon (2.3-fold, n=6), and lower in synovial fluid (0.58-fold, n=5), and bone (0.35-fold, n=6) relative to serum. The concentration of tigecycline in these tissues after multiple doses has not been studied.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Metabolism
                              
                              Tigecycline is not extensively metabolized. In vitro studies with tigecycline using human liver microsomes, liver slices, and hepatocytes led to the formation of only trace amounts of metabolites. In healthy male volunteers receiving 14C-tigecycline, tigecycline was the primary 14C-labeled material recovered in urine and feces, but a glucuronide, an N-acetyl metabolite, and a tigecycline epimer (each at no more than 10% of the administered dose) were also present.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Elimination
                              
                              The recovery of total radioactivity in feces and urine following administration of 14C-tigecycline indicates that 59% of the dose is eliminated by biliary/fecal excretion, and 33% is excreted in urine. Approximately 22% of the total dose is excreted as unchanged tigecycline in urine. Overall, the primary route of elimination for tigecycline is biliary excretion of unchanged tigecycline and its metabolites. Glucuronidation and renal excretion of unchanged tigecycline are secondary routes.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Specific Populations
                              
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Patients with Hepatic Impairment
                                    
                                    In a study comparing 10 patients with mild hepatic impairment (Child Pugh A), 10 patients with moderate hepatic impairment (Child Pugh B), and 5 patients with severe hepatic impairment (Child Pugh C) to 23 age and weight matched healthy control subjects, the single-dose pharmacokinetic disposition of tigecycline was not altered in patients with mild hepatic impairment. However, systemic clearance of tigecycline was reduced by 25% and the half-life of tigecycline was prolonged by 23% in patients with moderate hepatic impairment (Child Pugh B). Systemic clearance of tigecycline was reduced by 55%, and the half-life of tigecycline was prolonged by 43% in patients with severe hepatic impairment (Child Pugh C). Dosage adjustment is necessary in patients with severe hepatic impairment (Child Pugh C) [see Use in Specific Populations (8.6) and Dosage and Administration (2.2)].
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Patients with Renal Impairment
                                    
                                    A single dose study compared 6 subjects with severe renal impairment (creatinine clearance <30 mL/min), 4 end stage renal disease (ESRD) patients receiving tigecycline 2 hours before hemodialysis, 4 ESRD patients receiving tigecycline 1 hour after hemodialysis, and 6 healthy control subjects. The pharmacokinetic profile of tigecycline was not significantly altered in any of the renally impaired patient groups, nor was tigecycline removed by hemodialysis. No dosage adjustment of TYGACIL is necessary in patients with renal impairment or in patients undergoing hemodialysis.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Geriatric Patients
                                    
                                    No significant differences in pharmacokinetics were observed between healthy elderly subjects (n=15, age 65–75; n=13, age >75) and younger subjects (n=18) receiving a single 100-mg dose of TYGACIL. Therefore, no dosage adjustment is necessary based on age [see Use in Specific Populations (8.5)].
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Pediatric Patients
                                    
                                    A single-dose safety, tolerability, and pharmacokinetic study of tigecycline in pediatric patients aged 8–16 years who recently recovered from infections was conducted.  The doses administered were 0.5, 1, or 2 mg/kg. The study showed that for children aged 12–16 years (n = 16) a dosage of 50 mg twice daily would likely result in exposures comparable to those observed in adults with the approved dosing regimen. Large variability observed in children aged 8 to 11 years of age (n = 8) required additional study to determine the appropriate dosage.
                                    A subsequent tigecycline dose-finding study was conducted in 8–11 year old patients with cIAI, cSSSI, or CABP. The doses of tigecycline studied were 0.75 mg/kg (n = 17), 1 mg/kg (n = 21), and 1.25 mg/kg (n=20). This study showed that for children aged 8–11 years, a 1.2 mg/kg dose would likely result in exposures comparable to those observed in adults resulting with the approved dosing regimen [see Dosage and Administration (2.3)].
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Gender
                                    
                                    In a pooled analysis of 38 women and 298 men participating in clinical pharmacology studies, there was no significant difference in the mean (±SD) tigecycline clearance between women (20.7±6.5 L/h) and men (22.8±8.7 L/h). Therefore, no dosage adjustment is necessary based on gender.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Race
                                    
                                    In a pooled analysis of 73 Asian subjects, 53 Black subjects, 15 Hispanic subjects, 190 White subjects, and 3 subjects classified as "other" participating in clinical pharmacology studies, there was no significant difference in the mean (±SD) tigecycline clearance among the Asian subjects (28.8±8.8 L/h), Black subjects (23.0±7.8 L/h), Hispanic subjects (24.3±6.5 L/h), White subjects (22.1±8.9 L/h), and "other" subjects (25.0±4.8 L/h). Therefore, no dosage adjustment is necessary based on race.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Drug Interactions
                              
                              TYGACIL (100 mg followed by 50 mg every 12 hours) and digoxin (0.5 mg followed by 0.25 mg, orally, every 24 hours) were co-administered to healthy subjects in a drug interaction study. Tigecycline slightly decreased the Cmax of digoxin by 13%, but did not affect the AUC or clearance of digoxin. This small change in Cmax did not affect the steady-state pharmacodynamic effects of digoxin as measured by changes in ECG intervals. In addition, digoxin did not affect the pharmacokinetic profile of tigecycline. Therefore, no dosage adjustment of either drug is necessary when TYGACIL is administered with digoxin.
                              Concomitant administration of TYGACIL (100 mg followed by 50 mg every 12 hours) and warfarin (25 mg single-dose) to healthy subjects resulted in a decrease in clearance of R-warfarin and S-warfarin by 40% and 23%, an increase in Cmax by 38% and 43% and an increase in AUC by 68% and 29%, respectively. Tigecycline did not significantly alter the effects of warfarin on INR. In addition, warfarin did not affect the pharmacokinetic profile of tigecycline. However, prothrombin time or other suitable anticoagulation test should be monitored if tigecycline is administered with warfarin.
                              
                                 In vitro studies in human liver microsomes indicate that tigecycline does not inhibit metabolism mediated by any of the following 6 cytochrome P450 (CYP) isoforms: 1A2, 2C8, 2C9, 2C19, 2D6, and 3A4. Therefore, TYGACIL is not expected to alter the metabolism of drugs metabolized by these enzymes. In addition, because tigecycline is not extensively metabolized, clearance of tigecycline is not expected to be affected by drugs that inhibit or induce the activity of these CYP450 isoforms.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.4 Microbiology 
                     
                     
                        
                           
                              
                                 To reduce the development of drug-resistant bacteria and maintain the effectiveness of TYGACIL and other antibacterial drugs, TYGACIL should be used only to treat or prevent infections that are proven or strongly suspected to be caused by bacteria.
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Mechanism of Action
                              Tigecycline, a glycylcycline, inhibits protein translation in bacteria by binding to the 30S ribosomal subunit and blocking entry of amino-acyl tRNA molecules into the A site of the ribosome. This prevents incorporation of amino acid residues into elongating peptide chains. Tigecycline carries a glycylamido moiety attached to the 9-position of minocycline. The substitution pattern is not present in any naturally occurring or semisynthetic tetracycline and imparts certain microbiologic properties to tigecycline. In general, tigecycline is considered bacteriostatic; however, TYGACIL has demonstrated bactericidal activity against isolates of S. pneumoniae and L. pneumophila.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Mechanism(s) of Resistance
                              To date there has been no cross-resistance observed between tigecycline and other antibacterials. Tigecycline is not affected by the two major tetracycline-resistance mechanisms, ribosomal protection and efflux. Additionally, tigecycline is not affected by resistance mechanisms such as beta-lactamases (including extended spectrum beta-lactamases), target-site modifications, macrolide efflux pumps or enzyme target changes (e.g. gyrase/topoisomerases). Tigecycline resistance in some bacteria (e.g. Acinetobacter calcoaceticus-Acinetobacter baumannii complex) is associated with multi-drug resistant (MDR) efflux pumps.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Interaction with Other Antimicrobials
                              
                                 In vitro studies have not demonstrated antagonism between tigecycline and other commonly used antibacterials.
                              Tigecycline has been shown to be active against most of the following bacteria, both in vitro and in clinical infections [see Indications and Usage (1)].
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    Facultative Gram-positive bacteria
                                    
                                       Enterococcus faecalis (vancomycin-susceptible isolates)
                                    
                                       Staphylococcus aureus (methicillin-susceptible and -resistant isolates)
                                    
                                       Streptococcus agalactiae
                                    
                                    
                                       Streptococcus anginosus grp. (includes S. anginosus, S. intermedius, and S. constellatus)
                                    
                                       Streptococcus pneumoniae (penicillin-susceptible isolates)
                                    
                                       Streptococcus pyogenes
                                    
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    Facultative Gram-negative bacteria
                                    
                                       Citrobacter freundii
                                    
                                    
                                       Enterobacter cloacae
                                    
                                    
                                       Escherichia coli
                                    
                                    
                                       Haemophilus influenzae (beta-lactamase negative isolates)
                                    
                                       Klebsiella oxytoca
                                    
                                    
                                       Klebsiella pneumoniae
                                    
                                    
                                       Legionella pneumophila
                                    
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    Anaerobic bacteria
                                    
                                       Bacteroides fragilis
                                    
                                    
                                       Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron
                                    
                                    
                                       Bacteroides uniformis
                                    
                                    
                                       Bacteroides vulgatus
                                    
                                    
                                       Clostridium perfringens
                                    
                                    
                                       Peptostreptococcus micros
                                    
                                    At least 90% of the following bacteria exhibit in vitro minimum inhibitory concentrations (MICs) that are at concentrations that are achievable using the prescribed dosing regimens. However, the clinical significance of this is unknown because the safety and effectiveness of tigecycline in treating clinical infections due to these bacteria have not been established in adequate and well-controlled clinical trials.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    Facultative Gram-positive bacteria
                                    
                                       Enterococcus avium
                                    
                                    
                                       Enterococcus casseliflavus
                                    
                                    
                                       Enterococcus faecalis (vancomycin-resistant isolates)
                                    
                                       Enterococcus faecium (vancomycin-susceptible and -resistant isolates)
                                    
                                       Enterococcus gallinarum
                                    
                                    
                                       Listeria monocytogenes
                                    
                                    
                                       Staphylococcus epidermidis (methicillin-susceptible and -resistant isolates)
                                    
                                       Staphylococcus haemolyticus
                                    
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    Facultative Gram-negative bacteria
                                    
                                       Acinetobacter baumanniiThere have been reports of the development of tigecycline resistance in Acinetobacter infections seen during the course of standard treatment. Such resistance appears to be attributable to an MDR efflux pump mechanism. While monitoring for relapse of infection is important for all infected patients, more frequent monitoring in this case is suggested. If relapse is suspected, blood and other specimens should be obtained and cultured for the presence of bacteria. All bacterial isolates should be identified and tested for susceptibility to tigecycline and other appropriate antimicrobials. 
                                       
                                    
                                    
                                       Aeromonas hydrophila
                                    
                                    
                                       Citrobacter koseri
                                    
                                    
                                       Enterobacter aerogenes
                                    
                                    
                                       Haemophilus influenzae (ampicillin-resistant)
                                    
                                       Haemophilus parainfluenzae
                                    
                                    
                                       Pasteurella multocida
                                    
                                    
                                       Serratia marcescens
                                    
                                    
                                       Stenotrophomonas maltophilia
                                    
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    Anaerobic bacteria
                                    
                                       Bacteroides distasonis
                                    
                                    
                                       Bacteroides ovatus
                                    
                                    
                                       Peptostreptococcus spp.
                                    
                                       Porphyromonas spp.
                                    
                                       Prevotella spp.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    Other bacteria
                                    
                                       Mycobacterium abscessus
                                    
                                    
                                       Mycobacterium fortuitum
                                    
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Susceptibility Test Methods
                              
                              When available, the clinical microbiology laboratory should provide cumulative results of the in vitro susceptibility test results for antimicrobial drugs used in local hospitals and practice areas to the physician as periodic reports that describe the susceptibility profile of nosocomial and community-acquired pathogens. These reports should aid the physician in selecting the most effective antimicrobial.
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Dilution Techniques
                                    
                                    Quantitative methods are used to determine antimicrobial minimum inhibitory concentrations (MICs). These MICs provide estimates of the susceptibility of bacteria to antimicrobial compounds. The MICs should be determined using a standardized procedure based on dilution methods (broth, agar, or microdilution)1,3,4 or equivalent using standardized inoculum and concentrations of tigecycline. For broth dilution tests for aerobic organisms, MICs must be determined in testing medium that is fresh (<12h old). The MIC values should be interpreted according to the criteria provided in Table 4.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Diffusion Techniques
                                    
                                    Quantitative methods that require measurement of zone diameters also provide reproducible estimates of the susceptibility of bacteria to antimicrobial compounds. The standardized procedure2,4 requires the use of standardized inoculum concentrations. This procedure uses paper disks impregnated with 15 mcg tigecycline to test the susceptibility of bacteria to tigecycline. Interpretation involves correlation of the diameter obtained in the disk test with the MIC for tigecycline. Reports from the laboratory providing results of the standard single-disk susceptibility test with a 15 mcg tigecycline disk should be interpreted according to the criteria in Table 4.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Anaerobic Techniques
                                    
                                    Anaerobic susceptibility testing with tigecycline should be done by the agar dilution method3 since quality control parameters for broth-dilution are not established.
                                    


                                    


A report of "Susceptible" indicates that the pathogen is likely to be inhibited if the antimicrobial compound reaches the concentrations usually achievable. A report of "Intermediate" indicates that the result should be considered equivocal, and, if the microorganism is not fully susceptible to alternative, clinically feasible drugs, the test should be repeated. This category implies possible clinical applicability in body sites where the drug is physiologically concentrated or in situations where high dosage of drug can be used. This category also provides a buffer zone that prevents small uncontrolled technical factors from causing major discrepancies in interpretation. A report of "Resistant" indicates that the pathogen is not likely to be inhibited if the antimicrobial compound reaches the concentrations usually achievable; other therapy should be selected.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Quality Control
                                    
                                    As with other susceptibility techniques, the use of laboratory control microorganisms is required to control the technical aspects of the laboratory standardized procedures.1,2,3,4 Standard tigecycline powder should provide the MIC values provided in Table 5. For the diffusion technique using the 15 mcg tigecycline disk the criteria provided in Table 5 should be achieved.
                                    


