
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Bexarotene selectively binds and activates retinoid X receptor subtypes (RXRα, RXRβ, RXRγ). RXRs can form heterodimers with various receptor partners such as retinoic acid receptors (RARs), vitamin D receptor, thyroid receptor, and peroxisome proliferator activator receptors (PPARs). Once activated, these receptors function as transcription factors that regulate the expression of genes that control cellular differentiation and proliferation. Bexarotene inhibits the growth in vitro of some tumor cell lines of hematopoietic and squamous cell origin. It also induces tumor regression in vivo in some animal models. The exact mechanism of action of bexarotene in the treatment of cutaneous T-cell lymphoma (CTCL) is unknown.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Pharmacokinetics
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Absorption
                              
                           
                           
                              After oral administration of Bexarotene capsules, bexarotene is absorbed with a Tmax of about two hours. Terminal half-life of bexarotene is about seven hours. Studies in patients with advanced malignancies show approximate single dose linearity within the therapeutic range and low accumulation with multiple doses. Plasma bexarotene AUC and Cmax values resulting from a 75 to 300 mg dose were 35% and 48% higher, respectively, after a fat-containing meal than after a glucose solution (see 
                                    
                                       PRECAUTIONS:Drug-Food Interaction
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                     
                                 and 
                                    DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION
                                 ). 
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Distribution
                              
                           
                           
                              Bexarotene is highly bound (> 99%) to plasma proteins. The plasma proteins to which bexarotene binds have not been elucidated, and the ability of bexarotene to displace drugs bound to plasma proteins and the ability of drugs to displace bexarotene binding have not been studied (see 
                                    
                                       PRECAUTIONS: Protein Binding
                                    
                                 ). The uptake of bexarotene by organs or tissues has not been evaluated.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Metabolism
                              
                           
                           
                              Four bexarotene metabolites have been identified in plasma: 6- and 7-hydroxy-bexarotene and 6- and 7-oxo-bexarotene. In vitro studies suggest that cytochrome P450 3A4 is the major cytochrome P450 responsible for formation of the oxidative metabolites and that the oxidative metabolites may be glucuronidated. The oxidative metabolites are active in in vitro assays of retinoid receptor activation, but the relative contribution of the parent and any metabolites to the efficacy and safety of Bexarotene capsules is unknown.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Elimination
                              
                           
                           
                              The renal elimination of bexarotene and its metabolites was examined in patients with Type 2 diabetes mellitus. Neither bexarotene nor its metabolites were excreted in urine in appreciable amounts. Bexarotene is thought to be eliminated primarily through the hepatobiliary system.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Pharmacokinetics in Special Populations
                              
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Age
                                 
                                    Based on the population pharmacokinetic analysis of data for 232 patients aged ≥ 65 years and 343 patients aged < 65 years, age has no statistically significant effect on bexarotene pharmacokinetics. 
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Body Weight and Gender
                                 
                                    Based on the population pharmacokinetics analysis of data for 614 patients with a weight range of 26 to 145 kg, the bexarotene apparent clearance increases with increasing body weight. Gender has no statistically significant effect on bexarotene pharmacokinetics. 
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Race
                                 
                                    Based on the population pharmacokinetic analysis of data for 540 Caucasian and 44 Black patients, bexarotene pharmacokinetics are similar in Blacks and Caucasians. There are insufficient data to evaluate potential differences in the pharmacokinetics of bexarotene for other races. 
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Renal Insufficiency
                                 
                                    No formal studies have been conducted with Bexarotene capsules in patients with renal insufficiency. Urinary elimination of bexarotene and its known metabolites is a minor excretory pathway (< 1% of administered dose), but because renal insufficiency can result in significant protein binding changes, pharmacokinetics may be altered in patients with renal insufficiency (see 
                                          
                                             PRECAUTIONS: Renal Insufficiency
                                          
                                       ). 
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Hepatic Insufficiency
                                 
                                    No specific studies have been conducted with Bexarotene capsules in patients with hepatic insufficiency. Because less than 1% of the dose is excreted in the urine unchanged and there is in vitro evidence of extensive hepatic contribution to bexarotene elimination, hepatic impairment would be expected to lead to greatly decreased clearance (see 
                                          
                                             WARNINGS: Hepatic insufficiency
                                          
                                       ).
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Drug-Drug Interactions
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 Effect of Other Drugs on Pharmacokinetics of Bexarotene Capsules: 
                              
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 CYP3A4 Inhibitors/Inducers
                                 
                                    
                                       In vitro studies suggested that bexarotene is metabolized by cytochrome P450 3A4 (CYP3A4); therefore ketoconazole, itraconazole, erythromycin, gemfibrozil, grapefruit juice, and other inhibitors of CYP3A4 would be expected to lead to an increase in plasma bexarotene concentrations. However, in a clinical study, concomitant administration of Bexarotene capsules with multiple doses of ketoconazole did not alter bexarotene plasma concentrations. This suggests that bexarotene elimination is not substantially dependent on CYP3A4 metabolism. The effects of concomitant administration of inducers of CYP3A4 such as rifampin, phenytoin, and phenobarbital have not been studied. 
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Gemfibrozil
                                 
                                    Concomitant administration of Bexarotene capsules and gemfibrozil resulted in substantial increases in plasma concentrations of bexarotene. Concomitant administration of gemfibrozil with Bexarotene capsules is not recommended (see 
                                          
                                             PRECAUTIONS: Drug-Drug Interactions
                                          
                                       ). 
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Paclitaxel plus Carboplatin
                                 
                                    The coadministration of paclitaxel (200 mg/m2 IV dose over 3 hours) plus carboplatin (at a dose expected to achieve an AUC of 6 mg•min/mL) with Bexarotene Capsules (400 mg/m2 orally once daily) increased the exposure to bexarotene (AUC0-24 and Cmax) by 2-fold compared to Bexarotene Capsules alone (see 
                                          
                                             PRECAUTIONS: Drug-Drug Interactions
                                          
                                       ). 
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Atorvastatin
                                 
                                    Bexarotene concentrations were not affected by concomitant atorvastatin administration. 
                                    
                                       Effect of Bexarotene Capsules on Pharmacokinetics of Other Drugs: 
                                    
                                    Bexarotene did not significantly inhibit the following enzymes in human liver microsomes: CYP1A2, CYP2A6, CYP2C9, CYP2C19, CYP2D6, CYP2E1 and CYP3A4. In vitro data suggested a potential for bexarotene to inhibit CYP2C8 and induce CYP3A4. 
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Atorvastatin
                                 
                                    The exposure (AUC) to atorvastatin (a substrate for CYP3A4) decreased by half when atorvastatin was coadministered with Bexarotene Capsules (400 mg/m2 orally once daily). 

                                    
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Tamoxifen
                                 
                                    Based on interim data, concomitant administration of Bexarotene Capsules and tamoxifen resulted in approximately a 35% decrease in plasma concentrations of tamoxifen, possibly through induction of CYP3A4 by bexarotene. 
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Paclitaxel
                                 
                                    The exposure (AUC) to paclitaxel (a substrate for CYP3A4 and CYP2C8) decreased by 19% when paclitaxel (200 mg/m2 IV dose over 3 hours) was coadministered with Bexarotene Capsules (400 mg/m2 orally once daily). 
                                    The effect of Bexarotene Capsules on atorvastatin, tamoxifen and paclitaxel suggests that Bexarotene Capsules is an inducer for the CYP3A4 enzymes, and that it may reduce plasma concentrations of other substrates metabolized by CYP3A4, including oral or other systemic hormonal contraceptives (see 
                                          
                                             CONTRAINDICATIONS: Pregnancy: Category X
                                          
                                       
                                        and 
                                       
                                          
                                             PRECAUTIONS: Drug-Drug Interactions
                                          
                                       ). 
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Carboplatin
                                 
                                    The coadministration of Bexarotene Capsules (400 mg/m2 orally once daily) had no effect on the exposure to free or total carboplatin.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Clinical Studies
                     
                        Bexarotene capsules were evaluated in 152 patients with advanced and early stage cutaneous T-cell lymphoma (CTCL) in two multicenter, open-label, historically-controlled clinical studies conducted in the U.S., Canada, Europe, and Australia. 
                        The advanced disease patients had disease refractory to at least one prior systemic therapy (median of two, range one to six prior systemic therapies) and had been treated with a median of five (range 1 to 11) prior systemic, irradiation, and/or topical therapies. Early disease patients were intolerant to, had disease that was refractory to, or had reached a response plateau of six months on, at least two prior therapies. The patients entered had been treated with a median of 3.5 (range 2 to 12) therapies (systemic, irradiation, and/or topical).
                        The two clinical studies enrolled a total of 152 patients, 102 of whom had disease refractory to at least one prior systemic therapy, 90 with advanced disease and 12 with early disease. This is the patient population for whom Bexarotene capsules are indicated. 
                        Patients were initially treated with a starting dose of 650 mg/m2/day with a subsequent reduction of starting dose to 500 mg/m2/day. Neither of these starting doses was tolerated, and the starting dose was then reduced to 300 mg/m2/day. If, however, a patient on 300 mg/m2/day of Bexarotene capsules showed no response after eight or more weeks of therapy, the dose could be increased to 400 mg/m2/day.
                        Tumor response was assessed in both studies by observation of up to five baseline-defined index lesions using a Composite Assessment of Index Lesion Disease Severity (CA). This endpoint was based on a summation of the grades, for all index lesions, of erythema, scaling, plaque elevation, hypopigmentation or hyperpigmentation, and area of involvement. Also considered in response assessment was the presence or absence of cutaneous tumors and extracutaneous disease manifestations. 
                        All tumor responses required confirmation over at least two assessments separated by at least 4 weeks. A partial response was defined as an improvement of at least 50% in the index lesions without worsening, or development of new cutaneous tumors or noncutaneous manifestations. A complete clinical response required complete disappearance of all manifestations of disease, but did not require confirmation by biopsy.
                        At the initial dose of 300 mg/m2/day, 1/62 (1.6%) of patients had a complete clinical tumor response and 19/62 (30%) of patients had a partial tumor response. The rate of relapse (25% increase in CA or worsening of other aspects of disease) in the 20 patients who had a tumor response was 6/20 (30%) over a median duration of observation of 21 weeks, and the median duration of tumor response had not been reached. Responses were seen as early as 4 weeks and new responses continued to be seen at later visits. 
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         