
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action 
                     
                        Guanfacine is a central alpha2A-adrenergic receptor agonist. Guanfacine is not a central nervous system (CNS) stimulant. The mechanism of action of guanfacine in ADHD is not known. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        Guanfacine is a selective central alpha2A-adrenergic receptor agonist in that it has a 15 to 20 times higher affinity for this receptor subtype than for the alpha2B or alpha2C subtypes.
                        Guanfacine is a known antihypertensive agent. By stimulating central alpha2A-adrenergic receptors, guanfacine reduces sympathetic nerve impulses from the vasomotor center to the heart and blood vessels. This results in a decrease in peripheral vascular resistance and a reduction in heart rate. 
                        In a thorough QT study, the administration of two dose levels of immediate-release guanfacine (4 mg and 8 mg) produced concentrations approximately 2 to 4 times the concentrations observed with the maximum recommended dose of guanfacine extended-release tablets of 0.12 mg/kg. Guanfacine was not shown to prolong the QTc interval to any clinically relevant extent. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Absorption and Distribution
                              
                           
                           
                              Guanfacine is readily absorbed and approximately 70% bound to plasma proteins independent of drug concentration. After oral administration of guanfacine extended-release tablets the time to peak plasma concentration is approximately 5 hours in children and adolescents with ADHD. 
                              Immediate-release guanfacine and guanfacine extended-release tablets have different pharmacokinetic characteristics; dose substitution on a milligram for milligram basis will result in differences in exposure. 
                              A comparison across studies suggests that the Cmax is 60% lower and AUC0-∞ 43% lower, respectively, for guanfacine extended-release tablets compared to immediate-release guanfacine. Therefore, the relative bioavailability of guanfacine extended-release tablets to immediate-release guanfacine is 58%. The mean pharmacokinetic parameters in adults following the administration of guanfacine extended-release tablets 1 mg once daily and immediate-release guanfacine 1 mg once daily are summarized in Table 15.
                              


                              



                                 Figure 1: Comparison of Pharmacokinetics: Guanfacine Extended-release Tablets vs. Immediate-release Guanfacine in Adults
                              
                              Exposure to guanfacine was higher in children (ages 6 to 12) compared to adolescents (ages 13 to 17) and adults. After oral administration of multiple doses of guanfacine extended-release tablets 4 mg, the Cmax was 10 ng/mL compared to 7 ng/mL and the AUC was 162 ng h/mL compared to 116 ng h/mL in children (ages 6 to 12) and adolescents (ages 13 to 17), respectively. These differences are probably attributable to the lower body weight of children compared to adolescents and adults. 
                              The pharmacokinetics were affected by intake of food when a single dose of guanfacine extended-release tablets 4 mg was administered with a high-fat breakfast. The mean exposure increased (Cmax ~75% and AUC ~40%) compared to dosing in a fasted state. 
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Figure 1: Comparison of Pharmacokinetics: Guanfacine Extended-release Tablets vs. Immediate-release Guanfacine in Adults
                                 
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Dose Proportionality
                              
                           
                           
                              Following administration of guanfacine extended-release tablets in single doses of 1 mg, 2 mg, 3 mg, and 4 mg to adults, Cmax and AUC0-∞ of guanfacine were proportional to dose. 
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Metabolism and Elimination:
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 n vitro studies with human liver microsomes and recombinant CYP’s demonstrated that guanfacine was primarily metabolized by CYP3A4. In pooled human hepatic microsomes, guanfacine did not inhibit the activities of the major cytochrome P450 isoenzymes (CYP1A2, CYP2C8, CYP2C9, CYP2C19, CYP2D6 or CYP3A4/5). Guanfacine is a substrate of CYP3A4/5 and exposure is affected by CYP3A4/5 inducers/inhibitors. 
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Studies in Specific Populations
                              
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Renal Impairment
                                 
                                    The impact of renal impairment on the pharmacokinetics of guanfacine in children was not assessed. In adult patients with impaired renal function, the cumulative urinary excretion of guanfacine and the renal clearance diminished as renal function decreased. In patients on hemodialysis, the dialysis clearance was about 15% of the total clearance. The low dialysis clearance suggests that the hepatic elimination (metabolism) increases as renal function decreases.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Hepatic Impairment
                                 
                                    The impact of hepatic impairment on PK of guanfacine in children was not assessed. Guanfacine in adults is cleared both by the liver and the kidney, and approximately 50% of the clearance of guanfacine is hepatic [see Hepatic Impairment (8.7)]. 
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Drug Interaction Studies
                              
                           
                           
                              Guanfacine is primarily metabolized by CYP3A4 and its plasma concentrations can be affected significantly by CYP3A4 inhibitors or inducers (Figure 2). 
                              
                                 Figure 2: Effect of Other Drugs on the Pharmacokinetics (PK) of Guanfacine Extended-release Tablets
                              
                              Guanfacine does not significantly affect exposures of methylphenidate and lisdexamfetamine when coadministered (Figure 3). 
                              
                                 Figure 3: Effect of Guanfacine Extended-release Tablets on the Pharmacokinetics (PK) of Other Drugs
                              
                                
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Figure 2: Effect of Other Drugs on the Pharmacokinetics (PK) of Guanfacine Extended-release Tablets
                                 
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 Figure 3: Effect of Guanfacine Extended-release Tablets on the Pharmacokinetics (PK) of Other Drugs
                                 
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         