
               
               
               
                  7     DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  No drug interaction studies have been conducted with Tekturna HCT and other drugs, although studies with the individual aliskiren and HCTZ components are described below.
                  
                     Aliskiren
                  
                  
                     Cyclosporine: Avoid coadministration of cyclosporine with aliskiren [see Warnings and Precautions (5.9) and Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                  
                     Itraconazole: Avoid coadministration of itraconazole with aliskiren [see Warnings and Precautions (5.7) and Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                  
                     Nonsteroidal Anti-Inflammatory Drugs (NSAIDs) including selective Cyclooxygenase-2 inhibitors (COX-2 inhibitors): In patients who are elderly, volume-depleted (including those on diuretic therapy), or with compromised renal function, coadministration of NSAIDs, including selective COX-2 inhibitors with agents that affect the RAAS, including aliskiren, may result in deterioration of renal function, including possible acute renal failure. These effects are usually reversible. Monitor renal function periodically in patients receiving aliskiren and NSAID therapy.
                  The antihypertensive effect of aliskiren may be attenuated by NSAIDs.
                  
                     Dual Blockade of the Renin-Angiotensin-Aldosterone System (RAAS): The concomitant use of aliskiren with other agents acting on the RAAS such as ACEIs or ARBs is associated with an increased risk of hypotension, hyperkalemia, and changes in renal function (including acute renal failure) compared to monotherapy. Most patients receiving the combination of two drugs that inhibit the renin-angiotensin system do not obtain any additional benefit compared to monotherapy. In general, avoid combined use of aliskiren with ACE inhibitors or ARBs, particularly in patients with CrCl less than 60 mL/min. Monitor blood pressure, renal function, and electrolytes in patients on aliskiren and other agents that affect the RAAS [see Warnings and Precautions (5.4, 5.5, 5.8)].
                  The concomitant use of aliskiren with an ARB or an ACEI in diabetic patients is contraindicated [see Contraindications (4)].
                  
                     Furosemide: Oral coadministration of aliskiren and furosemide reduced exposure to furosemide.  Monitor diuretic effects when furosemide is coadministered with aliskiren.
                  
                     Hydrochlorothiazide (HCTZ)
                  
                  When administered concurrently, the following drugs may interact with thiazide diuretics.
                  
                     Antidiabetic drugs (oral agents and insulin
                     )
                     : Dosage adjustment of the antidiabetic drug may be required.
                  
                     Lithium
                     : Diuretic agents increase the risk of lithium toxicity. Increases in serum lithium concentrations and lithium toxicity have been reported during concomitant administration of lithium with angiotensin II receptor antagonists. Monitoring of serum lithium levels is recommended during concomitant use.
                  
                     Nonsteroidal Anti-Inflammatory Drugs (NSAIDs) and COX-2 selective agents: When Tekturna HCT and NSAIDs are used concomitantly, the patient should be observed closely to determine if the desired effect of the diuretic is obtained.
                  
                     Ion-exchange Resins: Staggering the dosage of HCTZ and ion exchange resins (e.g., cholestyramine, colestipol) such that HCTZ is administered at least 4 hours before or 4 to 6 hours after the administration of resins would potentially minimize the interaction [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
               
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           Cyclosporine or Itraconazole: Avoid concomitant use. (5.9, 7, 12.3)
                           Nonsteriodal Anti-inflammatory Drugs (NSAIDs): Increased risk of renal impairment and loss of antihypertensive effect. (7)
                           Antidiabetic Drugs: Dosage adjustment of antidiabetic may be required. (7)
                           Cholestyramine and Colestipol: Reduced absorption of thiazides. (7)
                           Lithium: Increased risk of lithium toxicity when used with diuretics. (7)
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         