
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     GENERAL
                     
                        Iodixanol is a dimeric, isosmolar, nonionic, water soluble, iodinated x-ray contrast agent for intravascular administration.
                        Intravascular injection of iodixanol opacifies those vessels in the path of flow of the contrast agent, permitting radiographic visualization of the internal structures until significant dilution and elimination occurs.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     PHARMACOKINETICS
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Distribution
                           
                              In an in vitro human plasma study, iodixanol did not bind to protein. The volume of distribution was 0.26 L/kg body weight, consistent with distribution to extracellular space.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Metabolism
                           
                              Iodixanol metabolites have not been demonstrated.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Excretion
                           
                              Plasma and urine levels suggest that body clearance of iodixanol is primarily due to renal clearance. In adults, approximately 97% of the injected dose of iodixanol is excreted unchanged in urine within 24 hours, with less than 2% excreted in feces within five days post-injection. In 40 healthy, young male volunteers receiving a single intravenous administration of VISIPAQUE Injection in doses of 0.3 to 1.2 gI/kg body weight, the elimination half-life was 2.1 hr (± 0.1); and renal clearance was 110 mL/min (±14), equivalent to glomerular filtration (108 mL/min). These values were independent of the dose administered.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Special Populations
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Pediatric
                                 
                                    Forty pediatric patients ≤12 years old, with renal function that is normal for their age, received multiple intra-arterial administrations of VISIPAQUE Injection in doses of 0.32 to 3.2 gI/kg body weight. The elimination half-lives for these patients are shown in the following table and are derived from the mean terminal elimination rate constants (Kel): 0.185 hr -1 (newborn to 2 months old), 0.256 hr -1 (2 to <6 months old), 0.299 hr -1 (6 months to<1 year), 0.322 hr -1 (1 to<2 years), and 0.307 hr -1 (2 to ≤12 years old). The adult mean terminal elimination rate constant is 0.336 hr-1. The actual VISIPAQUE clearance and volume of distribution in pediatric patients were not determined. Pharmacodynamic dose adjustments to account for differences in elimination half-life in pediatric patients under 6 months of age have not been studied. (For pediatric dosing see the Dosage and Administration section; for age adjusted adverse events see the Pediatric Use section).
                                    


                                 



                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Renal Insufficiency
                                 
                                    In patients with significantly impaired renal function, the total clearance of iodixanol is reduced and the half-life in plasma phase is prolonged. In a study of 16 adult patients who were scheduled for renal transplant, the elimination of iodixanol 320 mgI/mL was studied. The patients' baseline mean creatinine levels were 6.3 mg/dL (±1.5) and mean creatinine clearances were 13.61 mL/min (±4.67). In these patients, the plasma half-life was increased to 23 hours (normal t1/2 = 2 hours). In these patients, levels of iodixanol were detected 5 days after dosing. Contrast enhancement time in kidneys increased from 6 hours to at least 24 hours. Dose adjustments in patients with renal impairment have not been studied. (See PHARMACODYNAMICS section for renal failure and blood-brain barrier interactions.)
                                    VISIPAQUE has been shown to be dialyzable. In an in vitro hemodialysis study, after 4 hours of dialysis with a cellulose membrane, approximately 36% of iodixanol was removed from the plasma. After 4 hours of dialysis with polysulfone membranes, approximately 49% of iodixanol was removed.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Drug-Drug Interactions
                                 
                                    Not known.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     PHARMACODYNAMICS
                     
                        As with other iodinated contrast agents, following administration of VISIPAQUE Injection, the degree of enhancement is directly related to the iodine content in an administered dose; peak iodine plasma levels occur immediately following rapid intravascular injection. Iodine plasma levels fall rapidly within 5 to 10 minutes. This can be accounted for by the dilution in the vascular and extravascular fluid compartments.
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Intravascular Contrast
                           
                              Contrast enhancement with iodinated contrast agents appears to be greatest immediately after bolus injections (15 seconds to 120 seconds). Thus, greatest enhancement may be detected by a series of consecutive two-to-three second scans performed within 30 to 90 seconds after injection (i.e., dynamic computed tomographic imaging).
                              Iodinated contrast agents may be visualized in the renal parenchyma within 30-60 seconds following rapid intravenous injection. Opacification of the calyces and pelves in patients with normal renal function becomes apparent within 1-3 minutes, with optimum contrast occurring within 5-15 minutes.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Contrast Enhanced Computerized Tomography (CECT)
                           
                              AS WITH OTHER IODINATED CONTRAST AGENTS, THE USE OF VISIPAQUE INJECTION CONTRAST ENHANCEMENT MAY OBSCURE SOME LESIONS WHICH WERE SEEN ON PREVIOUSLY UNENHANCED CT SCANS.
                              In CECT some performance characteristics are different in the brain and body. In CECT of the body, iodinated contrast agents diffuse rapidly from the vascular into the extravascular space. Following the administration of iodinated contrast agents, the increase in tissue density to x-rays is related to blood flow, the concentration of the contrast agent, and the extraction of the contrast agent by various interstitial tissues. Contrast enhancement is thus due to relative differences in extravascular diffusion between adjacent tissues.
                              In normal brain with an intact blood-brain barrier, contrast enhancement is generally due to the presence of iodinated contrast agent within the intravascular space. The radiographic enhancement of vascular lesions, such as arteriovenous malformations and aneurysms, depends on the iodine content of the circulating blood pool.
                              In tissues with a break in the blood-brain barrier, contrast agent accumulates within interstitial spaces of the brain. The time to maximum contrast enhancement can vary from the time that peak blood iodine levels are reached to one hour after intravenous bolus administration. This delay suggests that radiographic contrast enhancement is at least in part dependent on the accumulation of iodine-containing medium within the lesion and outside the blood pool. The mechanism by which this occurs is not clear.
                              IN PATIENTS WITH NORMAL BLOOD-BRAIN BARRIERS and RENAL FAILURE, iodinated contrast agents have been associated with blood-brain barrier DISRUPTION and ACCUMULATION OF CONTRAST IN THE BRAIN. (See PRECAUTIONS.)
                              The usefulness of contrast enhancement for the investigation of the retrobulbar space and of low grade or infiltrative glioma has not been demonstrated. Calcified lesions are less likely to enhance. The enhancement of tumors after therapy may decrease. The opacification of the inferior vermis following contrast agent administration has resulted in false-positive diagnosis. Cerebral infarctions of recent onset may be better visualized with contrast enhancement. Older infarctions may be obscured by the contrast agent.
                              For information on coagulation parameters, platelets, erythrocytes and complement system, please refer to the LABORATORY TEST FINDINGS section.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         