
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              CYP3A4 Substrates: inhibition of CYP3A4 by netupitant can result in increased plasma concentrations of the concomitant drug that can last at least 4 days and may last longer after single dosage administration of AKYNZEO; use with caution (7.1) 
                           
                              CYP3A4 Inducers (e.g., rifampin): decreased plasma concentrations of netupitant; avoid use (7.2)
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 Effects of AKYNZEO on Other Drugs
                     
                        
                           Interaction with CYP3A4 Substrates
                        
                        Netupitant, a component of AKYNZEO, is a moderate inhibitor of CYP3A4.  
                        AKYNZEO should be used with caution in patients receiving concomitant medications that are primarily metabolized through CYP3A4. The plasma concentrations of CYP3A4 substrates can increase when co-administered with AKYNZEO. The inhibitory effect on CYP3A4 can last for multiple days. 
                        
                           Dexamethasone
                        
                        A two-fold increase in the systemic exposure of dexamethasone was observed 4 days after single dose of netupitant. The duration of the effect was not studied beyond 4 days. Administer a reduced dose of dexamethasone with AKYNZEO [see Dosage and Administration (
                           2
                           ), Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)]. 
                        
                           Midazolam
                        
                        When administered with netupitant, the systemic exposure to midazolam was significantly increased. Consider the potential effects of increased plasma concentrations of midazolam or other benzodiazepines metabolized via CYP3A4 (alprazolam, triazolam) when administering these drugs with AKYNZEO.
                        
                           Interaction with chemotherapeutic agents 
                        
                        The systemic exposure of chemotherapy agents metabolized by CYP3A4 can increase when administered with AKYNZEO. Chemotherapy agents that are known to be metabolized by CYP3A4 include docetaxel, paclitaxel, etoposide, irinotecan, cyclophosphamide, ifosfamide, imatinib, vinorelbine, vinblastine, and vincristine [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)]. Caution and monitoring for chemotherapeutic related adverse reactions are advised in patients receiving chemotherapy agents metabolized primarily by CYP3A4.
                        
                           Interaction with oral contraceptives
                        
                        Clinically significant effect of AKYNZEO on the efficacy of oral contraceptives containing levonorgestrel and ethinyl estradiol is unlikely. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 Effects
of Other Drugs on AKYNZEO
                     
                        Netupitant, a component of AKYNZEO, is mainly metabolized by CYP3A4 [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                        
                           In vitro metabolism studies have suggested that CYP2D6 and to a lesser extent CYP3A4 and CYP1A2 are involved in the metabolism of palonosetron.  
                        
                           CYP3A4 Inducers
                        
                        Avoid concomitant use of AKYNZEO in patients who are chronically using a strong CYP3A4 inducer such as rifampin. A strong CYP3A inducer can decrease the efficacy of AKYNZEO by substantially reducing plasma concentrations of the netupitant component [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)]. 
                        
                           CYP3A4 Inhibitors
                        
                        Concomitant use of AKYNZEO with a strong CYP3A4 inhibitor (e.g., ketoconazole) can significantly increase the systemic exposure to the netupitant component of AKYNZEO. However, no dosage adjustment is necessary for single dose administration of AKYNZEO [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3 

Serotonergic
Drugs
                     
                        Serotonin syndrome (including altered mental status, autonomic instability, and neuromuscular symptoms) has been described following the concomitant use of 5-HT3 receptor antagonists and other serotonergic drugs, including selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) and serotonin and noradrenaline reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs) [see Warnings and Precautions (5.2)].
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         