
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Endogenous androgens, including testosterone and dihydrotestosterone (DHT) are responsible for the normal growth and development of the male sex organs and for maintenance of secondary sex characteristics. These effects include the growth and maturation of the prostate, seminal vesicles, penis, and scrotum; the development of male hair distribution, such as facial, pubic, chest, and axillary hair; laryngeal enlargement, vocal cord thickening, and alterations in body musculature and fat distribution.
                        Male hypogonadism, a clinical syndrome resulting from insufficient secretion of testosterone, has two main etiologies. Primary hypogonadism is caused by defects of the gonads, such as Klinefelter's syndrome or Leydig cell aplasia, whereas secondary hypogonadism is the failure of the hypothalamus (or pituitary) to produce sufficient gonadotropins (FSH, LH).
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        No specific pharmacodynamic studies were conducted using Vogelxo.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        In a single-dose, replicate crossover clinical study evaluating 58 hypogonadal males, the serum testosterone exposures (AUC0-24 and AUC0-t) and maximum testosterone concentration (Cmax) following a topical administration of 100 mg testosterone administration as a 2 × 5 g Vogelxo tubes (applied to the shoulders/upper arms) were bioequivalent to those following a topical administration of an approved testosterone gel product.
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Absorption
                              
                              Testosterone gel delivers physiologic amounts of testosterone, producing circulating testosterone concentrations that approximate normal levels (e.g., 300 – 1000 ng/dL) seen in healthy men.
                              The skin serves as a reservoir for the sustained release of testosterone into the systemic circulation. Approximately 10% of the testosterone applied on the skin surface is absorbed into the systemic circulation during a 24-hour period.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Single Dose
                              
                              In a single dose, replicate crossover study, when Vogelxo 100 mg was applied, absorption of testosterone into the blood continued for the entire 24 hour dosing period. The average (± SD) AUC0-24 and AUC0-t and Cmax were 6625 (±3671) ng∙hr/dL, 10425 (±5521) ng∙hr/dL, and 573 (±284) ng/dL, respectively.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Multiple Dose
                              
                              With single daily applications of testosterone gel 50 mg and 100 mg, follow-up measurements at 30 and 90 days after starting treatment have confirmed that serum testosterone and DHT concentrations are generally maintained within the normal range.
                              Figure 1 summarizes the 24-hour pharmacokinetic profile of testosterone for patients maintained on testosterone gel 50 mg or testosterone gel 100 mg for 30 days.
                              


                              


The average daily testosterone concentration produced by testosterone gel 100 mg at Day 30 was 612 (± 286) ng/dL and by testosterone gel 50 mg at Day 30 was 365 (± 187) ng/dL.
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Figure 1
                                 
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Distribution
                              
                              Circulating testosterone is primarily bound in the serum to sex hormone-binding globulin (SHBG) and albumin. Approximately 40% of testosterone in plasma is bound to SHBG, 2% remains unbound (free) and the rest is loosely bound to albumin and other proteins.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Metabolism
                              
                              Testosterone is metabolized to various 17-keto steroids through two different pathways. The major active metabolites of testosterone are estradiol and DHT. The average daily DHT concentration produced by testosterone gel 100 mg at Day 30 was 555 (± 293) pg/mL and by testosterone gel 50 mg at Day 30 was 346 (± 212) pg/mL.
                              Figure 2 summarizes the 24-hour pharmacokinetic profile of DHT for patients maintained on testosterone gel 50 mg or testosterone gel 100 mg for 30 days.
                              


                           



                           
                           
                              
                                 Figure 2
                                 
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Excretion
                              
                              There is considerable variation in the half-life of testosterone concentration as reported in the literature, ranging from 10 to 100 minutes. About 90% of a dose of testosterone given intramuscularly is excreted in the urine as glucuronic acid and sulfuric acid conjugates of testosterone and its metabolites. About 6% of a dose is excreted in the feces, mostly in the unconjugated form. Inactivation of testosterone occurs primarily in the liver.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Potential for Transfer from Male Patients to Female Partners
                              
                              The potential for dermal testosterone transfer following Vogelxo use was evaluated in a clinical study between males dosed with Vogelxo and their untreated female partners. Two (2) hours after application of 50 mg of testosterone from 5 g of Vogelxo to upper arm and shoulder of one side by the male subjects, the couples (N = 48 couples) engaged in a 15 minute session of skin-to-skin contact. Serum concentrations of testosterone were monitored in the female subjects for 24 hours after the transfer procedure. Under these study conditions, unprotected female partners had a mean testosterone AUC0-24 and Cmax that were 2.8 and 4 times greater than their mean baseline values, respectively. When a shirt covered the application site or the application site was washed, study results showed less than 10% increase in testosterone AUC0-24 and Cmax, compared to baseline in these females.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Effect of Hand Washing
                              
                              In a clinical study conducted to evaluate the effect of hand washing on the residual amount of testosterone, 36 healthy male subjects received 50 mg of testosterone from 5 g of Vogelxo on a hand and applied testosterone gel to the upper arm and shoulder of one side. Subjects washed their hands with liquid soap and warm water immediately after drug application. Then the hand was allowed to air dry or patted dry with a cloth towel. A skin swab sample was collected and analyzed for testosterone content. A mean (SD) of 0.16 (0.46) to 0.65(1.03) µg of residual testosterone (i.e., 99% reduction compared to when hands were not washed) was recovered after washing hands with liquid soap and warm water.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Effect of Showering
                              
                              The effect of showering (with mild soap) at 1, 2 and 6 hours post application of testosterone gel 100 mg was evaluated in a clinical trial in 12 men. The study demonstrated that the overall effect of washing was to decrease testosterone concentrations; however, when washing occurred two or more hours post drug application, serum testosterone concentrations remained within the normal range.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         