
               
               
               DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
            In vitro studies indicate that tramadol is unlikely to inhibit the CYP3A4-mediated metabolism of other drugs when tramadol is administered concomitantly at therapeutic doses. Tramadol does not appear to induce its own metabolism in humans, since observed maximal plasma concentrations after multiple oral doses are higher than expected based on single-dose data. Tramadol is a mild inducer of selected drug metabolism pathways measured in animals.

                  

                  
              Use With Carbamazepine

                  Patients taking carbamazepine may have a significantly reduced analgesic effect of tramadol. Because carbamazepine increases tramadol metabolism and because of the seizure risk associated with tramadol, concomitant administration of tramadol hydrochloride and acetaminophen tablets and carbamazepine is not recommended.

                  

                  
              Use With Quinidine

                  
                  

                  

                  
              Use With Inhibitors of CYP2D6

                  In vitro drug interaction studies in human liver microsomes indicate that concomitant administration with inhibitors of CYP2D6 such as fluoxetine, paroxetine, and amitriptyline could result in some inhibition of the metabolism of tramadol.

                  

                  
              Use With Cimetidine

                  Concomitant administration of tramadol hydrochloride and acetaminophen tablets and cimetidine has not been studied. Concomitant administration of tramadol and cimetidine does not result in clinically significant changes in tramadol pharmacokinetics. Therefore, no alteration of the tramadol hydrochloride and acetaminophen tablets dosage regimen is recommended.

                  

                  
              Use With MAO Inhibitors

                  Interactions with MAO Inhibitors, due to interference with detoxification mechanisms, have been reported for some centrally acting drugs (seeWARNINGS: Use With MAO Inhibitors).

                  

                  
              Use With Digoxin

                  Post-marketing surveillance of tramadol has revealed rare reports of digoxin toxicity.

                  

                  
              Use With Warfarin Like Compounds

                  Post-marketing surveillance of both tramadol and acetaminophen individual products have revealed rare alterations of warfarin effect, including elevation of prothrombin times.
While such changes have been generally of limited clinical significance for the individual products, periodic evaluation of prothrombin time should be performed when tramadol hydrochloride and acetaminophen tablets and warfarin-like compounds are administered concurrently.

                  

               
               
            
         