


Drug Interactions
Caution should be exercised when the following drugs are administered concomitantly with carbidopa and levodopa extended-release tablets.Caution should be exercised when the following drugs are administered concomitantly with carbidopa and levodopa extended-release tablets.Symptomatic postural hypotension has occurred when carbidopa-levodopa preparations were added to the treatment of patients receiving some antihypertensive drugs. Therefore, when therapy with carbidopa and levodopa extended-release tablets is started, dosage adjustment of the antihypertensive drug may be required. For patients receiving monoamine oxidase (MAO) inhibitors (Type A or B), see CONTRAINDICATIONS. Concomitant therapy with selegiline and carbidopa-levodopa may be associated with severe orthostatic hypotention not attributable to carbidopa-levodopa alone (see CONTRAINDICATIONS).CONTRAINDICATIONS. Concomitant therapy with selegiline and carbidopa-levodopa may be associated with severe orthostatic hypotention not attributable to carbidopa-levodopa alone (see There have been rare reports of adverse reactions, including hypertension and dyskinesia, resulting from the concomitant use of tricyclic antidepressants and carbidopa-levodopa preparations.Dopamine D2 receptor antagonists (e.g., phenothiazines, butyrophenones, risperidone) and isoniazid may reduce the therapeutic effects of levodopa. In addition, the beneficial effects of levodopa in Parkinson’s disease have been reported to be reversed by phenytoin and papaverine. Patients taking these drugs with carbidopa and levodopa extended-release tablets should be carefully observed for loss of therapeutic response.2 receptor antagonists (e.g., phenothiazines, butyrophenones, risperidone) and isoniazid may reduce the therapeutic effects of levodopa. In addition, the beneficial effects of levodopa in Parkinson’s disease have been reported to be reversed by phenytoin and papaverine. Patients taking these drugs with carbidopa and levodopa extended-release tablets should be carefully observed for loss of therapeutic response.Iron salts may reduce the bioavailability of levodopa and carbidopa. The clinical relevance is unclear.Although metoclopramide may increase the bioavailability of levodopa by increasing gastric emptying, metoclopramide may also adversely affect disease control by its dopamine receptor antagonistic properties.


