
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        CEFTIN is an antibacterial drug [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.4)]. 
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        
                           Absorption
                        
                        After oral administration, cefuroxime axetil is absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract and rapidly hydrolyzed by nonspecific esterases in the intestinal mucosa and blood to cefuroxime. Serum pharmacokinetic parameters for cefuroxime following administration of CEFTIN tablets to adults are shown in Table 8.
                        


                        



                           a Mean values of 12 healthy adult volunteers.
                        
                           b Drug administered immediately after a meal.
                        
                        
                           Food Effect: Absorption of the tablet is greater when taken after food (absolute bioavailability increases from 37% to 52%). Despite this difference in absorption, the clinical and bacteriologic responses of subjects were independent of food intake at the time of tablet administration in 2 trials where this was assessed.
                        All pharmacokinetic and clinical effectiveness and safety trials in pediatric subjects using the suspension formulation were conducted in the fed state. No data are available on the absorption kinetics of the suspension formulation when administered to fasted pediatric subjects.
                        
                           Lack of Bioequivalence: Oral suspension was not bioequivalent to tablets when tested in healthy adults. The tablet and oral suspension formulations are NOT substitutable on a milligram-per-milligram basis. The area under the curve for the suspension averaged 91% of that for the tablet, and the peak plasma concentration for the suspension averaged 71% of the peak plasma concentration of the tablets. Therefore, the safety and effectiveness of both the tablet and oral suspension formulations were established in separate clinical trials.
                        
                           Distribution
                        
                        Cefuroxime is distributed throughout the extracellular fluids. Approximately 50% of serum cefuroxime is bound to protein.
                        
                           Metabolism
                        
                        The axetil moiety is metabolized to acetaldehyde and acetic acid.
                        
                           Excretion
                        
                        Cefuroxime is excreted unchanged in the urine; in adults, approximately 50% of the administered dose is recovered in the urine within 12 hours. The pharmacokinetics of cefuroxime in pediatric subjects have not been studied. Until further data are available, the renal elimination of cefuroxime axetil established in adults should not be extrapolated to pediatric subjects.
                        
                           Specific Populations
                        
                        
                           Renal Impairment: In a trial of 28 adults with normal renal function or severe renal impairment (creatinine clearance <30 mL/min), the elimination half-life was prolonged in relation to severity of renal impairment. Prolongation of the dosage interval is recommended in adult patients with creatinine clearance <30 mL/min [see Dosage and Administration (2.5)].
                        
                           Pediatric Patients: Serum pharmacokinetic parameters for cefuroxime in pediatric subjects administered CEFTIN for oral suspension are shown in Table 9.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        


                        



                           a Mean age = 23 months.
                        
                           b Drug administered with milk or milk products.
                        
                           Geriatric Patients: In a trial of 20 elderly subjects (mean age = 83.9 years) having a mean creatinine clearance of 34.9 mL/min, the mean serum elimination half‑life was prolonged to 3.5 hours; however, despite the lower elimination of cefuroxime in geriatric patients, dosage adjustment based on age is not necessary [see Use in Specific Populations (8.5)].
                        
                           Drug Interactions
                        
                        Concomitant administration of probenecid with cefuroxime axetil tablets increases the cefuroxime area under the serum concentration versus time curve and maximum serum concentration by 50% and 21%, respectively.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.4 Microbiology
                     
                        
                           Mechanism of Action
                        
                        Cefuroxime axetil is a bactericidal agent that acts by inhibition of bacterial cell wall synthesis. Cefuroxime axetil has activity in the presence of some β-lactamases, both penicillinases and cephalosporinases, of gram-negative and gram-positive bacteria.
                        
                           Mechanism of Resistance
                        
                        Resistance to cefuroxime axetil is primarily through hydrolysis by β-lactamase, alteration of penicillin-binding proteins (PBPs), decreased permeability, and the presence of bacterial efflux pumps.
                        Susceptibility to cefuroxime axetil will vary with geography and time; local susceptibility data should be consulted, if available. Beta-lactamase‑negative, ampicillin-resistant (BLNAR) isolates of H. influenzae should be considered resistant to cefuroxime axetil.
                        Cefuroxime axetil has been shown to be active against most isolates of the following bacteria, both in vitro and in clinical infections [see Indications and Usage (1)]:
                        
                           
                              •Gram‑positive bacteria
                           
                               
                              Staphylococcus aureus (methicillin-susceptible isolates only)
                           
                               
                              Streptococcus pneumoniae
                           
                           
                               
                              Streptococcus pyogenes
                           
                        
                        
                           
                              •Gram‑negative bacteria
                           
                               
                              Escherichia colia
                              
                           
                           
                               
                              Klebsiella pneumoniaea
                              
                           
                           
                               
                              Haemophilus influenzae
                           
                           
                               
                              Haemophilus parainfluenzae
                           
                           
                               
                              Moraxella catarrhalis
                           
                           
                               
                              Neisseria gonorrhoeae
                           
                           
                               
                              a Most extended spectrum β-lactamase (ESBL)‑producing and carbapenemase-producing isolates are resistant to cefuroxime axetil.
                        
                        
                           
                              •Spirochetes
                           
                               
                              Borrelia burgdorferi
                           
                        
                        The following in vitro data are available, but their clinical significance is unknown. At least 90 percent of the following microorganisms exhibit an in vitro minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) less than or equal to the susceptible breakpoint for cefuroxime axetil of 1 mcg/mL. However, the efficacy of cefuroxime axetil in treating clinical infections due to these microorganisms has not been established in adequate and well-controlled clinical trials.
                        
                           
                              •Gram‑positive bacteria
                           
                               
                              Staphylococcus epidermidis (methicillin-susceptible isolates only)
                           
                               
                              Staphylococcus saprophyticus (methicillin-susceptible isolates only)
                           
                               
                              Streptococcus agalactiae
                           
                        
                        
                           
                              •Gram‑negative bacteria
                           
                               
                              Morganella morganii
                           
                           
                               
                              Proteus inconstans
                           
                           
                               
                              Proteus mirabilis
                           
                           
                               
                              Providencia rettgeri
                           
                        
                        
                           
                              •Anaerobic bacteria
                           
                               
                              Peptococcus niger
                           
                        
                        
                           Susceptibility Test Methods
                        
                        When available, the clinical microbiology laboratory should provide the results of in vitro susceptibility tests for antimicrobial drug products used in local hospitals and practice areas to the physician as periodic reports that describe the susceptibility profile of nosocomial and community-acquired pathogens. These reports should aid the physician in selecting an antibacterial drug product for treatment.
                        
                           Dilution Techniques: Quantitative methods are used to determine antimicrobial MICs. These MICs provide reproducible estimates of the susceptibility of bacteria to antimicrobial compounds. The MICs should be determined using a standardized test method (broth or agar).1,2 The MIC values should be interpreted according to criteria provided in Table 10.2,3
                        
                        
                           Diffusion Techniques: Quantitative methods that require measurement of zone diameters also provide reproducible estimates of the susceptibility of bacteria to antimicrobial compounds. The zone size provides an estimate of the susceptibility of bacteria to antimicrobial compounds. The zone size should be determined using a standardized test method.4 This procedure uses paper disks impregnated with 30 mcg cefuroxime axetil to test the susceptibility of microorganisms to cefuroxime axetil. The disk diffusion interpretive criteria are provided in Table 10.3
                        
                        


                        



                           a For Enterobacteriaceae, Haemophilus spp., and Moraxella catarrhalis, susceptibility interpretive criteria are based on a dose of 500 mg every 12 hours in patients with normal renal function.
                        
                           b 
                           Haemophilus spp. includes only isolates of H. influenzae and H. parainfluenzae.
                        Susceptibility of staphylococci to cefuroxime may be deduced from testing only penicillin and either cefoxitin or oxacillin.
                        Susceptibility of Streptococcus pyogenes may be deduced from testing penicillin.3
                        
                        A report of “Susceptible” indicates that the antimicrobial drug is likely to inhibit growth of the pathogen if the antimicrobial drug reaches the concentration usually achievable at the site of infection. A report of “Intermediate” indicates that the result should be considered equivocal, and if the microorganism is not fully susceptible to alternative, clinically feasible drugs, the test should be repeated. This category implies possible clinical applicability in body sites where the drug is physiologically concentrated or in situations where a high dosage of drug can be used. This category also provides a buffer zone that prevents small uncontrolled technical factors from causing major discrepancies in interpretation. A report of “Resistant” indicates that the antimicrobial drug is not likely to inhibit growth of the pathogen if the antimicrobial drug reaches the concentrations usually achievable at the infection site; other therapy should be selected.
                        
                           Quality Control: Standardized susceptibility test procedures require the use of laboratory controls to monitor and ensure the accuracy and precision of supplies and reagents used in the assay, and the techniques of the individual performing the test.1,2,4 The QC ranges for MIC and disk diffusion testing using the 30-mcg disk are provided in Table 11.3
                        
                        


                        


ATCC = American Type Culture Collection.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         