
                     
                     
                     Drug Interactions
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Metoprolol
                           
                              Catecholamine-depleting drugs (eg, reserpine, monoamine oxidase (MAO) inhibitors) may have an additive effect when given with beta-blocking agents. Observe patients treated with  DUTOPROL plus a catecholamine depletor for evidence of hypotension or marked bradycardia, which may produce vertigo, syncope, or postural hypotension. 
                              Drugs that inhibit CYP2D6 such as quinidine, fluoxetine, paroxetine, and propafenone are likely to increase metoprolol concentration.  In healthy subjects with CYP2D6 extensive metabolizer phenotype, coadministration of quinidine 100 mg and immediate release metoprolol 200 mg tripled the concentration of S—metoprolol and doubled the metoprolol elimination half—life.  In four patients with cardiovascular disease, coadministration of propafenone 150 mg t.i.d. with immediate—release metoprolol 50 mg t.i.d. resulted in two— to five-fold increases in the steady-state concentration of metoprolol.  These increases in plasma concentration would decrease the cardioselectivity of metoprolol.
                              
                              Digitalis glycosides, clonidine, diltiazem and verapamil  slow atrioventricular conduction and decrease heart rate.  Concomitant use with beta blockers can increase the risk of bradycardia.  
                              If clonidine and a beta blocker, such as metoprolol are coadministered, withdraw the beta-blocker several days before the gradual withdrawal of clonidine because beta-blockers may exacerbate the rebound hypertension that can follow the withdrawal of clonidine.  If replacing clonidine by beta-blocker therapy, delay the introduction of beta-blockers for several days after clonidine administration has stopped (see Warnings).
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Hydrochlorothiazide
                           
                              When administered concurrently the following drugs may interact with thiazide diuretics:
                              
                                 Alcohol, barbiturates, or narcotics – Potentiation of orthostatic hypotension may occur.
                              
                                 Antidiabetic drugs (oral agents and insulin) – Dosage adjustment of the antidiabetic drug may be required.
                              
                                 Other antihypertensive drugs – Additive effect or potentiation.
                              
                                 Cholestyramine and colestipol resins – Absorption of hydrochlorothiazide is impaired in the presence of anionic exchange resins. Single doses of either cholestyramine or colestipol resins bind the hydrochlorothiazide and reduce its absorption from the gastrointestinal tract by up to 85 and 43 percent, respectively.
                              
                                 Corticosteroids, ACTH – Intensified electrolyte depletion, particularly hypokalemia.
                              
                                 Pressor amines (eg, norepinephrine) – Possible decreased response to pressor amines but not sufficient to preclude their use.
                              
                                 Skeletal muscle relaxants, nondepolarizing (eg, tubocurarine) – Possible increased responsiveness to the muscle relaxant.
                              
                                 Lithium – Generally should not be given with diuretics. Diuretic agents reduce the renal clearance of lithium and add a high risk of lithium toxicity. Refer to the package insert for lithium preparations before use of such preparations with DUTOPROL.
                              
                                 Non-steroidal Anti-inflammatory Drugs – In some patients, the administration of a non-steroidal anti-inflammatory agent can reduce the diuretic, natriuretic, and antihypertensive effects of loop, potassium sparing and thiazide diuretics. Therefore, when DUTOPROL and non-steroidal anti- inflammatory agents are used concomitantly, the patient should be observed closely to determine if the desired effect of the diuretic is obtained.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               