
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
                  Data from a drug-drug interaction study involving 10 mg of amlodipine and 80 mg of atorvastatin in healthy subjects indicate that the pharmacokinetics of amlodipine are not altered when the drugs are co-administered. The effect of amlodipine on the pharmacokinetics of atorvastatin showed no effect on the Cmax: 91% (90% confidence interval: 80 to 103%), but the AUC of atorvastatin increased by 18% (90% confidence interval: 109 to 127%) in the presence of amlodipine, which is not clinically meaningful.
                  No drug interaction studies have been conducted with amlodipine besylate and atorvastatin calcium tablets and other drugs, although studies have been conducted in the individual amlodipine and atorvastatin components, as described below:
                  
                     Amlodipine
                  
               
               
               
                  
                     
                        


                        



                           Other Lipid-Lowering Medications: Increased risk of myopathy (7).
                           Digoxin: Monitor digoxin levels (7.21).
                           Oral Contraceptives: Norethindrone and ethinyl estradiol may be increased (7.22).
                           Rifampin: Take at same time as amlodipine besylate and atorvastatin calcium tablets (7.20).
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1   In Vitro Data
                     
                        
                            In vitro data in human plasma indicate that amlodipine has no effect on the protein binding of drugs tested (digoxin, phenytoin, warfarin, and indomethacin).
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2  Cimetidine
                     
                        Co-administration of amlodipine with cimetidine did not alter the pharmacokinetics of amlodipine.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3  Grapefruit Juice
                     
                        Co-administration of 240 mL of grapefruit juice with a single oral dose of amlodipine 10 mg in 20 healthy volunteers had no significant effect on the pharmacokinetics of amlodipine.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4   Magnesium and Aluminum Hydroxide Antacid
                     
                        Co-administration of a magnesium and aluminum hydroxide antacid with a single dose of amlodipine had no significant effect on the pharmacokinetics of amlodipine.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.5   Sildenafil
                     
                        A single 100 mg dose of sildenafil in subjects with essential hypertension had no effect on the pharmacokinetic parameters of amlodipine. When amlodipine and sildenafil were used in combination, each agent independently exerted its own blood pressure lowering effect.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.6  Atorvastatin
                     
                        Co-administration of multiple 10 mg doses of amlodipine with 80 mg of atorvastatin resulted in no significant change in the steady-state pharmacokinetic parameters of atorvastatin.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.7  Digoxin
                     
                        Co-administration of amlodipine with digoxin did not change serum digoxin levels or digoxin renal clearance in normal volunteers.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.8   Ethanol (alcohol)
                     
                        Single and multiple 10 mg doses of amlodipine had no significant effect on the pharmacokinetics of ethanol.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.9   Warfarin
                     
                        Co-administration of amlodipine with warfarin did not change the warfarin prothrombin response time.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.10  CYP3A4 Inhibitors
                     
                        Co-administration of a 180 mg daily dose of diltiazem with 5 mg amlodipine in elderly hypertensive patients resulted in a 60% increase in amlodipine systemic exposure. Erythromycin co-administration in healthy volunteers did not significantly change amlodipine systemic exposure. However, strong inhibitors of CYP3A4 (e.g., ketoconazole, itraconazole, ritonavir) may increase the plasma concentrations of amlodipine to a greater extent. Monitor for symptoms of hypotension and edema when amlodipine is co-administered with CYP3A4 inhibitors.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.11 CYP3A4 Inducers
                     
                        No information is available on the quantitative effects of CYP3A4 inducers on amlodipine. Blood pressure should be closely monitored when amlodipine is co-administered with CYP3A4 inducers.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.12 Cyclosporine
                     
                        A prospective study in renal transplant patients (N=11) showed on an average of 40% increase in trough cyclosporine levels when concomitantly treated with amlodipine.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.13 Drug/Laboratory Test Interactions
                     
                        None known.
                        
                           Atorvastatin
                        
                        The risk of myopathy during treatment with statins is increased with concurrent administration of fibric acid derivatives, lipid-modifying doses of niacin, cyclosporine, or strong CYP3A4 inhibitors (e.g., clarithromycin, HIV protease inhibitors, and itraconazole) [see Warnings and Precautions (5.1) and Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.14  Strong Inhibitors of CYP3A4
                     
                        Atorvastatin is metabolized by CYP3A4. Concomitant administration of atorvastatin with strong inhibitors of CYP3A4 can lead to increases in plasma concentrations of atorvastatin. The extent of interaction and potentiation of effects depend on the variability of effect on CYP3A4.
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Clarithromycin: Atorvastatin AUC was significantly increased with concomitant administration of atorvastatin 80 mg with clarithromycin (500 mg twice daily) compared to that of atorvastatin alone [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)]. Therefore, in patients taking clarithromycin, avoid atorvastatin doses >20 mg [see Warnings and Precautions, Skeletal Muscle (5.1) and Dosage and Administration (2)].
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Combination of Protease Inhibitors: Atorvastatin AUC was significantly increased with concomitant administration of atorvastatin with several combinations of HIV protease inhibitors, as well as with the hepatitis C protease inhibitor telaprevir,  compared to that of atorvastatin alone [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)]. Therefore, in patients taking the HIV protease inhibitor tipranavir plus ritonavir, or the hepatitis C protease inhibitor telaprevir, concomitant use of atorvastatin should be avoided. In patients taking the HIV protease inhibitor lopinavir plus ritonavir, caution should be used when prescribing atorvastatin and the lowest dose necessary should be used. In patients taking the HIV protease inhibitors saquinavir plus ritonavir, darunavir plus ritonavir, fosamprenavir, or fosamprenavir plus ritonavir, the dose of atorvastatin should not exceed 20 mg [see Warnings and Precautions (5.1) and Dosage and Administration (2)]. In patients taking the HIV protease inhibitor nelfinavir or the hepatitis C protease inhibitor boceprevir, the dose of atorvastatin should not exceed 40 mg and close clinical monitoring is recommended.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Itraconazole: Atorvastatin AUC was significantly increased with concomitant administration of atorvastatin 40 mg and itraconazole 200 mg [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)]. Therefore, in patients taking itraconazole, avoid atorvastatin doses >20 mg [see Warnings and Precautions (5.1) and Dosage and Administration (2)].
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.15  Grapefruit Juice
                     
                        Contains one or more components that inhibit CYP3A4 and can increase plasma concentrations of atorvastatin, especially with excessive grapefruit juice consumption (>1.2 liters per day).
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.16  Cyclosporine
                     
                        Atorvastatin and atorvastatin-metabolites are substrates of the OATP1B1 transporter. Inhibitors of the OATP1B1 (e.g., cyclosporine) can increase the bioavailability of atorvastatin. Atorvastatin AUC was significantly increased with concomitant administration of atorvastatin 10 mg and cyclosporine 5.2 mg/kg/day compared to that of atorvastatin alone [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)]. The co-administration of atorvastatin with cyclosporine should be avoided [see Warnings and Precautions (5.1)].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.17  Gemfibrozil
                     
                        Because of an increased risk of myopathy/rhabdomyolysis when HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors are co-administered with gemfibrozil, avoid concomitant administration of atorvastatin with gemfibrozil [see 
                              Warnings and Precautions (5.1)
                           ].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.18  Other Fibrates
                     
                        The risk of myopathy during treatment with HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors is increased with concurrent administration of other fibrates. [see 
                              Warnings and Precautions (5.1)
                           ].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.19  Niacin
                     
                        The risk of skeletal muscle effects may be enhanced when atorvastatin is used in combination with niacin; consider a reduction in atorvastatin dosage in this setting [see 
                              Warnings and Precautions (5.1)
                           ].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.20  Rifampin or other Inducers of CYP3A4
                     
                        Concomitant administration of atorvastatin with inducers of CYP3A4 (e.g., efavirenz, rifampin) can lead to variable reductions in plasma concentrations of atorvastatin. Because of the dual interaction mechanism of rifampin, simultaneous co-administration of atorvastatin with rifampin is recommended, as delayed administration of atorvastatin after administration of rifampin has been associated with a significant reduction in atorvastatin plasma concentrations.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.21  Digoxin
                     
                        When multiple doses of atorvastatin and digoxin were co-administered, steady-state plasma digoxin concentrations increased by approximately 20%. Monitor digoxin levels.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.22  Oral Contraceptives
                     
                        Co-administration of atorvastatin and an oral contraceptive increased AUC values for norethindrone and ethinyl estradiol ) [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)]. Consider these increases when selecting an oral contraceptive for a woman taking amlodipine besylate and atorvastatin calcium tablets.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.23  Warfarin
                     
                        Atorvastatin had no clinically significant effect on prothrombin time when administered to patients receiving chronic warfarin treatment.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.24  Colchicine
                     
                        Cases of myopathy, including rhabdomyolysis, have been reported with atorvastatin co-administered with colchicine.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         