
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
                  
                     [See Clinical Pharmacology (12.3).]
                  
                  
                     VYTORIN
                  
               
               
               
                  
                     
                        


                        



                           Coumarin anticoagulants: simvastatin prolongs INR. Achieve stable INR prior to starting VYTORIN. Monitor INR frequently until stable upon initiation or alteration of VYTORIN therapy. (7.8)
                           Cholestyramine: Combination decreases exposure of ezetimibe. (2.3, 7.5)
                           Other Lipid-lowering Medications: Use with fenofibrates or lipid-modifying doses (≥1 g/day) of niacin increases the risk of adverse skeletal muscle effects. Caution should be used when prescribing with VYTORIN. (5.1, 7.2, 7.4)
                           Fenofibrates: Combination increases exposure of ezetimibe. If cholelithiasis is suspected in a patient receiving ezetimibe and a fenofibrate, gallbladder studies are indicated and alternative lipid-lowering therapy should be considered. (7.2,  7.7, 
                               12.3)
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 Strong CYP3A4 Inhibitors, Cyclosporine, or Danazol
                     
                        Strong CYP3A4 inhibitors: The risk of myopathy is increased by reducing the elimination of the simvastatin component of VYTORIN. Hence when VYTORIN is used with an inhibitor of CYP3A4 (e.g., as listed below), elevated plasma levels of HMG-CoA reductase inhibitory activity increases the risk of myopathy and rhabdomyolysis, particularly with higher doses of VYTORIN. [See Warnings and Precautions (5.1) and Clinical Pharmacology (12.3).] Concomitant use of drugs labeled as having a strong inhibitory effect on CYP3A4 is contraindicated [see Contraindications (4)].  If treatment with itraconazole, ketoconazole, posaconazole, voriconazole, erythromycin, clarithromycin or telithromycin is unavoidable, therapy with VYTORIN must be suspended during the course of treatment.
                        Cyclosporine or Danazol: The risk of myopathy, including rhabdomyolysis is increased by concomitant administration of cyclosporine or danazol. Therefore, concomitant use of these drugs is contraindicated [see 
                                 Contraindications (4)
                              , Warnings and Precautions (5.1) and Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 Lipid-Lowering Drugs That Can Cause Myopathy When Given Alone
                     
                        Gemfibrozil: Contraindicated with VYTORIN [see 
                                 
                                    Contraindications (4) 
                                 and 
                              
                                 Warnings and Precautions (5.1)].
                           
                        
                        Fenofibrates (e.g., fenofibrate and fenofibric acid): Caution should be used when prescribing with VYTORIN [see Warnings and Precautions (5.1) and Drug Interactions (7.7)].
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3 Amiodarone, Dronedarone, Ranolazine, or Calcium Channel Blockers
                     
                        The risk of myopathy, including rhabdomyolysis, is increased by concomitant administration of amiodarone, dronedarone, ranolazine, or calcium channel blockers such as verapamil, diltiazem or amlodipine [see Dosage and Administration (2.3) and Warnings and Precautions (5.1) and Table 6 in Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)]. 
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4 Niacin
                     
                        Cases of myopathy/rhabdomyolysis have been observed with simvastatin coadministered with lipid-modifying doses (≥1 g/day niacin) of niacin-containing products. The benefits of the combined use of VYTORIN with niacin should be carefully weighed against the potential risks of myopathy/rhabdomyolysis. In particular, caution should be used when treating Chinese patients with VYTORIN doses exceeding 10/20 mg/day coadministered with lipid-modifying doses of niacin-containing products. Because the risk for myopathy is dose-related, Chinese patients should not receive VYTORIN 10/80 mg coadministered with lipid-modifying doses of niacin-containing products. [See Warnings and Precautions (5.1).]
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.5 Cholestyramine
                     
                        Concomitant cholestyramine administration decreased the mean AUC of total ezetimibe approximately 55%. The incremental LDL-C reduction due to adding VYTORIN to cholestyramine may be reduced by this interaction.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.6 Digoxin
                     
                        In one study, concomitant administration of digoxin with simvastatin resulted in a slight elevation in plasma digoxin concentrations. Patients taking digoxin should be monitored appropriately when VYTORIN is initiated.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.7 Fenofibrates (e.g., fenofibrate and fenofibric acid)
                     
                        The safety and effectiveness of VYTORIN administered with fibrates have not been established. Because it is known that the risk of myopathy during treatment with HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors is increased with concurrent administration of fenofibrates, VYTORIN should be administered with caution when used concomitantly with a fenofibrate [see Warnings and Precautions (5.1)].
                        
                        Fenofibrates may increase cholesterol excretion into the bile, leading to cholelithiasis. In a preclinical study in dogs, ezetimibe increased cholesterol in the gallbladder bile [see Animal Toxicology and/or Pharmacology (13.2)]. If cholelithiasis is suspected in a patient receiving VYTORIN and a fenofibrate, gallbladder studies are indicated and alternative lipid-lowering therapy should be considered [see the product labeling for fenofibrate and fenofibric acid].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.8 Coumarin Anticoagulants
                     
                        Simvastatin 20-40 mg/day modestly potentiated the effect of coumarin anticoagulants: the prothrombin time, reported as International Normalized Ratio (INR), increased from a baseline of 1.7 to 1.8 and from 2.6 to 3.4 in a normal volunteer study and in a hypercholesterolemic patient study, respectively. With other statins, clinically evident bleeding and/or increased prothrombin time has been reported in a few patients taking coumarin anticoagulants concomitantly. In such patients, prothrombin time should be determined before starting VYTORIN and frequently enough during early therapy to ensure that no significant alteration of prothrombin time occurs. Once a stable prothrombin time has been documented, prothrombin times can be monitored at the intervals usually recommended for patients on coumarin anticoagulants. If the dose of VYTORIN is changed or discontinued, the same procedure should be repeated. Simvastatin therapy has not been associated with bleeding or with changes in prothrombin time in patients not taking anticoagulants.
                        Concomitant administration of ezetimibe (10 mg once daily) had no significant effect on bioavailability of warfarin and prothrombin time in a study of twelve healthy adult males. There have been postmarketing reports of increased INR in patients who had ezetimibe added to warfarin. Most of these patients were also on other medications.
                        The effect of VYTORIN on the prothrombin time has not been studied.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.9 Colchicine
                     
                        Cases of myopathy, including rhabdomyolysis, have been reported with simvastatin coadministered with colchicine, and caution should be exercised when prescribing VYTORIN with colchicine.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         