
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY

               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action

                     
                        Sulfate salts provide sulfate anions, which are poorly absorbed. The osmotic effect of unabsorbed sulfate anions and the associated cations causes water to be retained within the gastrointestinal tract.

                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics

                     
                        The osmotic effect of the unabsorbed ions, when ingested with a large volume of water, produces a copious watery diarrhea.

                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics

                     
                        Fecal excretion was the primary route of sulfate elimination. After administration of SUPREP Bowel Prep Kit in six healthy volunteers, the time at which serum sulfate reached its highest point (Tmax) was approximately 17 hours after the first half dose or approximately 5 hours after the second dose, and then declined with a half-life of 8.5 hours.

                        The disposition of sulfate after SUPREP Bowel Prep Kit was also studied in patients (N=6) with mild-moderate hepatic impairment (Child-Pugh grades A and B) and in patients (N=6) with moderate renal impairment (creatinine clearance of 30 to 49 mL/min). The renal impairment group had the highest serum sulfate AUC and Cmax, followed by the hepatic impairment group, and then by healthy subjects. Systemic exposure of serum sulfate (AUC and Cmax) was similar between healthy subjects and hepatic impairment patients. Renal impairment resulted in 54% higher mean AUC and 44% higher mean Cmax than healthy subjects. The mean sulfate levels of all three groups returned to their respective baseline levels by Day 6 after dose initiation. Urinary excretion of sulfate over 30 hours, starting after the first half dose, was similar between hepatic patients and normal volunteers, but was approximately 16% lower in moderate renal impairment patients than in healthy volunteers.

                     
                     
                  
               
            
         