
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        BENLYSTA is a BLyS-specific inhibitor that blocks the binding of soluble BLyS, a B-cell survival factor, to its receptors on B cells. BENLYSTA does not bind B cells directly, but by binding BLyS, BENLYSTA inhibits the survival of B cells, including autoreactive B cells, and reduces the differentiation of B cells into immunoglobulin-producing plasma cells.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        In Trial 1 and Trial 2 in which B cells were measured, treatment with BENLYSTA significantly reduced circulating CD19+, CD20+, naïve, and activated B cells, plasmacytoid cells, and the SLE B-cell subset at Week 52. Reductions in naïve and the SLE B-cell subset were observed as early as Week 8 and were sustained to Week 52. Memory cells increased initially and slowly declined toward baseline levels by Week 52. The clinical relevance of these effects on B cells has not been established.
                        Treatment with BENLYSTA led to reductions in IgG and anti-dsDNA, and increases in complement (C3 and C4). These changes were observed as early as Week 8 and were sustained through Week 52. The clinical relevance of normalizing these biomarkers has not been definitively established.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        The pharmacokinetic parameters displayed in Table 2 are based on population parameter estimates which are specific to the 563 patients who received BENLYSTA 10 mg/kg in Trials 2 and 3 [see Clinical Studies (14)].
                        


                        



                           a   Intravenous infusions were administered at 2‑week intervals for the first 3 doses and at 4‑week intervals thereafter.
                        
                           Drug Interactions
                        
                        No formal drug interaction studies have been conducted with BENLYSTA. Concomitant use of mycophenolate, azathioprine, methotrexate, antimalarials, NSAIDs, aspirin, and HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors did not significantly influence belimumab pharmacokinetics. Coadministration of steroids and angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors resulted in an increase of systemic clearance of belimumab that was not clinically significant because the magnitude was well within the range of normal variability of clearance. The effect of belimumab on the pharmacokinetics of other drugs has not been evaluated.
                        
                           Special Populations
                        
                        The following information is based on the population pharmacokinetic analysis.
                        
                           Age: Age did not significantly influence belimumab pharmacokinetics in the trial population, where the majority of subjects (70%) were aged between 18 and 45 years. No pharmacokinetic data are available in pediatric patients. Limited pharmacokinetic data are available for elderly patients as only 1.4% of the subjects included in the pharmacokinetic analysis were aged 65 years or older [see Use in Specific Populations (8.5)].
                        
                           Gender: Gender did not significantly influence belimumab pharmacokinetics in the largely (94%) female trial population.
                        
                           Race: Race did not significantly influence belimumab pharmacokinetics. The racial distribution was 53% white/Caucasian, 16% Asian, 16% Alaska native/American Indian, and 14% black/African-American.
                        
                           Renal Impairment: No formal trials were conducted to examine the effects of renal impairment on the pharmacokinetics of belimumab. BENLYSTA has been studied in a limited number of patients with SLE and renal impairment (261 subjects with moderate renal impairment, creatinine clearance ≥30 and <60 mL/min; 14 subjects with severe renal impairment, creatinine clearance ≥15 and <30 mL/min). Although increases in creatinine clearance and proteinuria (>2 g/day) increased belimumab clearance, these effects were within the expected range of variability. Therefore, dosage adjustment in patients with renal impairment is not recommended.
                        
                           Hepatic Impairment: No formal trials were conducted to examine the effects of hepatic impairment on the pharmacokinetics of belimumab. Baseline ALT and AST levels did not significantly influence belimumab pharmacokinetics.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         