
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Zolpidem, the active moiety of zolpidem tartrate, is a hypnotic agent with a chemical structure unrelated to benzodiazepines, barbiturates, or other drugs with known hypnotic properties. It interacts with a GABA-BZ receptor complex and shares some of the pharmacological properties of the benzodiazepines. In contrast to the benzodiazepines which non-selectively bind to and activate all BZ receptor subtypes, zolpidem in vitro binds the BZ1 receptor preferentially with a high affinity ratio of the α1/α5 subunits. This selective binding of zolpidem on the BZ1 receptor is not absolute, but it may explain the relative absence of myorelaxant and anticonvulsant effects in animal studies as well as the preservation of deep sleep (stages 3 and 4) in human studies of zolpidem at hypnotic doses.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        Zolpimist (zolpidem tartrate) Oral Spray is bioequivalent to Ambien® tablets (Sanofi-Aventis). The pharmacokinetic profile of Zolpimist is characterized by rapid absorption from the oral mucosa and gastrointestinal tract, and a short elimination t1/2 in healthy subjects.
                        In a single-dose crossover study in 10 healthy young (18-40 years of age) male subjects administered 2.5, 5, and 10 mg Zolpimist, the results demonstrated a linear relationship to dose for mean Cmax and AUC0-∞ over the range of doses administered in the study.
                        In a single-dose crossover study in 43 healthy young (18-45 years of age) subjects administered 5 and 10 mg Zolpimist, the means for Cmax were 114 (range: 19 to 197) and 210 ng/mL (range: 77 to 401), respectively, occurring at a mean time to maximum concentration (Tmax) of approximately 0.9 hours for both. The mean zolpidem t1/2 was 2.7 (range: 1.7 to 5.0) and 3.0 hours (range: 1.7 to 8.4), for 5 and 10 mg Zolpimist, respectively. In the same study, the means for Cmax were 123 (range: 53 to 221) and 219 ng/mL (range: 101 to 446) for 5 and 10 mg Ambien® tablets, respectively, occurring at a mean Tmax of 0.9 and 1.0 hours, respectively. The mean zolpidem t1/2 was 2.8 (range: 1.5 to 6.0) and 3.1 hours (range: 1.1 to 8.6) for the 5 and 10 mg Ambien® tablets, respectively.
                        Zolpidem is converted to inactive metabolites that are eliminated primarily by renal excretion. Total protein binding for zolpidem was found to be 92.5 ± 0.1% and remained constant, independent of concentration between 40 and 790 ng/mL. Zolpidem did not accumulate in young adults following nightly dosing with 20 mg zolpidem tartrate for 2 weeks.
                        A food-effect crossover study in 14 healthy young (18-45 years of age) male subjects compared the pharmacokinetics of Zolpimist 10 mg when administered while fasting at least 8 hours or 5 minutes after eating a standard high-fat meal. Results demonstrated that with food, mean AUC0-∞ and Cmax were decreased by 27% and 58%, respectively, while mean Tmax was prolonged by 225% (from 0.8 to 2.6 hours). These results suggest that, for faster sleep onset, as with all zolpidem products, Zolpimist should not be administered with or immediately after a meal.
                        
                           
                              Special Populations:
                           
                        
                        
                           Elderly: In the elderly, the dose for zolpidem tartrate should be 5 mg [see Warnings and Precautions (
                                 5
                              ) and Dosage and Administration (
                                 2
                              )]. This recommendation is based on several studies in which the mean Cmax, t1/2, and AUC were significantly increased when compared to results in young adults administered zolpidem tartrate. In a pharmacokinetic study of 24 elderly (≥65 years of age) subjects administered 5 mg Zolpimist, the means for Cmax and AUC were 134 ng/mL and 493 ng∙hr/mL respectively, following administration of a single 5 mg oral dose of Zolpimist. Zolpidem tartrate did not accumulate in elderly subjects following nightly oral dosing of 10 mg for 1 week.
                        
                           Hepatic impairment: The pharmacokinetics of zolpidem in eight patients with chronic hepatic insufficiency were compared to results in healthy subjects. Following a single 20 mg oral zolpidem tartrate dose, mean Cmax and AUC were found to be two times (250 vs 499 ng/mL) and five times (788 vs 4,203 ng∙hr/mL) higher, respectively, in hepatically compromised patients. Tmax did not change. The mean t1/2 in cirrhotic patients of 9.9 hours (range: 4.1 to 25.8 hours) was greater than that observed in normal subjects of 2.2 hours (range: 1.6 to 2.4 hours). Dosing should be modified accordingly in patients with hepatic insufficiency [see Dosage and Administration (2.2)].
                        
                           Renal impairment: The pharmacokinetics of zolpidem were studied in 11 patients with end-stage renal failure (mean Cl Cr=6.5 ± 1.5 mL/min) undergoing hemodialysis three times a week, who were dosed with zolpidem tartrate 10 mg orally each day for 14 or 21 days. No statistically significant differences were observed for Cmax, Tmax, t1/2, and AUC between the first and last day of drug administration when baseline concentration adjustments were made. Zolpidem was not hemodialyzable. No accumulation of unchanged drug appeared after 14 or 21 days. Zolpidem pharmacokinetics were not significantly different in renally impaired patients. No dosage adjustment is necessary in patients with compromised renal function. 
                        
                           
                              Drug interactions:
                           
                        
                        
                           CNS-depressants: Co-administration of zolpidem with other CNS depressants increases the risk of CNS depression [see Warnings and Precautions (5.1)].  Zolpidem tartrate was evaluated in healthy volunteers in single-dose interaction studies for several CNS drugs.  Imipramine in combination with zolpidem produced no pharmacokinetic interaction other than a 20% decrease in peak levels of imipramine, but there was an additive effect of decreased alertness.  Similarly, chlorpromazine in combination with zolpidem produced no pharmacokinetic interaction, but there was an additive effect of decreased alertness and psychomotor performance.
                        A study involving haloperidol and zolpidem revealed no effect of haloperidol on the pharmacokinetics or pharmacodynamics of zolpidem.  The lack of a drug interaction following single-dose administration does not predict the absence of an effect following chronic administration.
                        An additive adverse effect on psychomotor performance between alcohol and oral zolpidem was demonstrated [see Warnings and Precautions (5.1)].
                        Following five consecutive nightly doses at bedtime of oral zolpidem tartrate 10 mg in the presence of sertraline 50 mg (17 consecutive daily doses, at 7:00 am, in healthy female volunteers), zolpidem Cmax was significantly higher (43%) and Tmax was significantly decreased (-53%).  Pharmacokinetics of sertraline and N-desmethylsertraline were unaffected by zolpidem.
                        A single-dose interaction study with zolpidem tartrate 10 mg and fluoxetine 20 mg at steady-state levels in male volunteers did not demonstrate any clinically significant pharmacokinetic or pharmacodynamic interactions.  When multiple doses of zolpidem and fluoxetine were given at steady state and the concentrations evaluated in healthy females, an increase in the zolpidem t1/2 (17%) was observed.  There was no evidence of an additive effect in psychomotor performance.
                        
                           Drugs that affect drug metabolism via cytochrome P450: Some compounds known to inhibit CYP3A may increase exposure to zolpidem.  The effect of inhibitors of other P450 enzymes on the pharmacokinetics of zolpidem is unknown.
                        A single-dose interaction study with zolpidem tartrate 10 mg and itraconazole 200 mg at steady state levels in male volunteers resulted in a 34% increase in AUC0-∞ of zolpidem tartrate.  There were no pharmacodynamic effects of zolpidem detected on subjective drowsiness, postural sway, or psychomotor performance.
                        A single-dose interaction study with zolpidem tartrate 10 mg and rifampin 600 mg at steady-state levels in female subjects showed significant reductions of the AUC (-73%), Cmax (-58%), and t1/2 (-36%) of zolpidem together with significant reductions in the pharmacodynamic effects of zolpidem tartrate.  Rifampin, a CYP3A4 inducer, significantly reduced the exposure to and the pharmacodynamic effects of zolpidem.
                        A single-dose interaction study with zolpidem tartrate 5 mg and ketoconazole, a potent CYP3A4 inhibitor, given as 200 mg twice daily for 2 days increased Cmax of zolpidem (30%) and the total AUC of zolpidem (70%) compared to zolpidem alone and prolonged the elimination t1/2 (30%) along with an increase in the pharmacodynamic effects of zolpidem.  Consideration should be given to using a lower dose of zolpidem when ketoconazole and zolpidem are given together.
                        
                           Other drugs with no interactions with zolpidem: A study involving cimetidine/zolpidem tartrate and ranitidine/zolpidem tartrate combinations revealed no effect of either drug on the pharmacokinetics or pharmacodynamics of zolpidem.
                        Zolpidem tartrate had no effect on digoxin pharmacokinetics and did not affect prothrombin time when given with warfarin in healthy subjects.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         