
               
               
               
                  Drug Interactions: In vitro data indicate that amlodipine besylate has no effect on the human
plasma protein binding of digoxin, phenytoin, warfarin, and indomethacin.

                     
Effect of other agents on Amlodipine besylate.
CIMETIDINE: Co-administration of amlodipine besylate with cimetidine did not alter the
pharmacokinetics of amlodipine besylate.

                     
GRAPEFRUIT JUICE: Co-administration of 240 mL of grapefruit juice with a single oral dose of
amlodipine 10 mg in 20 healthy volunteers had no significant effect on the C6H6O3S
pharmacokinetics of amlodipine.

                     
MAALOX (antacid): Co-administration of the antacid Maalox with a single dose of amlodipine
besylate had no significant effect on the pharmacokinetics of amlodipine besylate.

                     
SILDENAFIL: A single 100 mg dose of sildenafil (Viagra®) in subjects with essential hypertension
had no effect on the pharmacokinetic parameters of amlodipine besylate. When amlodipine besylate
and sildenafil were used in combination, each agent independently exerted its own blood pressure
lowering effect.

                     
Effect of Amlodipine besylate on other agents.
ATORVASTATIN: Co-administration of multiple 10 mg doses of amlodipine besylate with 80 mg of
atorvastatin resulted in no significant change in the steady state pharmacokinetic parameters of
atorvastatin.

                     
DIGOXIN: Co-administration of amlodipine besylate with digoxin did not change serum digoxin levels
or digoxin renal clearance in normal volunteers.

                     
ETHANOL (alcohol): Single and multiple 10 mg doses of amlodipine besylate had no significant
effect on the pharmacokinetics of ethanol.

                     
WARFARIN: Co-administration of amlodipine besylate with warfarin did not change the warfarin
prothrombin response time.

                     
In clinical trials, amlodipine besylate has been safely administered with thiazide diuretics, betablockers,
angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors, long-acting nitrates, sublingual nitroglycerin,
digoxin, warfarin, non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, antibiotics, and oral hypoglycemic drugs.
               
               
            
         