
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  
                     Human Pharmacology: Serum level studies with a 150 mg oral dose of clindamycin hydrochloride in 24 normal adult volunteers showed that clindamycin was rapidly absorbed after oral administration. An average peak serum level of 2.50 mcg/mL was reached in 45 minutes; serum levels averaged 1.51 mcg/mL at 3 hours and 0.70 mcg/mL at 6 hours. Absorption of an oral dose is virtually complete (90%), and the concomitant administration of food does not appreciably modify the serum concentrations; serum levels have been uniform and predictable from person to person and dose to dose. Serum level studies following multiple doses of clindamycin hydrochloride for up to 14 days show no evidence of accumulation or altered metabolism of drug.
                  Serum half-life of clindamycin is increased slightly in patients with markedly reduced renal function. Hemodialysis and peritoneal dialysis are not effective in removing clindamycin from the serum.
                  Concentrations of clindamycin in the serum increased linearly with increased dose. Serum levels exceed the MIC (minimum inhibitory concentration) for most indicated organisms for at least six hours following administration of the usually recommended doses. Clindamycin is widely distributed in body fluids and tissues (including bones). The average biological half-life is 2.4 hours. Approximately 10% of the bioactivity is excreted in the urine and 3.6% in the feces; the remainder is excreted as bioinactive metabolites.
                  Doses of up to 2 grams of clindamycin per day for 14 days have been well tolerated by healthy volunteers, except that the incidence of gastrointestinal side effects is greater with the higher doses.
                  No significant levels of clindamycin are attained in the cerebrospinal fluid, even in the presence of inflamed meninges.
                  Pharmacokinetic studies in elderly volunteers (61-79 years) and younger adults (18-39 years) indicate that age alone does not alter clindamycin pharmacokinetics (clearance, elimination half-life, volume of distribution, and area under the serum concentration-time curve) after IV administration of clindamycin phosphate. After oral administration of clindamycin hydrochloride, elimination half-life is increased to approximately 4.0 hours (range 3.4-5.1 h) in the elderly compared to 3.2 hours (range 2.1-4.2 h) in younger adults. The extent of absorption, however, is not different between age groups and no dosage alteration is necessary for the elderly with normal hepatic function and normal (age-adjusted) renal function.
                  
                     Microbiology: Clindamycin inhibits bacterial protein synthesis by binding to the 50S subunit of the ribosome. It has activity against Gram-positive aerobes and anaerobes as well as the Gram-negative anaerobes. Clindamycin is bacteriostatic. Cross-resistance between clindamycin and lincomycin is complete. Antagonism in vitro has been demonstrated between clindamycin and erythromycin.
                  Clindamycin has been shown to be active against most of the isolates of the following microorganisms, both in vitro and in clinical infections, as described in the INDICATIONS AND USAGE section.
                  
                     Gram-positive aerobes
                  
                  
                     Staphylococcus aureus (methicillin-susceptible strains)
                  
                     Streptococcus pneumoniae (penicillin-susceptible strains)
                  
                     Streptococcus pyogenes
                  
                  
                     Anaerobes
                  
                  
                     Prevotella melaninogenica
                  
                  
                     Fusobacterium necrophorum
                  
                  
                     Fusobacterium nucleatum
                  
                  
                     Peptostreptococcus anaerobius
                  
                  
                     Clostridium perfringens
                  
                  The following in vitro data are available, but their clinical significance is unknown. At least 90% of the following microorganisms exhibit an in vitro minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) less than or equal to the susceptible breakpoint for clindamycin. However, the safety and effectiveness of clindamycin in treating clinical infections due to these microorganisms have not been established in adequate and well-controlled clinical trials.
                  
                     Gram-positive aerobes
                  
                  
                     Staphylococcus epidermidis (methicillin-susceptible strains)
                  
                     Streptococcus agalactiae
                  
                  
                     Streptococcus anginosus
                  
                  
                     Streptococcus oralis
                  
                  
                     Streptococcus mitis
                  
                  
                     Anaerobes
                  
                  
                     Prevotella intermedia
                  
                  
                     Prevotella bivia
                  
                  
                     Propionibacterium acnes
                  
                  
                     Micromonas (“Peptostreptococcus”) micros
                  
                  
                     Finegoldia (“Peptostreptococcus”) magna
                  
                  
                     Actinomyces israelii
                  
                  
                     Clostridium clostridioforme
                  
                  
                     Eubacterium lentum
                  
               
               
            
         