
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY:
               
                  Single 30-minute intravenous infusions of 500 mg, 1 g and 2 g doses of aztreonam for injection in healthy subjects produced aztreonam peak serum levels of 54 mcg/mL, 90 mcg/mL and 204 mcg/mL, respectively, immediately after administration; at 8 hours, serum levels were 1 mcg/mL, 3 mcg/mL and 6 mcg/mL, respectively (Figure 1).  Single 3-minute intravenous injections of the same doses resulted in serum levels of 58 mcg/mL, 125 mcg/mL and 242 mcg/mL at 5 minutes following completion of injection.
                  

                  Serum concentrations of aztreonam in healthy subjects following completion of single intramuscular injections of 500 mg and 1 g doses are depicted in Figure 1; maximum serum concentrations occur at about 1 hour.  After identical single intravenous or intramuscular doses of aztreonam for injection, the serum concentrations of aztreonam are comparable at 1 hour (1.5 hours from start of intravenous infusion) with similar slopes of serum concentrations thereafter.
                  

                  
                     
                     
 
                  

                  The serum levels of aztreonam following single 500 mg or 1 g (intramuscular or intravenous) or 2 g (intravenous) doses of aztreonam for injection exceed the MIC90 for 
                        Neisseria
                      sp., 
                        Haemophilus influenzae
                      and most genera of the Enterobacteriaceae for 8 hours (for 
                        Enterobacter
                      sp., the 8-hour serum levels exceed the MIC for 80% of strains).  For 
                        Pseudomonas aeruginosa
                     , a single 2 g intravenous dose produces serum levels that exceed the MIC90 for approximately 4 to 6 hours.  All of the above doses of aztreonam for injection result in average urine levels of aztreonam that exceed the MIC90 for the same pathogens for up to 12 hours.
                  

                  When aztreonam pharmacokinetics were assessed for adult and pediatric patients, they were found to be comparable (down to 9 months old).  The serum half-life of aztreonam averaged 1.7 hours (1.5 to 2) in subjects with normal renal function, independent of the dose and route of administration.  In healthy subjects, based on a 70 kg person, the serum clearance was 91 mL/min and renal clearance was 56 mL/min; the apparent mean volume of distribution at steady-state averaged 12.6 liters, approximately equivalent to extracellular fluid volume.
                  

                  

                  

                  In elderly patients, the mean serum half-life of aztreonam increased and the renal clearance decreased, consistent with the age-related decrease in creatinine clearance.1-4  The dosage of aztreonam for injection should be adjusted accordingly (see DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION, Renal Impairment in Adult Patients).

                     
In patients with impaired renal function, the serum half-life of aztreonam is prolonged (see DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION, Renal Impairment in Adult Patients).  The serum half-life of aztreonam is only slightly prolonged in patients with hepatic impairment since the liver is a minor pathway of excretion.
                  

                  Average urine concentrations of aztreonam were approximately 1,100 mcg/mL, 3,500 mcg/mL and 6,600 mcg/mL within the first 2 hours following single 500 mg, 1 g and 2 g intravenous doses of aztreonam for injection (30-minute infusions), respectively.  The range of average concentrations for aztreonam in the 8 to 12 hour urine specimens in these studies was 25 to 120 mcg/mL.  After intramuscular injection of single 500 mg and 1 g doses of aztreonam for injection, urinary levels were approximately 500 mcg/mL and 1,200 mcg/mL, respectively, within the first 2 hours, declining to 180 mcg/mL and 470 mcg/mL in the 6 to 8 hour specimens.  In healthy subjects, aztreonam is excreted in the urine about equally by active tubular secretion and glomerular filtration.  Approximately 60%  to 70% of an intravenous or intramuscular dose was recovered in the urine by 8 hours.  Urinary excretion of a single parenteral dose was essentially complete by 12 hours after injection.  About 12% of a single intravenous radiolabeled dose was recovered in the feces.  Unchanged aztreonam and the inactive beta-lactam ring hydrolysis product of aztreonam were present in feces and urine. 
                  

                  Intravenous or intramuscular administration of a single 500 mg or 1 g dose of aztreonam for injection every 8 hours for 7 days to healthy subjects produced no apparent accumulation of aztreonam or modification of its disposition characteristics; serum protein binding averaged 56% and was independent of dose.  An average of about 6% of a 1 g intramuscular dose was excreted as a microbiologically inactive open beta-lactam ring hydrolysis product (serum half-life approximately 26 hours) of aztreonam in the 0 to 8 hour urine collection on the last day of multiple dosing.
                  

                  Renal function was monitored in healthy subjects given aztreonam; standard tests (serum creatinine, creatinine clearance, BUN, urinalysis and total urinary protein excretion) as well as special tests (excretion of N-acetyl-ß-glucosaminidase, alanine aminopeptidase and ß2- microglobulin) were used.  No abnormal results were obtained. 
                  

                  Aztreonam achieves measurable concentrations in the following body fluids and tissues:
                  

                  

                  

                  
                                                                                     Table 1: Extravascular Concentrations of Aztreonam After a Single Parenteral Dosea 
                      
                  

                  

                  


                  



                     a Tissue penetration is regarded as essential to therapeutic efficacy, but specific tissue levels have not been correlated with specific therapeutic effects.
                  

                  The concentration of aztreonam in saliva at 30 minutes after a single 1 g intravenous dose (9 patients) was 0.2 mcg/mL; in human milk at 2 hours after a single 1 g intravenous dose (6 patients), 0.2 mcg/mL, and at 6 hours after a single 1 g intramuscular dose (6 patients), 0.3 mcg/mL; in amniotic fluid at 6 to 8 hours after a single 1 g intravenous dose (5 patients), 2 mcg/mL.  The concentration of aztreonam in peritoneal fluid obtained 1 to 6 hours after multiple 2 g intravenous doses ranged between 12 mcg/mL and 90 mcg/mL in 7 of 8 patients studied.
                  

                  Aztreonam given intravenously rapidly reaches therapeutic concentrations in peritoneal dialysis fluid; conversely, aztreonam given intraperitoneally in dialysis fluid rapidly produces therapeutic serum levels. 
                  

                  Concomitant administration of probenecid or furosemide and aztreonam causes clinically insignificant increases in the serum levels of aztreonam.  Single-dose intravenous pharmacokinetic studies have not shown any significant interaction between aztreonam and concomitantly administered gentamicin, nafcillin sodium, cephradine, clindamycin or metronidazole.  No reports of disulfiram-like reactions with alcohol ingestion have been noted; this is not unexpected since aztreonam does not contain a methyl-tetrazole side chain.
                  

               
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Microbiology
                     
                        
                           Mechanism of Action
                        
                        Aztreonam is a bactericidal agent that acts by inhibition of bacterial cell wall synthesis.  Aztreonam has activity in the presence of some beta-lactamases, both penicillinases and cephalosporinases, of Gram-negative and Gram-positive bacteria. 
                        

                        
                           Mechanism of Resistance
                        
                        Resistance to aztreonam is primarily through hydrolysis by beta-lactamase, alteration of penicillin-binding proteins (PBPs), and decreased permeability. 
                        

                        
                           Interaction with Other Antimicrobials
                        
                        Aztreonam and aminoglycosides have been shown to be synergistic 
                              in vitro
                            against most strains of 
                              P. aeruginosa
                           , many strains of Enterobacteriaceae, and other Gram-negative aerobic bacilli. 
                        

                        Aztreonam has been shown to be active against most strains of the following microorganisms, both 
                              in vitro 
                           and in clinical infections as described in the 
                              INDICATIONS AND USAGE
                           
                           5 section.
                        

                        
                           Aerobic Gram-negative microorganisms:
                        
                        
                           
                              Citrobacter 
                           species
                        
                           
                              Enterobacter 
                           species
                        
                           
                              Escherichia coli
                           
                        
                        
                           
                              Haemophilus influenzae 
                           (including ampicillin-resistant and other penicillinase-producing strains)
                        
                           
                              Klebsiella oxytoca
                           
                        
                        
                           
                              Klebsiella pneumoniae
                           
                        
                        
                           
                              Proteus mirabilis
                           
                        
                        
                           
                              Pseudomonas aeruginosa
                           
                        
                        
                           
                              Serratia 
                           species 
                        

                        The following 
                              in vitro 
                           data are available, but their clinical significance is unknown.  At least 90% of the following microorganisms exhibit an 
                              in vitro
                            minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) less than or equal to the susceptible breakpoint for aztreonam.  However, the efficacy of aztreonam in treating clinical infections due to these microorganisms has not been established in adequate and well-controlled clinical trials.
                        

                        
                           Aerobic Gram-negative microorganisms:
                        
                        
                           
                              Aeromonas hydrophila
                           
                        
                        
                           
                              Morganella morganii
                           
                        
                        
                           
                              Neisseria gonorrhoeae 
                           (including penicillinase-producing strains)
                        
                           
                              Pasteurella multocida
                           
                        
                        
                           
                              Proteus vulgaris
                           
                        
                        
                           
                              Providencia stuartii
                           
                        
                        
                           
                              Providencia rettgeri
                           
                        
                        
                           
                              Yersinia enterocolitica
                            
                        

                        Aztreonam and aminoglycosides have been shown to be synergistic 
                              in vitro 
                           against most strains of 
                              P. aeruginosa
                           , many strains of Enterobacteriaceae, and other Gram-negative aerobic bacilli.
                        

                        Alterations of the anaerobic intestinal flora by broad-spectrum antibiotics may decrease colonization resistance, thus permitting overgrowth of potential pathogens, e.g., 
                              Candida 
                           and 
                              Clostridium 
                           species.  Aztreonam has little effect on the anaerobic intestinal microflora in 
                              in vitro 
                           studies.  
                              Clostridium difficile 
                           and its cytotoxin were not found in animal models following administration of aztreonam (see ADVERSE REACTIONS ,
                           
                              
                                 
                                    Gastrointestinal
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              ).
                           
                        
                        

                        
                           
                              
                                 Susceptibility Test Methods
                              
                           
                        
                        When available, the clinical microbiology laboratory should provide the results of 
                              in vitro
                            susceptibility test results for antimicrobial drug products used in resident hospitals to the physician as periodic reports that describe the susceptibility profile of nosocomial and community-acquired pathogens.  These reports should aid the physician in selecting an antibacterial drug product for treatment.
                        

                        
                           Dilution Techniques
                        
                        Quantitative methods are used to determine antimicrobial MICs.1-3  These MICs provide estimates of the susceptibility of bacteria to antimicrobial compounds.  The MICs should be determined using a standardized procedure.  Standardized procedures are based on a dilution method6 (broth or agar) or equivalent with standardized inoculum concentrations and standardized concentrations of aztreonam powder.  The MIC values should be interpreted according to the criteria in Table 2.
                        

                        
                           Diffusion Techniques
                        
                        Quantitative methods that require measurement of zone diameters also provide reproducible estimates of the susceptibility of bacteria to antimicrobial compounds.  The zone size provides an estimate of the susceptibility of bacteria to antimicrobial compounds.  The zone size should be determined using a standardized test method.6,7  This procedure uses paper disks impregnated with 30 mcg aztreonam to test the susceptibility of microorganisms to aztreonam.  The disk diffusion interpretive criteria are provided in Table 2. 
                        

                        
                           
                                                                                                      Table 2:  Susceptibility Test Interpretive Criteria for Aztreonam
                        
                        


                        



                           a The current absence of data on resistant isolates precludes defining any category other than “Susceptible”.  If isolates yield MIC results other than susceptible, they should be submitted to a reference laboratory for additional testing.
                        

                        

                        
                           Quality Control
                        
                        Standardized susceptibility test procedures require the use of laboratory controls to monitor and ensure the accuracy and precision of supplies and reagents used in the assay, and the techniques of the individual performing the test.6-8  Standard aztreonam powder should provide the following range of MIC values noted in Table 3.  For the diffusion technique using the 30 mcg disk, the criteria in Table 3 should be achieved.  
                        

                        
                           
                                                                                                     Table 3:  Acceptable Quality Control Ranges for Aztreonam 
                        


                        




                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     figure1
                     
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         