
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        The pharmacokinetic properties of nelfinavir were evaluated in healthy volunteers and HIV-infected patients; no substantial differences were observed between the two groups.
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Absorption
                           
                              Pharmacokinetic parameters of nelfinavir (area under the plasma concentration-time curve during a 24-hour period at steady-state [AUC24], peak plasma concentrations [Cmax], morning and evening trough concentrations [Ctrough]) from a pharmacokinetic study in HIV-positive patients after multiple dosing with 1250 mg (five 250 mg tablets) twice daily (BID) for 28 days (10 patients) and 750 mg (three 250 mg tablets) three times daily (TID) for 28 days (11 patients) are summarized in Table 1. 
                              


                              


The difference between morning and afternoon or evening trough concentrations for the TID and BID regimens was also observed in healthy volunteers who were dosed at precisely 8- or 12-hour intervals.
                              In healthy volunteers receiving a single 1250 mg dose, the 625 mg tablet was not bioequivalent to the 250 mg tablet formulation. Under fasted conditions (n=27), the AUC and Cmax were 34% and 24% higher, respectively, for the 625 mg tablets. In a relative bioavailability assessment under fed conditions (n=28), the AUC was 24% higher for the 625 mg tablet; the Cmax was comparable for both formulations. In HIV-1 infected subjects (N = 21) receiving multiple doses of 1250 mg BID under fed conditions, the 625 mg formulation was bioequivalent to the 250 mg formulation based on similarity in steady state exposure (Cmax and AUC).
                              Table 2 shows the summary of the steady state pharmacokinetic parameters (mean ± SD) of nelfinavir after multiple dose administration of 1250 mg BID (2 × 625 tablets) to HIV-infected patients (N = 21) for 14 days.
                              


                              


In healthy volunteers receiving a single 750 mg dose under fed conditions, nelfinavir concentrations were similar following administration of the 250 mg tablet and oral powder.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Effect of Food on Oral Absorption
                           
                              Food increases nelfinavir exposure and decreases nelfinavir pharmacokinetic variability relative to the fasted state. In one study, healthy volunteers received a single dose of 1250 mg of VIRACEPT 250 mg tablets (5 tablets) under fasted or fed conditions (three different meals). In a second study, healthy volunteers received single doses of 1250 mg VIRACEPT (5 × 250 mg tablets) under fasted or fed conditions (two different fat content meals). The results from the two studies are summarized in Table 3 and Table 4, respectively.
                              



                              


Nelfinavir exposure can be increased by increasing the calorie or fat content in meals taken with VIRACEPT.
                              A food effect study has not been conducted with the 625 mg tablet. However, based on a cross-study comparison (n=26 fed vs. n=26 fasted) following single dose administration of nelfinavir 1250 mg, the magnitude of the food effect for the 625 mg nelfinavir tablet appears comparable to that of the 250 mg tablets. VIRACEPT should be taken with a meal. 
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Distribution
                           
                              The apparent volume of distribution following oral administration of nelfinavir was 2–7 L/kg. Nelfinavir in serum is extensively protein-bound (>98%).
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Metabolism
                           
                              Unchanged nelfinavir comprised 82–86% of the total plasma radioactivity after a single oral 750 mg dose of 14C-nelfinavir. In vitro, multiple cytochrome P-450 enzymes including CYP3A and CYP2C19 are responsible for metabolism of nelfinavir. One major and several minor oxidative metabolites were found in plasma. The major oxidative metabolite has in vitro antiviral activity comparable to the parent drug.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Elimination
                           
                              The terminal half-life in plasma was typically 3.5 to 5 hours. The majority (87%) of an oral 750 mg dose containing 14C-nelfinavir was recovered in the feces; fecal radioactivity consisted of numerous oxidative metabolites (78%) and unchanged nelfinavir (22%). Only 1–2% of the dose was recovered in urine, of which unchanged nelfinavir was the major component.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Special Populations
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Hepatic Insufficiency
                                 
                                    The steady-state pharmacokinetics of nelfinavir (1250 mg BID for 2 weeks) was studied in HIV-seronegative subjects with mild (Child-Pugh Class A; n=6) or moderate (Child-Pugh Class B; n=6) hepatic impairment. When compared with subjects with normal hepatic function, the Cmax and AUC of nelfinavir were not significantly different in subjects with mild hepatic impairment but were increased by 22% and 62%, respectively, in subjects  with moderate hepatic impairment. The steady-state pharmacokinetics of nelfinavir has not been studied in HIV-seronegative subjects with severe hepatic impairment.
                                    The steady-state pharmacokinetics of nelfinavir has not been studied in HIV-positive patients with any degree of hepatic impairment.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Renal Insufficiency
                                 
                                    The pharmacokinetics of nelfinavir have not been studied in patients with renal insufficiency; however, less than 2% of nelfinavir is excreted in the urine, so the impact of renal impairment on nelfinavir elimination should be minimal.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Gender and Race
                                 
                                    No significant pharmacokinetic differences have been detected between males and females. Pharmacokinetic differences due to race have not been evaluated.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Pediatrics
                                 
                                    The pharmacokinetics of nelfinavir have been investigated in 5 studies in pediatric patients from birth to 13 years of age either receiving VIRACEPT three times or twice daily. The dosing regimens and associated AUC24 values are summarized in Table 5.
                                    


                                    


Pharmacokinetic data are also available for 86 patients (age 2 to 12 years) who received VIRACEPT 25–35 mg/kg TID in Study AG1343-556. The pharmacokinetic data from Study AG1343-556 were more variable than data from other studies conducted in the pediatric population; the 95% confidence interval for AUC24 was 9 to 121 mg.hr/L.
                                    Overall, use of VIRACEPT in the pediatric population is associated with highly variable drug exposure. The high variability may be due to inconsistent food intake in pediatric patients. (See PRECAUTIONS: Pediatric Use, DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION.)
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Geriatric Patients
                                 
                                    The pharmacokinetics of nelfinavir have not been studied in patients over 65 years of age.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Drug Interactions
                     
                        (also see CONTRAINDICATIONS, WARNINGS, PRECAUTIONS: Drug Interactions) 
                        CYP3A and CYP2C19 appear to be the predominant enzymes that metabolize nelfinavir in humans. The potential ability of nelfinavir to inhibit the major human cytochrome P450 enzymes (CYP3A, CYP2C19, CYP2D6, CYP2C9, CYP1A2 and CYP2E1) has been investigated in vitro. Only CYP3A was inhibited at concentrations in the therapeutic range. Specific drug interaction studies were performed with nelfinavir and a number of drugs. Table 6 summarizes the effects of nelfinavir on the geometric mean AUC, Cmax and Cmin of coadministered drugs. Table 7 shows the effects of coadministered drugs on the geometric mean AUC, Cmax and Cmin of nelfinavir.
                        



                        


For information regarding clinical recommendations see CONTRAINDICATIONS, WARNINGS, PRECAUTIONS: Drug Interactions.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         