
               
               
               12	CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        The mechanism of action of mesalamine is not fully understood, but appears to have a topical anti-inflammatory effect on the colonic epithelial cells. Mucosal production of arachidonic acid metabolites, both through the cyclooxygenase and lipoxygenase pathways, is increased in patients with chronic inflammatory bowel disease, and it is possible that mesalamine diminishes inflammation by blocking cyclooxygenase and inhibiting prostaglandin production in the colon.
                        Mesalamine has the potential to inhibit the activation of nuclear factor kappa B (NFκB) and consequently the production of key pro-inflammatory cytokines. It has been proposed that reduced expression of PPARγ nuclear receptors (γ-form of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptors) may be implicated in ulcerative colitis. There is evidence that mesalamine produces pharmacodynamic effects through direct activation of PPARγ receptors in the colonic/rectal epithelium.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2	Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        The pharmacodynamic actions of mesalamine occur in the colonic/rectal mucosae local to the delivery of drug from LIALDA into the lumen.  There is information suggesting that severity of colonic inflammation in ulcerative colitis patients treated with mesalamine is inversely correlated with mucosal concentrations of mesalamine.  Plasma concentrations representing systemically absorbed mesalamine are not believed to contribute extensively to efficacy.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        
                           Absorption
                        
                        The total absorption of mesalamine from LIALDA 2.4 g or 4.8 g given once daily for 14 days to healthy volunteers was found to be approximately 21-22% of the administered dose. 
                        Gamma-scintigraphy studies have shown that a single dose of LIALDA 1.2 g (one tablet) passed intact through the upper gastrointestinal tract of fasted healthy volunteers. Scintigraphic images showed a trail of radio-labeled tracer in the colon, suggesting that mesalamine had distributed through this region of the gastrointestinal tract.
                        In a single dose study, LIALDA 1.2 g, 2.4 g and 4.8 g were administered in the fasted state to healthy subjects. Plasma concentrations of mesalamine were detectable after 2 hours and reached a maximum by 9-12 hours on average for the doses studied. The pharmacokinetic parameters are highly variable among subjects (Table 3). Mesalamine systemic exposure in terms of area under the plasma concentration-time curve (AUC) was slightly more than dose proportional between 1.2 g and 4.8 g LIALDA. Maximum plasma concentrations (Cmax) of mesalamine increased approximately dose proportionately between 1.2 g and 2.4 g and sub-proportionately between 2.4 g and 4.8 g LIALDA, with the dose normalized value at 4.8 g representing, on average, 74% of that at 2.4 g based on geometric means.
                        
                           Table 3: Mean (SD) PK Parameters for Mesalamine Following Single Dose Administration of LIALDA Under Fasting Conditions
                        
                        


                        


Administration of a single dose of LIALDA 4.8 g with a high fat meal resulted in further delay in absorption, and plasma concentrations of mesalamine were detectable 4 hours following dosing. However, a high fat meal increased systemic exposure of mesalamine (mean Cmax: ↑ 91%; mean AUC: ↑ 16%) compared to results in the fasted state. LIALDA was administered with food in the controlled clinical trials that supported its approval.
                        In a single and multiple dose pharmacokinetic study of LIALDA, 2.4 g or 4.8 g was administered once daily with standard meals to 28 healthy volunteers per dose group. Plasma concentrations of mesalamine were detectable after 4 hours and were maximal by 8 hours after the single dose. Steady state was achieved generally by 2 days after dosing. Mean AUC at steady state was only modestly greater (1.1- to 1.4-fold) than predictable from single dose pharmacokinetics.
                        In a single dose pharmacokinetic study of LIALDA, 4.8 g was administered in the fasted state to 71 healthy male and female volunteers (28 young (18-35yrs); 28 elderly (65-75yrs); 15 elderly (>75yrs)). Increased age resulted in increased systemic exposure (approximately 2-fold in Cmax), to mesalamine and its metabolite N-acetyl-5-aminosalicylic acid. Increased age resulted in a slower apparent elimination of mesalamine, though there was high between-subject variability. Systemic exposures in individual subjects were inversely correlated with renal function as assessed by estimated creatinine clearance.
                        
                           Table 4: Mean (SD) PK Parameters for Mesalamine Following Single Dose Administration of LIALDA 4.8 g under Fasting Conditions to Young and Elderly Subjects
                        
                        


                        



                           Distribution
                        
                        Mesalamine is approximately 43% bound to plasma proteins at the concentration of 2.5 μg/mL.
                        
                           Metabolism
                        
                        The only major metabolite of mesalamine (5-aminosalicylic acid) is N-acetyl-5-aminosalicylic acid. Its formation is brought about by N-acetyltransferase (NAT) activity in the liver and intestinal mucosa cells, principally by NAT-1.
                        
                           Elimination
                        
                        Elimination of mesalamine is mainly via the renal route following metabolism to N-acetyl-5-aminosalicylic acid (acetylation). However, there is also limited excretion of the parent drug in urine. Of the approximately 21-22% of the dose absorbed, less than 8% of the dose was excreted unchanged in the urine after 24 hours, compared with greater than 13% for N-acetyl-5-aminosalicylic acid. The apparent terminal half-lives for mesalamine and its major metabolite after administration of LIALDA 2.4 g and 4.8 g were, on average, 7-9 hours and 8-12 hours, respectively.
                        
                           Drug Interactions:
                        
                        The potential effect of Lialda (4.8 g given once daily) on the pharmacokinetics of four commonly used antibiotics were evaluated in healthy subjects.  The four antibiotics studied and their dosing regimens were as follows:  amoxicillin (single 500 mg dose), ciprofloxacin XR (single 500 mg dose), metronidazole (750 mg twice daily for 3.5 days), and sulfamethoxazole/trimethoprim (800 mg/160 mg twice daily for 3.5 days).  Coadministration of Lialda did not result in clinically significant changes in the pharmacokinetics of any of the four antibiotics.  The change in Cmax and AUC of amoxicillin, ciprofloxacin and metronidazole when they were co-administered with Lialda were all ≤ 3%.  There was an increase of 12% in Cmax and an increase of 15% in AUC of sulfamethoxazole when sulfamethoxazole/trimethoprim was coadministered with Lialda [see Drug Interactions (7)].
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         