
               
               
               
                  12  CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY 

               
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           12.1 	Mechanism of Action 

                        
                     
                     
                        Endogenous estrogens are largely responsible for the development and maintenance of the female reproductive system and secondary sexual characteristics. Although circulating estrogens exist in a dynamic equilibrium of metabolic interconversions, estradiol is the principal intracellular human estrogen and is substantially more potent than its metabolites, estrone and estriol, at the receptor level.
                        The primary source of estrogen in normally cycling adult women is the ovarian follicle, which secretes 70 to 500 mcg of estradiol daily, depending on the phase of the menstrual cycle. After menopause, most endogenous estrogen is produced by conversion of androstenedione, secreted by the adrenal cortex, to estrone in the peripheral tissues. Thus, estrone and the sulfate conjugated form, estrone sulfate, are the most abundant circulating estrogens in postmenopausal women.
                        Estrogens act through binding to nuclear receptors in estrogen-responsive tissues. To date, two estrogen receptors have been identified. These vary in proportion from tissue to tissue.
                        Circulating estrogens modulate the pituitary secretion of the gonadotropins, luteinizing hormone (LH), and FSH, through a negative feedback mechanism. Estrogens act to reduce the elevated levels of these hormones seen in postmenopausal women.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           12.2 	Pharmacodynamics 

                        
                     
                     
                        Currently, there are no pharmacodynamic data known for estradiol.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           12.3 	Pharmacokinetics 

                        
                     
                     
                        
                           Absorption 
                        
                        Estrogen drug products are well absorbed through the skin, mucous membranes and the gastrointestinal tract. The vaginal delivery of estrogens circumvents first-pass metabolism.
                        In a single-center, randomized, open-label, multiple-dose, parallel group study conducted in 58 patients, estradiol 10 mcg demonstrated a mean estradiol (E2) Cave at Day 83 of 5.5 pg/mL and 11.59 pg/mL, respectively after 12 weeks of treatment (see Table 3).
                        


                        



                            
                        
                        
                           Table 4: Arithmetic Means of Estradiol (E2), Estrone (E1), and Estrone Sulfate (E1S) PK Parameters Following Multiple Dosesa of Estradiol 25 mcg 
                        
                        Uncorrected for baseline, Nc=28 or 27
                        


                        



                           a Patients received vaginal tablets as a once daily intravaginal treatment for the first 2 weeks and a twice weekly intravaginal maintenance for the following 10 weeks.
                        
                           b CV: Coefficient of Variance for both AUC0-24 and Cave(0-24)
                        
                        
                           c N=28 for treatment before Day 14 and N=27 for treatments from Day 14. 
                        
                            
                        
                        
                           Distribution 
                        
                        The distribution of exogenous estrogens is similar to that of endogenous estrogens. Estrogens are widely distributed in the body and are generally found in higher concentrations in the sex hormone target organs. Estrogens circulate in the blood largely bound to SHBG and albumin.
                        
                           Metabolism 
                        
                        Exogenous estrogens are metabolized in the same manner as endogenous estrogens. Circulating estrogens exist in a dynamic equilibrium of metabolic interconversions. These transformations take place mainly in the liver. Estradiol is converted reversibly to estrone, and both can be converted to estriol, which is the major urinary metabolite. Estrogens also undergo enterohepatic recirculation via sulfate and glucuronide conjugation in the liver, biliary secretion of conjugates into the intestine, and hydrolysis in the gut followed by reabsorption. In postmenopausal women, a significant portion of the circulating estrogens exist as sulfate conjugates, especially estrone sulfate, which serves as a circulating reservoir for the formation of more active estrogens.
                        
                           Excretion 
                        
                        Estradiol, estrone and estriol are excreted in the urine along with glucuronide and sulfate conjugates.
                        
                           Use in Specific Populations 
                        
                        No pharmacokinetic studies were conducted in specific populations, including patients with renal or hepatic impairment.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         