


CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY





Central Nervous System
Oxycodone is a pure agonist opioid whose principal
                                    therapeutic action is analgesia. Other members of the class
                                    known as opioid agonists include substances such as morphine,
                                    hydromorphone, fentanyl, codeine, and hydrocodone.
                                    Pharmacological effects of opioid agonists include anxiolysis,
                                    euphoria, feelings of relaxation, respiratory depression,
                                    constipation, miosis, and cough suppression, as well as
                                    analgesia. Like all pure opioid agonist analgesics, with
                                    increasing doses there is increasing analgesia, unlike with
                                    mixed agonist/antagonists or non-opioid analgesics, where there
                                    is a limit to the analgesic affect with increasing doses. With
                                    pure opioid agonist analgesics, there is no defined maximum
                                    dose; the ceiling to analgesic effectiveness is imposed only by
                                    side effects, the more serious of which may include somnolence
                                    and respiratory depression. The precise mechanism of the analgesic action is unknown.
                                    However, specific CNS opioid receptors for endogenous compounds
                                    with opioid-like activity have been identified throughout the
                                    brain and spinal cord and play a role in the analgesic effects
                                    of this drug.Oxycodone produces respiratory depression by direct
                                    action on brain stem respiratory centers. The respiratory
                                    depression involves both a reduction in the responsiveness of
                                    the brain stem respiratory centers to increases in carbon
                                    dioxide tension and to electrical stimulation.Oxycodone depresses the cough reflex by direct effect on
                                    the cough center in the medulla. Antitussive effects may occur
                                    with doses lower than those usually required for analgesia.Oxycodone causes miosis, even in total darkness. Pinpoint
                                    pupils are a sign of opioid overdose but are not pathognomonic
                                    (e.g., pontine lesions of hemorrhagic or ischemic origin may
                                    produce similar findings). Marked mydriasis rather than miosis
                                    may be seen with hypoxia in the setting of oxycodone
                                    hydrochloride extended-release tablet overdose (see OVERDOSAGE).OVERDOSAGE).







Gastrointestinal Tract and Other Smooth Muscle
Oxycodone causes a reduction in motility associated with
                                    an increase in smooth muscle tone in the antrum of the stomach
                                    and duodenum. Digestion of food in the small intestine is
                                    delayed and propulsive contractions are decreased. Propulsive
                                    peristaltic waves in the colon are decreased, while tone may be
                                    increased to the point of spasm resulting in constipation. Other
                                    opioid-induced effects may include a reduction in gastric,
                                    biliary and pancreatic secretions, spasm of sphincter of Oddi,
                                    and transient elevations in serum amylase.







Cardiovascular System
Oxycodone may produce release of histamine with or
                                    without associated peripheral vasodilation. Manifestations of                  histamine release and/or peripheral vasodilation may include
                                    pruritus, flushing, red eyes, sweating, and/or orthostatic
                                    hypotension.







Concentration – Efficacy Relationships
Studies in normal volunteers and patients reveal
                                    predictable relationships between oxycodone dosage and plasma
                                    oxycodone concentrations, as well as between concentration and
                                    certain expected opioid effects, such as pupillary constriction,
                                    sedation, overall “drug effect,” analgesia
                                    and feelings of “relaxation.”As with all opioids, the minimum effective plasma
                                    concentration for analgesia will vary widely among patients,
                                    especially among patients who have been previously treated with
                                    potent agonist opioids. As a result, patients need to be treated
                                    with individualized titration of dosage to the desired effect.
                                    The minimum effective analgesic concentration of oxycodone for
                                    any individual patient may increase over time due to an increase
                                    in pain, the development of a new pain syndrome and/or the
                                    development of analgesic tolerance.







Concentration – Adverse Experience Relationships
Oxycodone hydrochloride extended-release tablets are
                                    associated with typical opioid-related adverse experiences.
                                    There is a general relationship between increasing oxycodone
                                    plasma concentration and increasing frequency of dose-related
                                    opioid adverse experiences such as nausea, vomiting, CNS
                                    effects, and respiratory depression. In opioid-tolerant
                                    patients, the situation is altered by the development of
                                    tolerance to opioid-related side effects, and the relationship
                                    is not clinically relevant.As with all opioids, the dose must be individualized (seeDOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION), because the effective analgesic dose for some
                                    patients will be too high to be tolerated by other
                                patients.DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION), because the effective analgesic dose for some
                                    patients will be too high to be tolerated by other
                                patients.




