
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Although the exact mechanism of action through which indomethacin causes closure of a patent ductus arteriosus is not known, it is believed to be through inhibition of prostaglandin synthesis.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        Indomethacin has been shown to be a potent inhibitor of prostaglandin synthesis, both 
                              in vitro
                            and 
                              in vivo
                           .  In human newborns with certain congenital heart malformations, PGE 1 dilates the ductus arteriosus.  In fetal and newborn lambs, E type prostaglandins have also been shown to maintain the patency of the ductus, and as in human newborns, indomethacin causes its constriction.
                        Studies in healthy young animals and in premature infants with patent ductus arteriosus indicated that, after the first dose of intravenous indomethacin, there was a transient reduction in cerebral blood flow velocity and cerebral blood flow.  Similar decreases in mesenteric blood flow and velocity have been observed.  The clinical significance of these effects has not been established.
                        In double-blind, placebo-controlled studies of Indomethacin for Injection in 460 small pre-term infants, weighing 1,750 g or less, the neonates treated with placebo had a ductus closure rate after 48 hours of 25 to 30 percent, whereas those treated with Indomethacin for Injection had a 75 to 80 percent closure rate.  In one of these studies, a multicenter study, involving 405 pre-term infants, later reopening of the ductus arteriosus occurred in 26 percent of neonates treated with Indomethacin for Injection however, 70 percent of these closed subsequently without the need for surgery or additional indomethacin.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        The disposition of indomethacin following intravenous administration (0.2 mg/kg) in pre-term neonates with patent ductus arteriosus has not been extensively evaluated.  Even though the plasma half-life of indomethacin was variable among premature infants, it was shown to vary inversely with postnatal age and weight.  In one study, of 28 neonates who could be evaluated, the plasma half-life in those less than 7 days old averaged 20 hours (range: 3 to 60 hours, n=18).  In neonates older than 7 days, the mean plasma half-life of indomethacin was 12 hours (range: 4 to 38 hours, n=10).  Grouping the neonates by weight, mean plasma half-life in those weighing less than 1,000 g was 21 hours (range: 9 to 60 hours, n=10); in those neonates weighing more than 1,000 g, the mean plasma half-life was 15 hours (range: 3 to 52 hours, n=18).
                        Following intravenous administration in adults, indomethacin is eliminated via renal excretion, metabolism, and biliary excretion.  Indomethacin undergoes appreciable enterohepatic circulation.  The mean plasma half-life of indomethacin is 4.5 hours.  In the absence of enterohepatic circulation, it is 90 minutes.  Indomethacin has been found to cross the blood-brain barrier and the placenta.
                        In adults, about 99 percent of indomethacin is bound to protein in plasma over the expected range of therapeutic plasma concentrations.  The percent bound in neonates has not been studied.  In controlled trials in premature infants, however, no evidence of bilirubin displacement has been observed as evidenced by increased incidence of bilirubin encephalopathy (kernicterus).
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         