
               
               
               7. DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           Cholinesterase inhibitors have the potential to interfere with the activity of anticholinergic medications (7.3). 
                           A synergistic effect may be expected with concomitant administration of succinylcholine, similar neuromuscular blocking agents, or cholinergic agonists (7.4). 
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     7.1 Effect of Donepezil Hydrochloride Tablets on the Metabolism of Other Drugs
                     
                        No in vivo clinical trials have investigated the effect of donepezil hydrochloride tablets on the clearance of drugs metabolized by CYP 3A4 (e.g. cisapride, terfenadine) or by CYP 2D6 (e.g. imipramine). However, in vitro studies show a low rate of binding to these enzymes (mean Ki about 50-130 μM), that, given the therapeutic plasma concentrations of donepezil (164 nM), indicates little likelihood of interference. 
                        Whether donepezil hydrochloride tablets have any potential for enzyme induction is not known. Formal pharmacokinetic studies evaluated the potential of donepezil hydrochloride tablets for interaction with theophylline, cimetidine, warfarin, digoxin and ketoconazole. No effects of donepezil hydrochloride tablets on the pharmacokinetics of these drugs were observed. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     7.2 Effect of Other Drugs on the Metabolism of Donepezil Hydrochloride Tablets
                     
                        Ketoconazole and quinidine, inhibitors of CYP450, 3A4 and 2D6, respectively, inhibit donepezil metabolism in vitro. Whether there is a clinical effect of quinidine is not known. In a 7-day crossover study in 18 healthy volunteers, ketoconazole (200 mg q.d.) increased mean donepezil  (5 mg q.d.) concentrations (AUC0-24 and Cmax) by 36%. The clinical relevance of this increase in concentration is unknown. 
                        Inducers of CYP 2D6 and CYP 3A4 (e.g., phenytoin, carbamazepine, dexamethasone, rifampin, and phenobarbital) could increase the rate of elimination of donepezil hydrochloride tablets. 
                        Formal pharmacokinetic studies demonstrated that the metabolism of donepezil hydrochloride tablets is not significantly affected by concurrent administration of digoxin or cimetidine. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     7.3 Use with Anticholinergics
                     
                        Because of their mechanism of action, cholinesterase inhibitors have the potential to interfere with the activity of anticholinergic medications. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     7.4 Use with Cholinomimetics and Other Cholinesterase Inhibitors
                     
                        A synergistic effect may be expected when cholinesterase inhibitors are given concurrently with succinylcholine, similar neuromuscular blocking agents or cholinergic agonists such as bethanechol. 
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         