
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        The active moiety of fenofibric acid delayed-release capsules is fenofibric acid. The pharmacological effects of fenofibric acid in both animals and humans have been extensively studied through oral administration of fenofibrate. 
                        The lipid-modifying effects of fenofibric acid seen in clinical practice have been explained in vivo in transgenic mice and in vitro in human hepatocyte cultures by the activation of peroxisome proliferator activated receptor α (PPARα). Through this mechanism, fenofibric acid increases lipolysis and elimination of triglyceride-rich particles from plasma by activating lipoprotein lipase and reducing production of Apo CIII (an inhibitor of lipoprotein lipase activity). 
                        The resulting decrease in TG produces an alteration in the size and composition of LDL from small, dense particles (which are thought to be atherogenic due to their susceptibility to oxidation), to large buoyant particles. These larger particles have a greater affinity for cholesterol receptors and are catabolized rapidly. Activation of PPARα also induces an increase in the synthesis of HDL-C and Apo AI and AII. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        Elevated levels of Total-C, LDL-C and Apo B, and decreased levels of HDL-C and its transport complex, Apo AI and Apo AII, are risk factors for human atherosclerosis. Epidemiologic studies have established that cardiovascular morbidity and mortality vary directly with the levels of Total-C, LDL-C and TG, and inversely with the level of HDL-C. The independent effect of raising HDL-C or lowering TG on the risk of cardiovascular morbidity and mortality has not been determined. 
                        Fenofibric acid, the active metabolite of fenofibrate, produces reductions in TC, LDL-C, Apo B, TG, and triglyceride-rich lipoprotein (VLDL) in treated patients. In addition, treatment with fenofibric acid results in increases in HDL-C and Apo AI and Apo AII.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        Fenofibric acid delayed-release capsules contain fenofibric acid, which is the only circulating pharmacologically active moiety in plasma after oral administration of fenofibric acid. Fenofibric acid is also the circulating pharmacologically active moiety in plasma after oral administration of fenofibrate, the ester of fenofibric acid. 
                        Plasma concentrations of fenofibric acid after administration of one 135 mg fenofibric acid delayed-release capsule are equivalent to those after one 200 mg capsule of micronized fenofibrate administered under fed conditions. 
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Absorption
                           
                              Fenofibric acid is well absorbed throughout the gastrointestinal tract. The absolute bioavailability of fenofibric acid is approximately 81%. 
                              Peak plasma levels of fenofibric acid occur within 4 to 5 hours after a single dose administration of fenofibric acid capsule under fasting conditions. 
                              Fenofibric acid exposure in plasma, as measured by Cmax and AUC, is not significantly different when a single 135 mg dose of fenofibric acid is administered under fasting or nonfasting conditions. 
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Distribution
                           
                              Upon multiple dosing of fenofibric acid, fenofibric acid levels reach steady-state within 8 days. Plasma concentrations of fenofibric acid at steady-state are approximately slightly more than double those following a single dose. Serum protein binding is approximately 99% in normal and dyslipidemic subjects. 
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Metabolism
                           
                              Fenofibric acid is primarily conjugated with glucuronic acid and then excreted in urine. A small amount of fenofibric acid is reduced at the carbonyl moiety to a benzhydrol metabolite which is, in turn, conjugated with glucuronic acid and excreted in urine. 
                              
                                 In vivo metabolism data after fenofibrate administration indicate that fenofibric acid does not undergo oxidative metabolism (e.g., cytochrome P450) to a significant extent. 
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Excretion
                           
                              After absorption, fenofibric acid is primarily excreted in the urine in the form of fenofibric acid and fenofibric acid glucuronide. 
                              Fenofibric acid is eliminated with a half-life of approximately 20 hours, allowing once daily administration of fenofibric acid. 
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Specific Populations
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Geriatrics
                                 
                                    In five elderly volunteers 77 to 87 years of age, the oral clearance of fenofibric acid following a single oral dose of fenofibrate was 1.2 L/h, which compares to 1.1 L/h in young adults. This indicates that an equivalent dose of fenofibric acid can be used in elderly subjects with normal renal function, without increasing accumulation of the drug or metabolites [see 
                                       
                                          Use in Specific Populations (8.5)
                                       
                                       ].
                                    
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Pediatrics
                                 
                                    The pharmacokinetics of fenofibric acid has not been studied in pediatric populations.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Gender
                                 
                                    No pharmacokinetic difference between males and females has been observed for fenofibric acid. 
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Race
                                 
                                    The influence of race on the pharmacokinetics of fenofibric acid has not been studied; however, fenofibric acid is not metabolized by enzymes known for exhibiting inter-ethnic variability.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Renal Impairment
                                 
                                    The pharmacokinetics of fenofibric acid was examined in patients with mild, moderate and severe renal impairment. Patients with severe renal impairment (estimated glomerular filtration rate [eGFR] < 30 mL/min/1.73 m2) showed a 2.7-fold increase in exposure for fenofibric acid and increased accumulation of fenofibric acid during chronic dosing compared to that of healthy subjects. Patients with mild to moderate renal impairment (eGFR 30 to 59 mL/min/1.73 m2) had similar exposure but an increase in the half-life for fenofibric acid compared to that of healthy subjects. Based on these findings, the use of fenofibric acid should be avoided in patients who have severe renal impairment and dose reduction is required in patients having mild to moderate renal impairment [see Dosage and Administration (2.5)].
                                    
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Hepatic Impairment
                                 
                                    No pharmacokinetic studies have been conducted in patients with hepatic impairment. 
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Drug-drug Interactions
                           
                              
                                 In vitro studies using human liver microsomes indicate that fenofibric acid is not an inhibitor of cytochrome (CYP) P450 isoforms CYP3A4, CYP2D6, CYP2E1 or CYP1A2. It is a weak inhibitor of CYP2C8, CYP2C19 and CYP2A6, and mild to moderate inhibitor of CYP2C9 at therapeutic concentrations. 
                              Comparison of atorvastatin exposures when atorvastatin (80 mg once daily for 10 days) is given in combination with fenofibric acid (fenofibric acid delayed-release capsules 135 mg once daily for 10 days) and ezetimibe (10 mg once daily for 10 days) versus when atorvastatin is given in combination with ezetimibe only (ezetimibe 10 mg once daily and atorvastatin, 80 mg once daily for 10 days): The Cmax decreased by 1% for atorvastatin and ortho-hydroxy-atorvastatin and increased by 2% for parahydroxy-atorvastatin. The AUC decreased 6% and 9% for atorvastatin and orthohydroxy-atorvastatin, respectively, and did not change for para-hydroxy-atorvastatin.
                              Comparison of ezetimibe exposures when ezetimibe (10 mg once daily for 10 days) is given in combination with fenofibric acid (fenofibric acid delayed-release capsules 135 mg once daily for 10 days) and atorvastatin (80 mg once daily for 10 days) versus when ezetimibe is given in combination with atorvastatin only (ezetimibe 10 mg once daily and atorvastatin, 80 mg once daily for 10 days): The Cmax increased by 26% and 7% for total and free ezetimibe, respectively. The AUC increased by 27% and 12% for total and free ezetimibe, respectively.
                              Table 3 describes the effects of coadministered drugs on fenofibric acid systemic exposure. 
Table 4 describes the effects of coadministered fenofibric acid on other drugs.
                              



