
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  Colistin sulfate is a polypeptide antibiotic which penetrates into and disrupts the bacterial cell membrane. Neomycin sulfate is an aminoglycoside antibiotic which inhibits protein synthesis, disrupting the normal cycle of ribosomal function. Hydrocortisone acetate is a corticosteroid hormone which is thought to act by regulating the rate of protein synthesis; it controls inflammation, edema, pruritus and other dermal reactions. Cortiscosteroids suppress the inflammatory response to a variety of agents and they may delay healing. Since corticoids may inhibit the body's defense mechanism against infection, a concomitant antimicrobial drug may be used when this inhibition is considered to be clinically significant in a particular case. 
                  The relative potency of corticosteroids depends on the molecular structure, concentration, and release from the vehicle. 
                  Thonzonium bromide is a surface-active agent that promotes tissue contact by dispersion and penetration of the cellular debris and exudate. 
               
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Microbiology
                     
                        Together, colistin sulfate and neomycin sulfate have bactericidal activity against most strains of the following microorganisms, both in vitro and in clinical infections as described in the INDICATIONS AND USAGE section. 
                        
                           Aerobic gram-positive microorganisms: 
                        
                        
                           Staphylococcus aureus. 
                        
                        
                           Aerobic gram-negative microorganisms: 
                        
                        
                           Enterobacter aerogenes 
                        
                        
                           Escherichia coli 
                        
                        
                           Klebsiella pneumoniae 
                        
                        
                           Pseudomonas aeruginosa. 
                        
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Susceptibility Tests
                           
                              It is not recommended that colistin sulfate or neomycin sulfate be routinely tested and reported by clinical microbiology laboratories.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         