
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Hydrocodone is a semisynthetic narcotic antitussive and analgesic with multiple actions qualitatively similar to those of codeine. The precise mechanism of action of hydrocodone and other opiates is not known; however, hydrocodone is believed to act directly on the cough center. In excessive doses, hydrocodone will depress respiration. Hydrocodone can produce miosis, euphoria, and physical and physiological dependence.
                        Chlorpheniramine is an antihistamine drug (H1 receptor antagonist) that also possesses anticholinergic and sedative activity. It prevents released histamine from dilating capillaries and causing edema of the respiratory mucosa.
                        Pseudoephedrine hydrochloride is an orally active sympathomimetic amine and exerts a decongestant action on the nasal mucosa. Pseudoephedrine hydrochloride is recognized as an effective agent for the relief of nasal congestion due to upper respiratory allergies or common cold. Pseudoephedrine produces peripheral effects similar to those of ephedrine and central effects similar to, but less intense than, amphetamines. It has the potential for excitatory side effects.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        Systemic exposure (in terms of peak plasma concentrations and area under plasma concentration versus time curve) of hydrocodone bitartrate, chlorpheniramine maleate and pseudoephedrine hydrochloride after single dose administration of 5 mL hydrocodone bitartrate, pseudoephedrine HCl, and chlorpheniramine maleate oral solution are equivalent to respective reference solutions of 5 mL hydrocodone bitartrate (5 mg/5 mL), 5 mL chlorpheniramine maleate (4 mg/5 mL), and 5 mL pseudoephedrine hydrochloride (60 mg/5 mL).
                        Hydrocodone had a mean (SD) peak plasma concentration of 10.6 (2.63) ng/mL at 1.4 (0.55) hours.  The mean plasma half-life of hydrocodone is approximately 4.9 hours.  Pseudoephedrine had a mean (SD) peak plasma concentration of 212 (46.2) ng/mL at 1.8 (0.56) hours.  The mean plasma half-life of pseudoephedrine is approximately 5.6 hours.  Chlorpheniramine had a mean (SD) plasma peak concentration of 7.20 (1.98) ng/mL at 3.5 (1.6) hours.  The mean plasma half-life of chlorpheniramine is approximately 24 hours.  
                        
                           
                              Specific Populations
                           
                        
                        
                           
                              Renal Impairment
                           
                        
                        Pseudoephedrine is primarily excreted unchanged in the urine as unchanged drug with the remainder apparently being metabolized in the liver.  Therefore, pseudoephedrine may accumulate in patients with renal impairment.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         