
                     
                     
                     DRUG INTERACTIONS
                     
                        Ketorolac is highly bound to human plasma protein (mean 99.2%).
                        Warfarin, Digoxin, Salicylate and Heparin
                        The in vitro binding of 
                              warfarin
                            to plasma proteins is only slightly reduced by ketorolac tromethamine (99.5% control vs 99.3%) when ketorolac plasma concentrations reach 5 to 10 mcg/mL. Ketorolac does not alter 
                              digoxin
                            protein binding. In vitro studies indicate that, at therapeutic concentrations of 
                              salicylate
                            (300 mcg/mL), the binding of ketorolac was reduced from approximately 99.2% to 97.5%, representing a potential two-fold increase in unbound ketorolac plasma levels. Therapeutic concentrations of 
                              digoxin, warfarin, ibuprofen, naproxen, piroxicam, acetaminophen, phenytoin,
                            and 
                              tolbutamide
                            did not alter ketorolac tromethamine protein binding.
                        In a study involving 12 volunteers, ketorolac tromethamine tablets were co-administered with a single dose of 25 mg 
                              warfarin
                           , causing no significant changes in pharmacokinetics or pharmacodynamics of warfarin. In another study, ketorolac tromethamine injection was given with two doses of 5000 U of 
                              heparin
                            to 11 healthy volunteers, resulting in a mean template bleeding time of 6.4 minutes (3.2 to 11.4 min) compared to a mean of 6.0 minutes (3.4 to 7.5 min) for heparin alone and 5.1 minutes (3.5 to 8.5 min) for placebo. Although these results do not indicate a significant interaction between ketorolac tromethamine and warfarin or heparin, the administration of ketorolac tromethamine to patients taking anticoagulants should be done extremely cautiously, and patients should be closely monitored (see WARNINGS and PRECAUTIONS).
                        Furosemide
                        Ketorolac tromethamine administered IV or IM reduced the diuretic response to 
                              furosemide
                            in normovolemic healthy subjects by approximately 20% (mean sodium and urinary output decreased 17%).
                        Probenecid
                        Concomitant administration of ketorolac tromethamine tablets and 
                              probenecid
                            resulted in decreased clearance of ketorolac and significant increases in ketorolac plasma levels (total AUC increased approximately 3-fold from 5.4 to 17.8 mcg/h/mL) and terminal half-life increased approximately 2-fold from 6.6 to 15.1 hours. Therefore, concomitant use of ketorolac tromethamine and probenecid is contraindicated.
                        Lithium
                        Inhibition of renal 
                              lithium
                            clearance, leading to an increase in plasma lithium concentration, has been reported with some prostaglandin synthesis-inhibiting drugs. The effect of ketorolac tromethamine on plasma lithium has not been studied, but cases of increased lithium plasma levels during ketorolac tromethamine therapy have been reported.
                        Methotrexate
                        Concomitant administration of 
                              methotrexate
                            and some NSAIDs has been reported to reduce the clearance of methotrexate, enhancing the toxicity of methotrexate. The effect of ketorolac tromethamine on methotrexate clearance has not been studied.
                        Nondepolarizing Muscle Relaxants
                        In postmarketing experience, there have been reports of a possible interaction between ketorolac tromethamine injection and 
                              nondepolarizing muscle relaxants
                            that resulted in apnea. The concurrent use of ketorolac tromethamine with muscle relaxants has not been formally studied.
                        ACE Inhibitors
                        Concomitant use of ACE 
                           
                              inhibitors
                            may increase the risk of renal impairment, particularly in volume-depleted patients.
                        Antiepileptic Drugs
                        Sporadic cases of seizures have been reported during concomitant use of ketorolac tromethamine and 
                              antiepileptic drugs
                            (phenytoin, carbamazepine).
                        Psychoactive Drugs
                        Hallucinations have been reported when ketorolac tromethamine was used in patients taking 
                              psychoactive drugs
                            (fluoxetine, thiothixene, alprazolam).
                        Morphine
                        Ketorolac tromethamine injection has been administered concurrently with 
                              morphine
                            in several clinical trials of postoperative pain without evidence of adverse interactions. Do not mix ketorolac tromethamine and morphine in the same syringe.
                        There is no evidence in animal or human studies that ketorolac tromethamine induces or inhibits hepatic enzymes capable of metabolizing itself or other drugs.
                     
                     
                  
               