
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY

               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           Mechanism of Action:  Activation of beta2-adrenergic receptors on airway smooth muscle leads to the activation of adenylate cyclase and to an increase in the intracellular concentration of cyclic-3', 5'-adenosine monophosphate (cyclic AMP).  The increase in cyclic AMP is associated with the activation of protein kinase A, which in turn, inhibits the phosphorylation of myosin and lowers intracellular ionic calcium concentrations, resulting in muscle relaxation.  Levalbuterol relaxes the smooth muscles of all airways, from the trachea to the terminal bronchioles.  Increased cyclic AMP concentrations are also associated with the inhibition of the release of mediators from mast cells in the airways.  Levalbuterol acts as a functional antagonist to relax the airway irrespective of the spasmogen involved, thus protecting against all bronchoconstrictor challenges.  While it is recognized that beta2-adrenergic receptors are the predominant receptors on bronchial smooth muscle, data indicate that there are beta-receptors in the human heart, 10% to 50% of which are beta2-adrenergic receptors.  The precise function of these receptors has not been established (see 
                              WARNINGS
                           ).  However, all beta-adrenergic agonist drugs can produce a significant cardiovascular effect in some patients, as measured by pulse rate, blood pressure, symptoms, and/or electrocardiographic changes.

                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Preclinical

                     
                        Results from in vitro studies of binding to human beta-adrenergic receptors demonstrated that levalbuterol has approximately 2-fold greater binding affinity than racemic albuterol and approximately 100-fold greater binding affinity than (S)-albuterol.  In guinea pig airways, levalbuterol HCl and racemic albuterol decreased the response to spasmogens (e.g., acetylcholine and histamine), whereas (S)-albuterol was ineffective.  These results suggest that the bronchodilatory effects of racemic albuterol are attributable to the (R)-enantiomer.

                        Intravenous studies in rats with racemic albuterol sulfate have demonstrated that albuterol crosses the blood-brain barrier and reaches brain concentrations amounting to approximately 5.0% of the plasma concentrations.  In structures outside the blood-brain barrier (pineal and pituitary glands), racemic albuterol concentrations were found to be 100 times those in the whole brain.

                        Studies in laboratory animals (minipigs, rodents, and dogs) have demonstrated the occurrence of cardiac arrhythmias and sudden death (with histologic evidence of myocardial necrosis) when beta-agonists and methylxanthines are administered concurrently.  The clinical significance of these findings is unknown.

                        Propellant HFA-134a is devoid of pharmacological activity except at very high doses in animals (380 to 1300 times the maximum human exposure based on comparisons of AUC values), primarily producing ataxia, tremors, dyspnea, or salivation.  These are similar to effects produced by the structurally related chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs), which have been used extensively in metered-dose inhalers.

                        In animals and humans, propellant HFA-134a was found to be rapidly absorbed and rapidly eliminated, with an elimination half-life of 3 to 27 minutes in animals and 5 to 7 minutes in humans.  Time to maximum plasma concentration (tmax) and mean residence time are both extremely short, leading to a transient appearance of HFA-134a in the blood with no evidence of accumulation.

                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Pharmacokinetics

                     
                        A population pharmacokinetic (PPK) model was developed using plasma concentrations of (R)-albuterol obtained from 632 asthmatic patients aged 4 to 81 years in three large trials.  The PPK model-derived pharmacokinetic parameters for (R)-albuterol in pediatric and adolescent/adult patients receiving a 90 mcg dose of XOPENEX HFA (levalbuterol tartrate) Inhalation Aerosol or a 180 mcg dose of racemic albuterol by HFA metered-dose inhaler are presented in Table 1.

                        These pharmacokinetic data indicate that mean exposure to (R)-albuterol was 13% to 16% less in adult and 30% to 32% less in pediatric patients given XOPENEX HFA Inhalation Aerosol as compared to those given a comparable dose of racemic albuterol.  When compared to adult patients, pediatric patients given 90 mcg of levalbuterol have a 17% lower mean exposure to (R)-albuterol.

                        


                     



                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Metabolism and Elimination

                     
                        Information available in the published literature suggests that the primary enzyme responsible for the metabolism of albuterol enantiomers in humans is SULT1A3 (sulfotransferase).  When racemic albuterol was administered either intravenously or via inhalation after oral charcoal administration, there was a 3- to 4-fold difference in the area under the concentration-time curves between the (R)- and (S)-albuterol enantiomers, with (S)-albuterol concentrations being consistently higher.  However, without charcoal pretreatment, after either oral or inhalation administration the differences were 8- to 24-fold, suggesting that that (R)-albuterol is preferentially metabolized in the gastrointestinal tract, presumably by SULT1A3.

                        The primary route of elimination of albuterol enantiomers is through renal excretion (80% to 100%) of either the parent compound or the primary metabolite.  Less than 20% of the drug is detected in the feces.  Following intravenous administration of racemic albuterol, between 25% and 46% of the (R)-albuterol fraction of the dose was excreted as unchanged (R)-albuterol in the urine.

                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Special Populations

                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Hepatic Impairment:  The effect of hepatic impairment on the pharmacokinetics of XOPENEX HFA Inhalation Aerosol has not been evaluated.

                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Renal Impairment:  The effect of renal impairment on the pharmacokinetics of racemic albuterol was evaluated in 5 subjects with creatinine clearance of 7 to 53 mL/min, and the results were compared with those from healthy volunteers.  Renal disease had no effect on the half-life, but there was a 67% decline in racemic albuterol clearance.  Caution should be used when administering high doses of XOPENEX HFA Inhalation Aerosol to patients with renal impairment.

                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Clinical Trials

                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Adults and Adolescents:  The efficacy and safety of XOPENEX HFA Inhalation Aerosol were established in two 8-week, multicenter, randomized, double-blind, active- and placebo-controlled trials in 748 adults and adolescents with asthma between the ages of 12 and 81 years.  In these two trials, XOPENEX HFA Inhalation Aerosol (403 patients) was compared to an HFA-134a placebo MDI (166 patients), and the trials included a marketed albuterol HFA-134a MDI (179 patients) as an active control.  Serial forced expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV1) measurements demonstrated that 90 mcg (2 inhalations) of XOPENEX HFA Inhalation Aerosol produced significantly greater improvement in FEV1 over the pretreatment value than placebo.  The results from one of the trials are shown in Figure 1 as the mean percent change in FEV1 from test-day baseline at Day 1 (n=445) and Day 56 (n=387).  The results from the second trial were similar.

                              Figure 1: Percent Change in FEV1 from Test-Day Baseline in Adults and Adolescents Aged 12 to 81 Years at Day 1 and Day 56

                              
                              For XOPENEX HFA Inhalation Aerosol on Day 1, the median time to onset of a 15% increase in FEV1 ranged from 5.5 to 10.2 minutes and the median time to peak effect ranged from 76 to 78 minutes.  In the responder population, on Day 1 the median duration of effect as measured by a 15% increase in FEV1 was 3 to 4 hours, with duration of effect in some patients of up to 6 hours.

                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Figure 1

                                 
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Pediatrics:  The efficacy and safety of XOPENEX HFA Inhalation Aerosol in children were established in a 4-week, multicenter, randomized, double-blind, active- and placebo-controlled trial in 150 pediatric patients with asthma between the ages of 4 and 11 years.  In this trial, XOPENEX HFA Inhalation Aerosol (76 patients) was compared to a placebo HFA-134a MDI (35 patients), and the trial included a marketed albuterol HFA-134a MDI (39 patients) as an active control.  Serial FEV1 measurements demonstrated that 90 mcg (2 inhalations) of XOPENEX HFA Inhalation Aerosol produced significantly greater improvement in FEV1 over the pretreatment value than placebo and were consistent with the efficacy findings in the adult studies.

                              For XOPENEX HFA Inhalation Aerosol, on Day 1 the median time to onset of a 15% increase in FEV1 was 4.5 minutes and the median time to peak effect was 77 minutes.  In the responder population, the median duration of effect as measured by a 15% increase in FEV1 was 3 hours, with a duration of effect in some pediatric patients of up to 6 hours.

                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         