
               
               
               ACTIONS / CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Mechanism of action
                     
                        Spironolactone is a specific pharmacologic antagonist of aldosterone, acting primarily through competitive binding of receptors at the aldosterone-dependent sodium-potassium exchange site in the distal convoluted renal tubule. Spironolactone causes increased amounts of sodium and water to be excreted, while potassium is retained. Spironolactone acts both as a diuretic and as an antihypertensive drug by this mechanism. It may be given alone or with other diuretic agents that act more proximally in the renal tubule.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Aldosterone antagonist activity
                     
                        Increased levels of the mineralocorticoid, aldosterone, are present in primary and secondary hyperaldosteronism. Edematous states in which secondary aldosteronism is usually involved include congestive heart failure, hepatic cirrhosis, and nephrotic syndrome. By competing with aldosterone for receptor sites, spironolactone tablets provide effective therapy for the edema and ascites in those conditions. Spironolactone tablets counteract secondary aldosteronism induced by the volume depletion and associated sodium loss caused by active diuretic therapy.
                        Spironolactone tablets are effective in lowering the systolic and diastolic blood pressure in patients with primary hyperaldosteronism. It is also effective in most cases of essential hypertension, despite the fact that aldosterone secretion may be within normal limits in benign essential hypertension.
                        Through its action in antagonizing the effect of aldosterone, spironolactone tablets inhibit the exchange of sodium for potassium in the distal renal tubule and helps to prevent potassium loss.
                        Spironolactone tablets have not been demonstrated to elevate serum uric acid, to precipitate gout, or to alter carbohydrate metabolism.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        Spironolactone is rapidly and extensively metabolized. Sulfur-containing products are the predominant metabolites and are thought to be primarily responsible, together with spironolactone, for the therapeutic effects of the drug. The following pharmacokinetic data were obtained from 12 healthy volunteers following the administration of 100 mg of spironolactone (Aldactone® film-coated tabletsAldactone is a trademark of Pharmacia Corporation.) daily for 15 days. On the 15th day, spironolactone was given immediately after a low-fat breakfast and blood was drawn thereafter.
                        


                        


The pharmacological activity of spironolactone metabolites in man is not known. However, in the adrenalectomized rat the antimineralocorticoid activities of the metabolites C, TMS, and HTMS, relative to spironolactone, were 1.10, 1.28, and 0.32, respectively. Relative to spironolactone, their binding affinities to the aldosterone receptors in rat kidney slices were 0.19, 0.86, and 0.06, respectively.
                        In humans, the potencies of TMS and 7-α-thiospirolactone in reversing the effects of the synthetic mineralocorticoid, fludrocortisone, on urinary electrolyte composition were 0.33 and 0.26, respectively, relative to spironolactone. However, since the serum concentrations of these steroids were not determined, their incomplete absorption and/or first-pass metabolism could not be ruled out as a reason for their reduced in vivo activities.
                        Spironolactone and its metabolites are more than 90% bound to plasma proteins. The metabolites are excreted primarily in the urine and secondarily in bile.
                        The effect of food on spironolactone absorption (two 100 mg Aldactone tablets) was assessed in a single-dose study of 9 healthy, drug-free volunteers. Food increased the bioavailability of unmetabolized spironolactone by almost 100%. The clinical importance of this finding is not known.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         