
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        APOKYN is a non-ergoline dopamine agonist with high in vitro binding affinity for the dopamine D4 receptor, and moderate affinity for the dopamine D2, D3, and D5, and adrenergic α1D, α2B, α2C receptors. The precise mechanism of action of APOKYN as a treatment for Parkinson's disease is unknown, although it is believed to be due to stimulation of post-synaptic dopamine D2-type receptors within the caudate-putamen in the brain. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Prolongation of the QTc Interval: In a placebo-controlled study in which patients received increasing single doses of APOKYN from 2 mg to up to 10 mg, the mean difference in QTc (measured by Holter monitor) between APOKYN and placebo was 0 msec at 4 mg, 1 msec at 6 mg, and 7 msec at 8 mg. Too few patients received a 10 mg dose to be able to adequately characterize the change in QTc interval at that dose. 
                              In a controlled trial in which patients were administered placebo or a single dose of APOKYN (mean dose of 5.2 mg; range of 2 mg to 10 mg), the mean difference between APOKYN and placebo in the change in QTc was about 3 msec at 20 minutes and 90 minutes. In the entire database, 2 patients (one at 2 mg and 6 mg, one at 6 mg) exhibited large QTc increments (> 60 msecs from pre-dose) and had QTc intervals greater than 500 msecs acutely after dosing. Doses of 6 mg or less thus are associated with minimal increases in QTc. 
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Decreases in blood pressure
                              
                              Dose-dependent mean decrements in systolic blood pressure ranged from 5 mmHg after 2 mg to 16 mmHg after 10 mg. Dose-dependent mean decrements in diastolic blood pressure ranged from 3 mmHg after 2 mg to 8 mmHg after 10 mg. These changes were observed at 20 minutes, and were maximal between 20 and 40 minutes after dosing. Lesser, but still noteworthy blood pressure decrements persisted up to at least 90 minutes after dosing. 
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Absorption
                              
                              Apomorphine hydrochloride is a lipophilic compound that is rapidly absorbed (time to peak concentration ranges from 10 minutes to 60 minutes) following subcutaneous administration into the abdominal wall. After subcutaneous administration, apomorphine appears to have bioavailability equal to that of an intravenous administration. Apomorphine exhibits linear pharmacokinetics over a dose range of 2 mg to 8 mg following a single subcutaneous injection of APOKYN into the abdominal wall in patients with idiopathic Parkinson's disease.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Distribution
                              
                              The plasma-to-whole blood apomorphine concentration ratio is equal to one. Mean (range) apparent volume of distribution was 218 L (123 L to 404 L). Maximum concentrations in cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) are less than 10% of maximum plasma concentrations and occur 10 minutes to 20 minutes later. 
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Metabolism and Elimination
                              
                              The mean apparent clearance (range) is 223 L/hr (125 L/hr to 401 L/hr) and the mean terminal elimination half-life is about 40 minutes (range about 30 minutes to 60 minutes). 
                              The route of metabolism in humans is not known. Potential routes of metabolism in humans include sulfation, N-demethylation, glucuronidation and oxidation. In vitro, apomorphine undergoes rapid autooxidation.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Special Populations
                              
                              The clearance of apomorphine does not appear to be influenced by age, gender, weight, duration of Parkinson's disease, levodopa dose or duration of therapy.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Renal Impairment
                              
                              In a study comparing renally-impaired subjects (moderately impaired as determined by estimated creatinine clearance) to healthy matched volunteers, the AUC0-∞ and Cmax values were increased by approximately 16% and 50%, respectively, following a single subcutaneous administration of APOKYN into the abdominal wall. The mean time to peak concentrations and the mean terminal half-life of apomorphine were unaffected by the renal status of the individual. Studies in subjects with severe renal impairment have not been conducted. The starting dose for patients with mild or moderate renal impairment should be reduced [see Dosage and Administration (2.4) and Use in Specific Populations (8.6)].
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Hepatic Impairment
                              
                              In a study comparing subjects with hepatic impairment (moderately impaired as determined by the Child-Pugh classification method) to healthy matched volunteers, the AUC0-∞ and Cmax values were increased by approximately 10% and 25%, respectively, following a single subcutaneous administration of APOKYN into the abdominal wall. Studies in subjects with severe hepatic impairment have not been conducted [see Dosage and Administration (2.5) and Use in Specific Populations (8.7)].
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Drug-Drug Interactions
                              
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    Carbidopa/levodopa: Levodopa pharmacokinetics were unchanged when subcutaneous APOKYN and levodopa were co-administrated in patients. However, motor response differences were significant. The threshold levodopa concentration necessary for an improved motor response was reduced significantly, leading to an increased duration of effect without a change in the maximal response to levodopa therapy. 
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Other Drugs Eliminated Via Hepatic Metabolism
                              
                              Based upon an in vitro study, cytochrome P450 enzymes play a minor role in the metabolism of apomorphine. In vitro studies have also demonstrated that drug interactions are unlikely due to apomorphine acting as a substrate, an inhibitor, or an inducer of cytochrome P450 enzymes. 
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 COMT Interactions
                              
                              A pharmacokinetic interaction of APOKYN with catechol-O-methyl transferase (COMT) inhibitors or drugs metabolized by this route is unlikely since apomorphine appears not to be metabolized by COMT.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         