
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  Following the application of CENTANY (mupirocin ointment, 2%) to a 400 cm2 area on the back of 23 healthy volunteers once daily for 7 days, the mean (range) cumulative urinary excretion of monic acid over 24 hrs following the last administration was 1.25% (0.2% to 3.0%) of the administered dose of mupirocin. The monic acid concentration in urine collected at specified intervals for 24 hrs on Day 7 ranged from <0.050 to 0.637 µg/mL.
               
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Microbiology
                     
                        Mupirocin is an antibacterial agent produced by fermentation using the organism Pseudomonas fluorescens. Its spectrum of activity includes gram-positive bacteria. It is also active, in vitro only, against certain gram-negative bacteria. Mupirocin inhibits bacterial protein synthesis by reversibly and specifically binding to bacterial isoleucyl transfer-RNA synthetase. Due to this unique mode of action, mupirocin does not demonstrate cross-resistance with other classes of antimicrobial agents.
                        When mupirocin resistance occurs, it results from the production of a modified isoleucyl-tRNA synthetase or the acquisition, by genetic transfer, of a plasmid-mediating a new isoleucyl-tRNA synthetase. High-level plasmid-mediated resistance (MIC > 500 mcg/mL) has been reported in increasing numbers of isolates of Staphylococcus aureus and with higher frequency in coagulase-negative staphylococci. Methicillin resistance and mupirocin resistance commonly occur together in Staphylococcus aureus and coagulase negative staphylococci.
                        Mupirocin is bactericidal at concentrations achieved by topical administration. However, the minimum bactericidal concentration (MBC) against relevant pathogens is generally eight-fold to thirty-fold higher than the minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC). In addition, mupirocin is highly protein bound (>97%), and the effect of wound secretions on the MICs of mupirocin has not been determined.
                        Mupirocin has been shown to be active against susceptible strains of Staphylococcus aureus and Streptococcus pyogenes, both in vitro and in clinical studies (see
                               INDICATIONS AND USAGE
                           ).
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         