
               
               
               12  CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1  Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Feraheme consists of a superparamagnetic iron oxide that is coated with a carbohydrate shell, which helps to isolate the bioactive iron from plasma components until the iron-carbohydrate complex enters the reticuloendothelial system macrophages of the liver, spleen and bone marrow. The iron is released from the iron-carbohydrate complex within vesicles in the macrophages. Iron then either enters the intracellular storage iron pool (e.g., ferritin) or is transferred to plasma transferrin for transport to erythroid precursor cells for incorporation into hemoglobin.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2  Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        
                           Cardiac Electrophysiology
                           
In a randomized, positive- and placebo-controlled, parallel-group study, healthy subjects received a supratherapeutic regimen of Feraheme (1.02 g given as two 510 mg doses within 24 hours), placebo or a single dose of 400 mg moxifloxacin (positive control). Results demonstrated no effect of Feraheme on QT interval durations. No clinically meaningful effect of Feraheme on heart rate was observed.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3  Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        The pharmacokinetic (PK) behavior of Feraheme has been examined in healthy subjects and in patients with CKD stage 5D on hemodialysis. Feraheme exhibited dose-dependent, capacity-limited elimination from plasma with a half life of approximately 15 hours in humans. The clearance (CL) was decreased by increasing the dose of Feraheme. Volume of distribution (Vd) was consistent with plasma volume, and the mean maximum observed plasma concentration (Cmax) and terminal half-life (t1/2) values increased with dose. The estimated values of CL and Vd following two 510 mg doses of Feraheme administered intravenously within 24 hours were 69.1 mL/hr and 3.16 L, respectively. The Cmax and time of maximum concentration (tmax) were 206 mcg/mL and 0.32 hr, respectively. Rate of infusion had no influence on Feraheme PK parameters. No gender differences in Feraheme PK parameters were observed. Feraheme is not removed by hemodialysis.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         