
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  Disofenin (Hepatolite) is an iminodiacetic acid derivative with no known pharmacologic actions at the doses recommended.

                  
                  Technetium Tc99m Disofenin is rapidly cleared from the circulation of normal individuals following intravenous administration; about 8% of the injected activity remains in the circulation 30 minutes post-injection. About 9% of the administered activity is excreted in the urine over the first two hours post-injection. The remainder of the activity is essentially quantitatively cleared through the hepatobiliary system. In fasting normal individuals, peak liver uptake occurs by 10 minutes post-injection and peak gallbladder accumulation by 30-40 minutes post-injection. Gallbladder visualization and visualization of intestinal activity occurs by 60 minutes post-injection in individuals with normal hepatobiliary function.

                  
                  As the serum bilirubin level increases, the blood clearance becomes progressively delayed, resulting in higher background-to-liver radioactivity ratios. Kidney visualization becomes progressively prolonged compared with that in patients with normal biliary excretion. In patients with hepatocellular disease or partial biliary obstruction, there is delayed transit of the radiopharmaceutical to the gut.
                  Morphine administration has been reported to be effective in shortening the 4 hours usually required for observations, to 90 minutes. In patients who do not have acute cholecystitis, the use of morphine may result in visualization of the gall bladder within an additional 30 minutes.

                  
                  False negative visualization of the gallbladder in cases of acute cholecystitis, and false positive failure of a normal gallbladder to visualize have been reported with both morphine augmentation and the standard 4 hours of observation.
               
               
            
         