
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  
                     
                        Coadministration of efavirenz can alter the concentrations of other drugs and other drugs may alter the concentrations of efavirenz. The potential for drug-drug interactions should be considered before and during therapy. (7.1, 12.3)
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 Drug-Drug Interactions
                     
                        Efavirenz has been shown in vivo to induce CYP3A and CYP2B6. Other compounds that are substrates of CYP3A or CYP2B6 may have decreased plasma concentrations when coadministered with SUSTIVA. Drugs that induce CYP3A activity (eg, phenobarbital, rifampin, rifabutin) would be expected to increase the clearance of efavirenz resulting in lowered plasma concentrations [see Dosage and Administration (2.1)
                           ]. Drug interactions with SUSTIVA are summarized in Table 5 [for pharmacokinetics data see 
                           
                              Clinical Pharmacology (12.3, Tables 7 and 8)
                           ]. This table includes potentially significant interactions, but is not all inclusive.
                        


                     



                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Other Drugs 
                           
                              Based on the results of drug interaction studies [see 
                                 
                                    Clinical Pharmacology (12.3, Tables 7 and 8)
                                 ], no dosage adjustment is recommended when SUSTIVA is given with the following: aluminum/magnesium hydroxide antacids, azithromycin, cetirizine, famotidine, fluconazole, lamivudine, lorazepam, nelfinavir, paroxetine, raltegravir, tenofovir disoproxil fumarate, and zidovudine.
                              Specific drug interaction studies have not been performed with SUSTIVA and NRTIs other than lamivudine and zidovudine. Clinically significant interactions would not be expected since the NRTIs are metabolized via a different route than efavirenz and would be unlikely to compete for the same metabolic enzymes and elimination pathways.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 Cannabinoid Test Interaction
                     
                        Efavirenz does not bind to cannabinoid receptors. False-positive urine cannabinoid test results have been reported with some screening assays in uninfected and HIV-infected subjects receiving efavirenz. Confirmation of positive screening tests for cannabinoids by a more specific method is recommended.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         