
                     
                     
                     
                        Drug Interactions
                     
                     
                        When corticosteroids are administered concomitantly with potassium-depleting agents (e.g., ), patients should be observed closely for development of hypokalemia. In addition, there have been cases reported in which concomitant use of amphotericin B and hydrocortisone was followed by cardiac enlargement and congestive heart failure.
                                    Amphotericin B Injection and Potassium-Depleting Agents
                                        

                           
                           amphotericin B, diuretics
                        
                        Macrolide antibiotics have been reported to cause a significant decrease in corticosteroid clearance (See : Hepatic Enzyme Inducers, Inhibitors and Substrates).
                                    Antibiotics
                                        

                           
                           
                              PRECAUTIONS: Drug Interactions
                           
                        
                        Concomitant use of anticholinesterase agents (e.g., ) and corticosteroids may produce severe weakness in patients with myasthenia gravis. If possible, anticholinesterase agents should be withdrawn at least 24 hours before initiating corticosteroid therapy. If concomitant therapy must occur, it should take place under close supervision and the need for respiratory support should be anticipated.
                                    Anticholinesterases
                                        

                           
                           neostigmine, pyridostigmine
                        
                        Co-administration of corticosteroids and warfarin usually results in inhibition of response to , although there have been some conflicting reports. Therefore, coagulation indices should be monitored frequently to maintain the desired anticoagulant effect.
                                    Anticoagulants, Oral
                                        

                           
                           warfarin
                        
                        Because corticosteroids may increase blood glucose concentrations, dosage adjustments of antidiabetic agents may be required.
                                    Antidiabetics
                                        

                           
                        
                        Serum concentrations of may be decreased.
                                    Antitubercular Drugs
                                        

                           
                           isoniazid
                        
                        Since systemic steroids, as well as bupropion, can lower the seizure threshold, concurrent administration should be undertaken only with extreme caution; low initial dosing and small gradual increases should be employed.
                                    Bupropion
                                        

                           
                        
                        Cholestyramine may increase the clearance of corticosteroids.
                                    Cholestyramine
                                        

                           
                        
                        Increased activity of both cyclosporine and corticosteroids may occur when the two are used concurrently. Convulsions have been reported with this concurrent use.
                                    Cyclosporine
                                        

                           
                        
                        Patients on digitalis glycosides may be at increased risk of arrhythmias due to hypokalemia.
                                    Digitalis Glycosides
                                        

                           
                        
                        Estrogens may decrease the hepatic metabolism of certain corticosteroids, thereby increasing their effect.
                                    Estrogens, Including Oral Contraceptives
                                        

                           
                        
                        Post-marketing surveillance reports indicate that the risk of tendon rupture may be increased in patients receiving concomitant fluoroquinolones (e.g., ) and corticosteroids, especially in the elderly. Tendon rupture can occur during or after treatment with quinolones.
                                    Fluoroquinolones
                                        

                           
                           ciprofloxacin,
                           levofloxacin
                        
                        Drugs which cytochrome P450 3A4 (CYP 3A4) enzyme activity (e.g., ) may enhance the metabolism of corticosteroids andrequire that the dosage of the corticosteroid be increased. Drugs which CYP 3A4(e.g., ) have the potential to result in increased plasma concentrations ofcorticosteroids. Glucocorticoids are moderate inducers of CYP 3A4. Co-administration withother drugs that are metabolized by CYP 3A4 (e.g., ) may increasetheir clearance, resulting in decreased plasma concentration.
                                    Hepatic Enzyme Inducers, Inhibitors and Substrates
                                        

                           
                           induce
                           barbiturates, phenytoin, carbamazepine, rifampin
                           inhibit
                           ketoconazole, itraconazole, ritonavir, indinavir, macrolide antibiotics such as erythromycin
                           indinavir, erythromycin
                        
                        Ketoconazole has been reported to decrease the metabolism of certain corticosteroids by up to 60%, leading to increased risk of corticosteroid side effects. In addition, ketoconazole alone can inhibit adrenal corticosteroid synthesis and may cause adrenal insufficiency during corticosteroid withdrawal.
                                    Ketoconazole
                                        

                           
                        
                        Concomitant use of aspirin (or other nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory agents) and corticosteroids increases the risk of gastrointestinal side effects. Aspirin should be used cautiously in conjunction with corticosteroids in hypoprothrombinemia. The clearance of salicylates may be increased with concurrent use of corticosteroids; this could lead to decreased salicylate serum levels or increase the risk of salicylate toxicity when corticosteroid is withdrawn.
                                    Nonsteroidal Anti-Inflammatory Agents (NSAIDS)
                                        

                           
                        
                        In post-marketing experience, there have been reports of both increases and decreases in phenytoin levels with dexamethasone co-administration, leading to alterations in seizure control. Phenytoin has been demonstrated to increase the hepatic metabolism of corticosteroids, resulting in a decreased therapeutic effect of the corticosteroid.
                                    Phenytoin
                                        

                           
                        
                        Increased doses of quetiapine may be required to maintain control of symptoms of schizophrenia in patients receiving a glucocorticoid, a hepatic enzyme inducer.
                                    Quetiapine
                                        

                           
                        
                        Corticosteroids may suppress reactions to skin tests.
                                    Skin Tests
                                        

                           
                        
                        Co-administration with thalidomide should be employed cautiously, as toxic epidermal necrolysis has been reported with concomitant use.
                                    Thalidomide
                                        

                           
                        
                        Patients on corticosteroid therapy may exhibit a diminished response to toxoids and live or inactivated vaccines due to inhibition of antibody response. Corticosteroids may also potentiate the replication of some organisms contained in live attenuated vaccines. Routine administration of vaccines or toxoids should be deferred until corticosteroid therapy is discontinued if possible (See Vaccination).
                                    Vaccines
                                        

                           
                           :
                                        
                                 WARNINGS: Infection
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                  
               