
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
                  
                     
                        •No drug interaction trials have been conducted using TRIZIVIR Tablets [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                  
               
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              •Concomitant use with the following drugs should be avoided: stavudine (7.1), doxorubicin (7.2).
                           
                              •Ethanol: Decreases the elimination of abacavir. (7.3)
                           
                              •Bone marrow suppressive/cytotoxic agents: May increase the hematologic toxicity of zidovudine. (7.4)
                           
                              •Methadone: An increased methadone dose may be required in a small number of patients. (7.6)
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 Antiretroviral Agents
                     
                        
                           Zidovudine:
                           Stavudine: Concomitant use of zidovudine with stavudine should be avoided since an antagonistic relationship has been demonstrated in vitro.
                        
                           Nucleoside Analogues Affecting DNA Replication: Some nucleoside analogues affecting DNA replication, such as ribavirin, antagonize the in vitro antiviral activity of zidovudine against HIV-1; concomitant use of such drugs should be avoided.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 Doxorubicin
                     
                        
                           Zidovudine: Concomitant use of zidovudine with doxorubicin should be avoided since an antagonistic relationship has been demonstrated in vitro.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3 Ethanol
                     
                        
                           Abacavir: Abacavir has no effect on the pharmacokinetic properties of ethanol. Ethanol decreases the elimination of abacavir causing an increase in overall exposure [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4 Hematologic/Bone Marrow Suppressive/Cytotoxic Agents
                     
                        
                           Zidovudine: Coadministration of ganciclovir, interferon alfa, ribavirin, and other bone marrow suppressive or cytotoxic agents may increase the hematologic toxicity of zidovudine.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.5 Interferon- and Ribavirin-Based Regimens
                     
                        
                           Lamivudine: Although no evidence of a pharmacokinetic or pharmacodynamic interaction (e.g., loss of HIV-1/HCV virologic suppression) was seen when ribavirin was coadministered with lamivudine in HIV-1/HCV co-infected subjects, hepatic decompensation (some fatal) has occurred in HIV-1/HCV co-infected subjects receiving combination antiretroviral therapy for HIV-1 and interferon alfa with or without ribavirin [see Warnings and Precautions (5.6), Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.6 Methadone
                     
                        
                           Abacavir: The addition of methadone has no clinically significant effect on the pharmacokinetic properties of abacavir. In a trial of 11 HIV-1-infected subjects receiving methadone-maintenance therapy with 600 mg of ZIAGEN twice daily (twice the currently recommended dose), oral methadone clearance increased [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)]. This alteration will not result in a methadone dose modification in the majority of patients; however, an increased methadone dose may be required in a small number of patients.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.7 Trimethoprim/Sulfamethoxazole (TMP/SMX)
                     
                        
                           Lamivudine: No change in dose of either drug is recommended [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)]. There is no information regarding the effect on lamivudine pharmacokinetics of higher doses of TMP/SMX such as those used to treat PCP.
                     
                  
               
            
         