
               
               
               Drug Interactions Section
               
                  
                  
                     Do not coadminister with atazanavir or nelfinavir (7.1) 
                     Concomitant warfarin use may require monitoring (7.2) 
                     May interfere with the absorption of drugs where gastric pH is important for bioavailability (7.4) 
                     May produce false-positive urine screen for THC (7.5) 
                     Methotrexate: Pantoprazole may increase serum level of methotrexate (7.6)
                  
                  Information describing use in pediatric patients with erosive esophagitis associated with GERD is approved for Wyeth Pharmaceuticals Inc.’s pantoprazole sodium delayed-release tablets. However, due to Wyeth Pharmaceuticals Inc.’s marketing exclusivity rights, this drug product is not labeled with that pediatric information.
                  
 

                  
                  Concomitant use of atazanavir or nelfinavir with proton pump inhibitors is not recommended. Coadministration of atazanavir or nelfinavir with proton pump inhibitors is expected to substantially decrease atazanavir or nelfinavir plasma concentrations and may result in a loss of therapeutic effect and development of drug resistance.
                  
 

                  
                  There have been postmarketing reports of increased INR and prothrombin time in patients receiving proton pump inhibitors, including pantoprazole, and warfarin concomitantly. Increases in INR and prothrombin time may lead to abnormal bleeding and even death. Patients treated with proton pump inhibitors and warfarin concomitantly should be monitored for increases in INR and prothrombin time.
                  
 

                  
                  Concomitant administration of pantoprazole and clopidogrel in healthy subjects had no clinically important effect on exposure to the active metabolite of clopidogrel or clopidogrel-induced platelet inhibition [see 
                  
                     Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)
                  
                  ]
                  
                     . 
                  
                  No dose adjustment of clopidogrel is necessary when administered with an approved dose of pantoprazole.
                  
 

                  
                  Pantoprazole causes long-lasting inhibition of gastric acid secretion. Therefore, pantoprazole may interfere with absorption of drugs where gastric pH is an important determinant of their bioavailability (e.g., ketoconazole, ampicillin esters, and iron salts).
                  
 

                  
                  There have been reports of false positive urine screening tests for tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) in patients receiving proton pump inhibitors. An alternative confirmatory method should be considered to verify positive results.
                  
 

                  
                  
                     Case
                  
                   reports, published population pharmacokinetic studies, and retrospective analyses suggest that concomitant administration of PPIs and methotrexate (primarily at high dose; see methotrexate prescribing information) may elevate and prolong serum levels of methotrexate and/or its metabolite hydroxymethotrexate. However, no formal drug interaction studies of methotrexate with PPIs have been conducted [
                  
                     see Warnings and Precautions (5.8)
                  
                  ].
                  
 

               
               
            
         