
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
                  No significant drug interactions were reported in studies in which Benicar was co-administered with digoxin or warfarin in healthy volunteers.
                  The bioavailability of olmesartan was not significantly altered by the co-administration of antacids [Al(OH)3/Mg(OH)2].
                  Olmesartan medoxomil is not metabolized by the cytochrome P450 system and has no effects on P450 enzymes; thus, interactions with drugs that inhibit, induce, or are metabolized by those enzymes are not expected.
                  
                     Non-Steroidal Anti-Inflammatory Agents including Selective Cyclooxygenase-2 Inhibitors (COX-2 Inhibitors)
                  
                  In patients who are elderly, volume-depleted (including those on diuretic therapy), or with compromised renal function, co-administration of NSAIDs, including selective COX-2 inhibitors, with angiotensin II receptor antagonists, including olmesartan medoxomil, may result in deterioration of renal function, including possible acute renal failure. These effects are usually reversible. Monitor renal function periodically in patients receiving olmesartan medoxomil and NSAID therapy.
                  The antihypertensive effect of angiotensin II receptor antagonists, including olmesartan medoxomil may be attenuated by NSAIDs including selective COX-2 inhibitors.
                  
                     Dual Blockade of the Renin-Angiotensin System (RAS)
                  
                  Dual blockade of the RAS with angiotensin receptor blockers, ACE inhibitors, or aliskiren is associated with increased risks of hypotension, hyperkalemia, and changes in renal function (including acute renal failure) compared to monotherapy. Most patients receiving the combination of two RAS inhibitors do not obtain any additional benefit compared to monotherapy. In general, avoid combined use of RAS inhibitors. Closely monitor blood pressure, renal function and electrolytes in patients on Benicar and other agents that affect the RAS.
                  Do not co-administer aliskiren with Benicar in patients with diabetes [see Contraindications (4)]. Avoid use of aliskiren with Benicar in patients with renal impairment (GFR <60 ml/min).
                  
                     
                        
                           Colesevelam 
                        hydrochloride
                  
                  Concurrent administration of bile acid sequestering agent colesevelam hydrochloride reduces the systemic exposure and peak plasma concentration of olmesartan. Administration of olmesartan at least 4 hours prior to colesevelam hydrochloride decreased the drug interaction effect. Consider administering olmesartan at least 4 hours before the colesevelam hydrochloride dose [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                  
                     Lithium
                  
                  Increases in serum lithium concentrations and lithium toxicity have been reported during concomitant administration of lithium with angiotensin II receptor antagonists, including BENICAR. Monitor serum lithium levels during concomitant use.
               
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           NSAID use may lead to increased risk of renal impairment and loss of antihypertensive effect (7).
                           Dual inhibition of the renin-angiotensin system: Increased risk of renal impairment, hypotension, and hyperkalemia (7).
                           Colesevelam hydrochloride: Consider administering olmesartan at least 4 hours before colesevelam hydrochloride dose (7).
                  
                           Lithium: Increases in serum lithium concentrations and lithium toxicity (7).
                        
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         