
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Nystatin
                     
                        Nystatin exerts its antifungal activity against a variety of pathogenic and nonpathogenic yeasts and fungi by binding to sterols in the cell membrane. The binding process renders the cell membrane incapable of functioning as a selective barrier. Nystatin provides specific anticandidal activity to Candida (Monilia) albicans and other Candida species, but is not active against bacteria, protozoa, trichomonads, or viruses.
                        Nystatin is not absorbed from intact skin or mucous membranes.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Triamcinolone Acetonide
                     
                        Triamcinolone acetonide is primarily effective because of its anti-inflammatory, antipruritic and vasoconstrictive actions, characteristic of the topical corticosteroid class of drugs. The pharmacologic effects of the topical corticosteroids are well known; however, the mechanisms of their dermatologic actions are unclear. Various laboratory methods, including vasoconstrictor assays, are used to compare and predict potencies and/or clinical efficacies of the topical corticosteroids. There is some evidence to suggest that a recognizable correlation exists between vasoconstrictor potency and therapeutic efficacy in man.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        the extent of percutaneous absorption of topical corticosteroids is determined by many factors including the vehicle, the integrity of the epidermal barrier, and the use of occlusive dressings (see 
                              DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION
                           ).
                        Topical corticosteroids can be absorbed from normal intact skin. Inflammation and/or other disease processes in the skin increase percutaneous absorption. Occlusive dressings substantially increase the percutaneous absorption of topical corticosteroids (see 
                              DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION
                           ).
                        Once absorbed through the skin, topical corticosteroids are handled through pharmacokinetic pathways similar to systemically administered corticosteroids. Corticosteroids are bound to plasma proteins in varying degrees. Corticosteroids are metabolized primarily in the liver and are then excreted by the kidneys. Some of the topical corticosteroids and their metabolites are also excreted into the bile.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Nystatin and Triamcinolone Acetonide
                     
                        During clinical studies of mild to severe manifestations of cutaneous candidiasis, patients treated with nystatin and triamcinolone acetonide showed a faster and more pronounced clearing of erythema and pruritus than patients treated with nystatin or triamcinolone acetonide alone.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         