
               
               
               
                  
                  CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
                  
                     There are several 
analytical methods used to estimate megestrol acetate plasma concentrations, 
including gas chromatography-mass fragmentography (GC-MF), high pressure liquid 
chromatography (HPLC) and radioimmunoassay (RIA). The GC-MF and HPLC methods are 
specific for megestrol acetate and yield equivalent concentrations. The RIA 
method reacts to megestrol acetate metabolites and is, therefore, non-specific 
and indicates higher concentrations than the GC-MF and HPLC methods. Plasma 
concentrations are dependent, not only on the method used, but also on 
intestinal and hepatic inactivation of the drug, which may be affected by 
factors such as intestinal tract motility, intestinal bacteria, antibiotics 
administered, body weight, diet and liver function.
                  
                  
                  Mechanism of Action
                     Several investigators 
have reported on the appetite enhancing property of megestrol acetate and its 
possible use in cachexia. The precise mechanism by which megestrol acetate 
produces effects in anorexia and cachexia is unknown at the present time.
                  
                  
                  Pharmacokinetic Properties:
                     Plasma concentrations of 
megestrol acetate after administration of 625 mg (125 mg/mL) of Megace® ES oral 
suspension are equivalent under fed conditions to 800 mg (40 mg/mL) of megestrol 
acetate oral suspension (see figure below).                                                                                                                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                                             
                  
                     In order to characterize 
the dose proportionality of Megace® ES, pharmacokinetic studies across a range 
of doses were conducted when administered under fasting and fed conditions. 
Pharmacokinetics of megestrol was linear in the dosing range between 150 mg and 
675 mg after Megace® ES administration regardless of meal condition. The Cmax 
and AUC under a high fat meal were increased by 48% and 36%, respectively, 
compared to those under the fasting after 625 mg Megace® ES administration 
(Table 1). However, a high fat meal significantly increased AUC and Cmax of 
megestrol to 2-fold and 7-fold, respectively, compared to those under fasting 
condition after administration of 800 mg in the original formulation. There was 
no difference in safety following administration in the fed state, therefore 
Megace® ES could be taken without regard to meals.
                  
                  


                  



                     Plasma steady state 
pharmacokinetics of megestrol acetate were evaluated in 10 adult, cachectic male 
patients with acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) and an involuntary 
weight loss greater than 10% of baseline. Patients received single oral doses of 
800 mg/day of megestrol acetate oral suspension for 21 days. Plasma 
concentration data obtained on day 21 were evaluated for up to 48 hours past the 
last dose.
                  
                     Mean (±1SD) peak plasma 
concentration (Cmax) of megestrol acetate was 753 (±539) ng/mL. Mean area under 
the concentration time-curve (AUC) was 10476 (±7788) ng x hr/mL. Median Tmax 
value was five hours. Seven of 10 patients gained weight in three weeks.
                  
                     Additionally, 24 adult, 
asymptomatic HIV seropositive male subjects were dosed once daily with 750 mg of 
megestrol acetate oral suspension. The treatment was administered for 14 days. 
Mean Cmax and AUC values were 490 (±238) ng/mL and 6779 (±3048) hr x ng/mL, 
respectively. The median Tmax value was three hours. The mean Cmax value was 202 
(±101) ng/mL. The mean % of fluctuation value was 107 (±40).
                  
                  
                  Metabolism
                     Megestrol acetate 
metabolites which were identified in urine constituted 5% to 8% of the dose 
administered. Respiratory excretion as labeled carbon dioxide and fat storage 
may have accounted for at least part of the radioactivity not found in urine and 
feces.
                  
                  
                  Elimination
                     The major route of drug 
elimination in humans is urine. When radiolabeled megestrol acetate was 
administered to humans in doses of 4 to 90 mg, the urinary excretion within 10 
days ranged from 56.5% to 78.4% (mean 66.4%) and fecal excretion ranged from 
7.7% to 30.3% (mean 19.8%). The total recovered radioactivity varied between 
83.1% and 94.7% (mean 86.2%).
                  
                  
                  Special Populations
                     The pharmacokinetics of 
megestrol acetate has not been studied in any special populations.
                  
                  ANIMAL PHARMACOLOGY AND/OR TOXICOLOGY
                  
                     Long-term treatment with 
Megace ® ES (megestrol acetate) may increase the risk of 
respiratory infections. A trend toward increased frequency of respiratory 
infections, decreased lymphocyte counts and increased neutrophil counts was 
observed in a two-year chronic toxicity/carcinogenicity study of megestrol 
acetate conducted in rats.
                  
                  
                  
                  DESCRIPTION OF CLINICAL STUDIES
                  
                     Megestrol acetate oral 
suspension at a dose of 800 mg/20 mL is equivalent to 625 mg/5 mL of Megace 
® ES. The clinical efficacy of megestrol acetate oral 
suspension was assessed in two clinical trials. One was a multicenter, 
randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled study comparing megestrol acetate 
(MA) at doses of 100 mg, 400 mg, and 800 mg per day versus placebo in AIDS 
patients with anorexia/cachexia and significant weight loss. Of the 270 patients 
entered on study, 195 met all inclusion/exclusion criteria, had at least two 
additional post baseline weight measurements over a 12 week period or had one 
post baseline weight measurement but dropped out for therapeutic failure. The 
percent of patients gaining five or more pounds at maximum weight gain in 12 
study weeks was statistically significantly greater for the 800 mg (64%) and 400 
mg (57%) MA-treated groups than for the placebo group (24%). Mean weight 
increased from baseline to last evaluation in 12 study weeks in the 800 mg 
MA-treated group by 7.8 pounds, the 400 mg MA group by 4.2 pounds, the 100 mg MA 
group by 1.9 pounds and decreased in the placebo group by 1.6 pounds. Mean 
weight changes at 4, 8 and 12 weeks for patients evaluable for efficacy in the 
two clinical trials are shown graphically. Changes in body composition during 
the 12 study weeks as measured by bioelectrical impedance analysis showed 
increases in non-water body weight in the MA-treated groups (see clinical 
studies table). In addition, edema developed or worsened in only 3 patients.
                  
                     Greater percentages of 
MA-treated patients in the 800 mg group (89%), the 400 mg group (68%) and the 
100 mg group (72%), than in the placebo group (50%), showed an improvement in 
appetite at last evaluation during the 12 study weeks. A statistically 
significant difference was observed between the 800 mg MA-treated group and the 
placebo group in the change in caloric intake from baseline to time of maximum 
weight change. Patients were asked to assess weight change, appetite, 
appearance, and overall perception of well-being in a 9 question survey. At 
maximum weight change only the 800 mg MA-treated group gave responses that were 
statistically significantly more favorable to all questions when compared to the 
placebo-treated group. A dose response was noted in the survey with positive 
responses correlating with higher dose for all questions.
                  
                     The second trial was a 
multicenter, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled study comparing 
megestrol acetate 800 mg/day versus placebo in AIDS patients with 
anorexia/cachexia and significant weight loss. Of the 100 patients entered on 
study, 65 met all inclusion/exclusion criteria, had at least two additional post 
baseline weight measurements over a 12 week period or had one post baseline 
weight measurement but dropped out for therapeutic failure. Patients in the 800 
mg MA-treated group had a statistically significantly larger increase in mean 
maximum weight change than patients in the placebo group. From baseline to study 
week 12, mean weight increased by 11.2 pounds in the MA-treated group and 
decreased 2.1 pounds in the placebo group. Changes in body composition as 
measured by bioelectrical impedance analysis showed increases in non-water 
weight in the MA-treated group (see clinical studies table). No edema was 
reported in the MA-treated group. A greater percentage of MA-treated patients 
(67%) than placebo-treated patients (38%) showed an improvement in appetite at 
last evaluation during the 12 study weeks; this difference was statistically 
significant. There were no statistically significant differences between 
treatment groups in mean caloric change or in daily caloric intake at time to 
maximum weight change. In the same 9 question survey referenced in the first 
trial, patients’ assessments of weight change, appetite, appearance, and overall 
perception of well-being showed increases in mean scores in MA-treated patients 
as compared to the placebo group.
                  
                     In both trials, patients 
tolerated the drug well and no statistically significant differences were seen 
between the treatment groups with regard to laboratory abnormalities, new 
opportunistic infections, lymphocyte counts, T4 counts, T8 counts, or skin 
reactivity tests (see ADVERSE
                     REACTIONS 
section).
                  
                  


                  



                     Presented below are the 
results of mean weight changes for patients evaluable for efficacy in trials 1 
and 2.
                  

                                                                                                            
                  
                  
                     

                  
                  

                                                                                                                  
                  
                     

                  
                  

                                                                                                          
                  
                     

                  
                  
                     

                  
               
               
               
                  
                     Graph Image
                     
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     Trial1 Image
                     
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     Trial2 Image
                     
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         