
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Ertapenem sodium is a carbapenem antibiotic [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.4)].
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        Average plasma concentrations (mcg/mL) of ertapenem following a single 30-minute infusion of a 1 g intravenous (IV) dose and administration of a single 1 g intramuscular (IM) dose in healthy young adults are presented in Table 8.
                        


                        


The area under the plasma concentration-time curve (AUC) of ertapenem in adults increased less-than dose-proportional based on total ertapenem concentrations over the 0.5 to 2 g dose range, whereas the AUC increased greater-than dose-proportional based on unbound ertapenem concentrations. Ertapenem exhibits non-linear pharmacokinetics due to concentration-dependent plasma protein binding at the proposed therapeutic dose [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)]. There is no accumulation of ertapenem following multiple IV or IM 1 g daily doses in healthy adults.
                        Average plasma concentrations (mcg/mL) of ertapenem in pediatric patients are presented in Table 9.
                        


                        



                           Absorption
                        
                        Ertapenem, reconstituted with 1% lidocaine HCl injection, USP (in saline without epinephrine), is almost completely absorbed following intramuscular (IM) administration at the recommended dose of 1 g. The mean bioavailability is approximately 90%. Following 1 g daily IM administration, mean peak plasma concentrations (Cmax) are achieved in approximately 2.3 hours (Tmax).
                        
                           Distribution
                        
                        Ertapenem is highly bound to human plasma proteins, primarily albumin. In healthy young adults, the protein binding of ertapenem decreases as plasma concentrations increase, from approximately 95% bound at an approximate plasma concentration of <100 micrograms (mcg)/mL to approximately 85% bound at an approximate plasma concentration of 300 mcg/mL. 
                        The apparent volume of distribution at steady state (Vss) of ertapenem in adults is approximately 0.12 liter/kg, approximately 0.2 liter/kg in pediatric patients 3 months to 12 years of age and approximately 0.16 liter/kg in pediatric patients 13 to 17 years of age. 
                        The concentrations of ertapenem achieved in suction-induced skin blister fluid at each sampling point on the third day of 1 g once daily IV doses are presented in Table 10. The ratio of AUC0-24 in skin blister fluid/AUC0-24 in plasma is 0.61.
                        


                        


The concentration of ertapenem in breast milk from 5 lactating women with pelvic infections (5 to 14 days postpartum) was measured at random time points daily for 5 consecutive days following the last 1 g dose of intravenous therapy (3-10 days of therapy). The concentration of ertapenem in breast milk within 24 hours of the last dose of therapy in all 5 women ranged from <0.13 (lower limit of quantitation) to 0.38 mcg/mL; peak concentrations were not assessed. By day 5 after discontinuation of therapy, the level of ertapenem was undetectable in the breast milk of 4 women and below the lower limit of quantitation (<0.13 mcg/mL) in 1 woman.
                        
                           Metabolism
                        
                        In healthy young adults, after infusion of 1 g IV radiolabeled ertapenem, the plasma radioactivity consists predominantly (94%) of ertapenem. The major metabolite of ertapenem is the inactive ring-opened derivative formed by hydrolysis of the beta-lactam ring. 
                        
                           Elimination
                        
                        Ertapenem is eliminated primarily by the kidneys. The mean plasma half-life in healthy young adults is approximately 4 hours and the plasma clearance is approximately 1.8 L/hour. The mean plasma half-life in pediatric patients 13 to 17 years of age is approximately 4 hours and approximately 2.5 hours in pediatric patients 3 months to 12 years of age. 
                        Following the administration of 1 g IV radiolabeled ertapenem to healthy young adults, approximately 80% is recovered in urine and 10% in feces. Of the 80% recovered in urine, approximately 38% is excreted as unchanged drug and approximately 37% as the ring-opened metabolite. 
                        In healthy young adults given a 1 g IV dose, the mean percentage of the administered dose excreted in urine was 17.4% during 0-2 hours postdose, 5.4% during 4-6 hours postdose, and 2.4% during 12-24 hours postdose. 
                        
                           Special Populations
                        
                        
                           Renal Impairment
                        
                        Total and unbound fractions of ertapenem pharmacokinetics were investigated in 26 adult subjects (31 to 80 years of age) with varying degrees of renal impairment. Following a single 1 g IV dose of ertapenem, the unbound AUC increased 1.5-fold and 2.3-fold in subjects with mild renal impairment (CLCR 60-90 mL/min/1.73 m2) and moderate renal impairment (CLCR 31-59 mL/min/1.73 m2), respectively, compared with healthy young subjects (25 to 45 years of age). No dosage adjustment is necessary in patients with CLCR ≥31 mL/min/1.73 m2. The unbound AUC increased 4.4-fold and 7.6-fold in subjects with advanced renal impairment (CLCR 5-30 mL/min/1.73 m2) and end-stage renal disease (CLCR <10 mL/min/1.73 m2), respectively, compared with healthy young subjects. The effects of renal impairment on AUC of total drug were of smaller magnitude. The recommended dose of ertapenem in adult patients with CLCR ≤30 mL/min/1.73 m2 is 0.5 grams every 24 hours. Following a single 1 g IV dose given immediately prior to a 4 hour hemodialysis session in 5 adult patients with end-stage renal disease, approximately 30% of the dose was recovered in the dialysate. Dose adjustments are recommended for patients with severe renal impairment and end-stage renal disease [see Dosage and Administration (2.4)]. There are no data in pediatric patients with renal impairment.
                        
                           Hepatic Impairment
                        
                        The pharmacokinetics of ertapenem in patients with hepatic impairment have not been established. However, ertapenem does not appear to undergo hepatic metabolism based on in vitro studies and approximately 10% of an administered dose is recovered in the feces [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)
                            and 
                           
                              Dosage and Administration (2.6)].
                        
                           Gender
                        
                        The effect of gender on the pharmacokinetics of ertapenem was evaluated in healthy male (n=8) and healthy female (n=8) subjects. The differences observed could be attributed to body size when body weight was taken into consideration. No dose adjustment is recommended based on gender.
                        
                           Geriatric Patients
                        
                        The impact of age on the pharmacokinetics of ertapenem was evaluated in healthy male (n=7) and healthy female (n=7) subjects ≥65 years of age. The total and unbound AUC increased 37% and 67%, respectively, in elderly adults relative to young adults. These changes were attributed to age-related changes in creatinine clearance. No dosage adjustment is necessary for elderly patients with normal (for their age) renal function.
                        
                           Pediatric Patients
                        
                        Plasma concentrations of ertapenem are comparable in pediatric patients 13 to 17 years of age and adults following a 1 g once daily IV dose.
                        Following the 20 mg/kg dose (up to a maximum dose of 1 g), the pharmacokinetic parameter values in patients 13 to 17 years of age (N=6) were generally comparable to those in healthy young adults.
                        Plasma concentrations at the midpoint of the dosing interval following a single 15 mg/kg IV dose of ertapenem in patients 3 months to 12 years of age are comparable to plasma concentrations at the midpoint of the dosing interval following a 1 g once daily IV dose in adults [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)]. The plasma clearance (mL/min/kg) of ertapenem in patients 3 months to 12 years of age is approximately 2-fold higher as compared to that in adults. At the 15 mg/kg dose, the AUC value (doubled to model a twice daily dosing regimen, i.e., 30 mg/kg/day exposure) in patients 3 months to 12 years of age was comparable to the AUC value in young healthy adults receiving a 1 g IV dose of ertapenem.
                        
                           Drug Interactions
                        
                        When ertapenem is co-administered with probenecid (500 mg p.o. every 6 hours), probenecid competes for active tubular secretion and reduces the renal clearance of ertapenem. Based on total ertapenem concentrations, probenecid increased the AUC of ertapenem by 25%, and reduced the plasma and renal clearance of ertapenem by 20% and 35%, respectively. The half-life of ertapenem was increased from 4.0 to 4.8 hours.
                        
                           In vitro studies in human liver microsomes indicate that ertapenem does not inhibit metabolism mediated by any of the following cytochrome p450 (CYP) isoforms: 1A2, 2C9, 2C19, 2D6, 2E1 and 3A4.
                        
                           In vitro studies indicate that ertapenem does not inhibit P-glycoprotein-mediated transport of digoxin or vinblastine and that ertapenem is not a substrate for P-glycoprotein-mediated transport. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.4 Microbiology
                     
                        
                           Mechanism of Action
                        
                        Ertapenem has in vitro activity against Gram-positive and Gram-negative aerobic and anaerobic bacteria. The bactericidal activity of ertapenem results from the inhibition of cell wall synthesis and is mediated through ertapenem binding to penicillin binding proteins (PBPs). In Escherichia coli, it has strong affinity toward PBPs 1a, 1b, 2, 3, 4 and 5 with preference for PBPs 2 and 3. 
                        
                           Mechanism of Resistance
                        
                        Ertapenem is stable against hydrolysis by a variety of beta-lactamases, including penicillinases, and cephalosporinases and extended spectrum beta-lactamases. Ertapenem is hydrolyzed by metallo-beta-lactamases. 
                        Ertapenem has been shown to be active against most isolates of the following microorganisms both in vitro and in clinical infections as described in the INDICATIONS AND USAGE section:
                        
                           Gram-positive bacteria:
                        
                        
                           Staphylococcus aureus (methicillin susceptible isolates only)

                           Streptococcus agalactiae 
                           

                           Streptococcus pneumoniae (penicillin susceptible isolates only) 

                           Streptococcus pyogenes 
                        
                        
                           Gram-negative bacteria:
                        
                        
                           Escherichia coli 
                           

                           Haemophilus influenzae (beta-lactamase negative isolates only) 									

                           Klebsiella pneumoniae 
                           

                           Moraxella catarrhalis
                           

                           Proteus mirabilis
                        
                        
                           Anaerobic bacteria:
                        
                        
                           Bacteroides fragilis
                           

                           Bacteroides distasonis 
                           

                           Bacteroides ovatus
                           

                           Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron
                           

                           Bacteroides uniformis 
                           

                           Clostridium clostridioforme 
                           

                           Eubacterium lentum 
                           

                           Peptostreptococcus species

                           Porphyromonas asaccharolytica 
                           

                           Prevotella bivia 
                        
                        The following in vitro data are available, 
                              
                                 but their clinical significance is unknown
                              
                           . At least 90% of the following bacteria exhibit an in vitro minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) less than or equal to the susceptible breakpoint for ertapenem. However, the efficacy of ertapenem in treating clinical infections due to these bacteria 
                              has not been
                            established in adequate and well-controlled clinical trials:
                        
                           Gram-positive bacteria: 
                        
                        
                           Staphylococcus epidermidis (methicillin susceptible isolates only)

                           Streptococcus pneumoniae (penicillin-intermediate isolates) 
                        
                           Gram-negative bacteria:
                        
                        
                           Citrobacter freundii
                           

                           Citrobacter koseri
                           

                           Enterobacter aerogenes
                           

                           Enterobacter cloacae
                           

                           Haemophilus influenzae (beta-lactamase positive isolates only) 									

                           Haemophilus parainfluenzae
                           

                           Klebsiella oxytoca (excluding ESBL producing isolates)

                           Morganella morganii
                           

                           Proteus vulgaris
                           

                           Providencia rettgeri
                           

                           Providencia stuartii
                           

                           Serratia marcescens
                        
                        
                           Anaerobic bacteria:
                        
                        
                           Bacteroides vulgatus
                           

                           Clostridium perfringens
                           

                           Fusobacterium spp. 
                        
                           Susceptibility Test Methods:
                        
                        When available, the clinical microbiology laboratory should provide the results of in vitro susceptibility tests for antimicrobial drug products used in resident hospitals to the physician as periodic reports which describe the susceptibility profile of nosocomial and community-acquired pathogens. These reports should aid the physician in selecting the most effective antimicrobial. 
                        
                           Dilution Techniques:
                        
                        Quantitative methods are used to determine antimicrobial minimum inhibitory concentrations (MICs). These MICs provide estimates of the susceptibility of bacteria to antimicrobial compounds. The MICs should be determined using a standardized procedure. Standardized procedures are based on a broth dilution method {1} or equivalent with standardized inoculum concentrations and standardized concentrations of ertapenem powder. The MIC values should be interpreted according to criteria provided in Table 11 and {4}. 
                        
                           Diffusion Techniques:
                        
                        Quantitative methods that require measurement of zone diameters also provide reproducible estimates of the susceptibility of bacteria to antimicrobial compounds. One such standardized procedure {2} requires the use of standardized inoculum concentrations. This procedure uses paper disks impregnated with 10-µg ertapenem to test the susceptibility of microorganisms to ertapenem. The disk diffusion interpretive criteria should be interpreted according to criteria provided in Table 11 and {4}.
                        
                           Anaerobic Techniques:
                        
                        For anaerobic bacteria, the susceptibility to ertapenem as MICs can be determined by standardized test methods {3}. The MIC values obtained should be interpreted according to criteria provided in Table 11 and {4}.
                        


                        


A report of "Susceptible" indicates that the pathogen is likely to be inhibited if the antimicrobial compound at the infection site reaches the concentrations usually achievable. A report of "Intermediate" indicates that the result should be considered equivocal, and, if the microorganism is not fully susceptible to alternative, clinically feasible drugs, the test should be repeated. This category implies possible clinical applicability in body sites where the drug is physiologically concentrated or in situations where high dosage of drug can be used. This category also provides a buffer zone which prevents small uncontrolled technical factors from causing major discrepancies in interpretation. A report of "Resistant" indicates that the pathogen is not likely to be inhibited if the antimicrobial compound at the infection site reaches the concentrations usually achievable; other therapy should be selected. 
                        
                           Quality Control
                        
                        Standardized susceptibility test procedures require the use of laboratory control microorganisms to ensure the accuracy and precision of supplies and reagents used in the assay, and the techniques of the individuals performing the test. Quality control microorganisms are specific strains of organisms with intrinsic biological properties. QC strains are very stable strains which will give a standard and repeatable susceptibility pattern. The specific strains used for microbiological quality control are not clinically significant. Standard ertapenem powder should provide the following range of values noted in Table 12 and {4,5}. 
                        


