
               
               
               7	DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
                  This section describes clinically relevant drug interactions with VIREAD. Drug interactions trials are described elsewhere in the labeling [See Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)]. 
                  
               
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           Didanosine: Coadministration increases didanosine concentrations. Use with caution and monitor for evidence of didanosine toxicity (e.g., pancreatitis, neuropathy). Consider dose reductions or discontinuations of didanosine if warranted. (7.1)
                           HIV-1 protease inhibitors: Coadministration decreases atazanavir concentrations and increases tenofovir concentrations. When coadministered with VIREAD, use atazanavir given with ritonavir. Coadministration of VIREAD with atazanavir and ritonavir, darunavir and ritonavir, or lopinavir/ritonavir increases tenofovir concentrations.  Monitor for evidence of tenofovir toxicity. (7.2)
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1	Didanosine
                     
                        Coadministration of VIREAD and didanosine should be undertaken with caution and patients receiving this combination should be monitored closely for didanosine-associated adverse reactions. Didanosine should be discontinued in patients who develop didanosine-associated adverse reactions.
                        When administered with VIREAD, Cmax and AUC of didanosine increased significantly [See Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)]. The mechanism of this interaction is unknown. Higher didanosine concentrations could potentiate didanosine-associated adverse reactions, including pancreatitis and neuropathy. Suppression of CD4+ cell counts has been observed in patients receiving VIREAD with didanosine 400 mg daily. 
                        In patients weighing greater than 60 kg, the didanosine dose should be reduced to 250 mg once daily when it is coadministered with VIREAD. In patients weighing less than 60 kg, the didanosine dose should be reduced to 200 mg once daily when it is coadministered with VIREAD. When coadministered, VIREAD and didanosine EC may be taken under fasted conditions or with a light meal (less than 400 kcal, 20% fat). For additional information on coadministration of VIREAD and didanosine, please refer to the full prescribing information for didanosine.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2	HIV-1 Protease Inhibitors
                     
                        VIREAD decreases the AUC and Cmin of atazanavir [See Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)]. When coadministered with VIREAD, it is recommended that atazanavir 300 mg is given with ritonavir 100 mg. VIREAD should not be coadministered with atazanavir without ritonavir.
                        Lopinavir/ritonavir, atazanavir coadministered with ritonavir, and darunavir coadministered with ritonavir have been shown to increase tenofovir concentrations [See Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)]. Tenofovir disoproxil fumarate is a substrate of P-glycoprotein (Pgp) and breast cancer resistance protein (BCRP) transporters. When tenofovir disoproxil fumarate is coadministered with an inhibitor of these transporters, an increase in absorption may be observed. Patients receiving VIREAD concomitantly with lopinavir/ritonavir, ritonavir-boosted atazanavir, or ritonavir-boosted darunavir should be monitored for VIREAD-associated adverse reactions. VIREAD should be discontinued in patients who develop VIREAD-associated adverse reactions.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3	Drugs Affecting Renal Function
                     
                        Since tenofovir is primarily eliminated by the kidneys [See Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)], coadministration of VIREAD with drugs that reduce renal function or compete for active tubular secretion may increase serum concentrations of tenofovir and/or increase the concentrations of other renally eliminated drugs. Some examples include, but are not limited to, cidofovir, acyclovir, valacyclovir, ganciclovir, valganciclovir, aminoglycosides (e.g., gentamicin), and high-dose or multiple NSAIDs [See Warnings and Precautions (5.3)].  
                        In the treatment of chronic hepatitis B, VIREAD should not be administered in combination with HEPSERA (adefovir dipivoxil).
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         