
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           MAOI antidepressants are contraindicated; MAOIs potentiate the effects of amphetamine. Do not administer MAS-ER Capsules during or within 14 days after use of MAOI. (4; 7.1).
                           Alkalinizing agents (GI antacids and urinary): These agents increase blood levels of amphetamine. (7.1)
                           Acidifying agents (GI and urinary): These agents reduce blood levels of amphetamine. (7.2)
                           Adrenergic blockers, antihistamines, antihypertensives, phenobarbital, phenytoin, veratrum alkaloids, and ethosuximide: Effects may be reduced by amphetamines. (7.3)
                           Tricyclic antidepressants, norepinephrine, and meperidine: Effects may be potentiated by amphetamines. (7.4) 
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 Agents that Increase Blood Levels of Amphetamines
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 MAO Inhibitors 
                              
                              MAOI antidepressants slow amphetamine metabolism. This slowing potentiates amphetamines, increasing their effect on the release of norepinephrine and other monoamines from adrenergic nerve endings; this can cause headaches and other signs of hypertensive crisis. A variety of toxic neurological effects and malignant hyperpyrexia can occur, sometimes with fatal results. Do not administer MAS-ER Capsules during or within 14 days following the administration of monoamine oxidase inhibitors [see CONTRAINDICATIONS (4)]. 										
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Alkalinizing Agents 
                              
                              Gastrointestinal alkalinizing agents (e.g., sodium bicarbonate) increase absorption of amphetamines. Co-administration of MAS-ER Capsules and gastrointestinal alkalinizing agents, such as antacids, should be avoided. Urinary alkalinizing agents (acetazolamide, some thiazides) increase the concentration of the non-ionized species of the amphetamine molecule, thereby decreasing urinary excretion. Both groups of agents increase blood levels and therefore potentiate the actions of amphetamines.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 Agents that Lower Blood Levels of Amphetamines
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Acidifying Agents
                              
                              Gastrointestinal acidifying agents (e.g., guanethidine, reserpine, glutamic acid HCl, ascorbic acid) lower absorption of amphetamines. Urinary acidifying agents (e.g., ammonium chloride, sodium acid phosphate, methenamine salts) increase the concentration of the ionized species of the amphetamine molecule, thereby increasing urinary excretion. Both groups of agents lower blood levels and efficacy of amphetamines.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3 Agents Whose Effects May be Reduced by Amphetamines
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Adrenergic Blockers
                              
                              Amphetamines may reduce the cardiovascular effects of adrenergic blockers.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Antihistamines
                              
                              Amphetamines may counteract the sedative effect of antihistamines.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Antihypertensives 
                              
                              Amphetamines may antagonize the hypotensive effects of antihypertensives.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Veratrum alkaloids 
                              
                              Amphetamines inhibit the hypotensive effect of veratrum alkaloids.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Phenobarbital 
                              
                              Amphetamines may delay intestinal absorption of phenobarbital.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Phenytoin 
                              
                              Amphetamines may delay intestinal absorption of phenytoin.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Ethosuximide 
                              
                              Amphetamines may delay intestinal absorption of ethosuximide.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4 Agents Whose Effects May be Potentiated by Amphetamines
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Antidepressants, Tricyclic
                              
                              Amphetamines may enhance the activity of tricyclic antidepressants or sympathomimetic agents; d-amphetamine with desipramine or protriptyline and possibly other tricyclics cause striking and sustained increases in the concentration of d-amphetamine in the brain; cardiovascular effects can be potentiated.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Meperidine 
                              
                              Amphetamines potentiate the analgesic effect of meperidine.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Norepinephrine
                              
                              Amphetamines may enhance the adrenergic effect of norepinephrine. 
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.5 Agents that May Reduce the Effects of Amphetamines
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Chlorpromazine 
                              
                              Chlorpromazine blocks dopamine and norepinephrine receptors, thus inhibiting the central stimulant effects of amphetamines.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Haloperidol 
                              
                              Haloperidol blocks dopamine receptors, thus inhibiting the central stimulant effects of amphetamines.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Lithium Carbonate 
                              
                              The anorectic and stimulatory effects of amphetamines may be inhibited by lithium carbonate.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.6 Agents that May Potentiate the Effects of Amphetamines
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Norepinephrine
                              
                              Norepinephrine may enhance the adrenergic effect of amphetamine.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Propoxyphene Overdosage
                              
                              In cases of propoxyphene overdosage, amphetamine CNS stimulation is potentiated and fatal convulsions can occur. 
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.7 Proton Pump Inhibitors (PPI)
                     
                        PPIs act on proton pumps by blocking acid production, thereby reducing gastric acidity. When MAS-ER Capsules (20 mg single-dose) was administered concomitantly with the proton pump inhibitor, omeprazole (40 mg once daily for 14 days), the median Tmax of d-amphetamine was decreased by 1.25 hours (from 4 to 2.75 hours), and the median Tmax of l-amphetamine was decreased by 2.5 hours (from 5.5 to 3 hours), compared to MAS-ER Capsules administered alone. The AUC and Cmax of each moiety were unaffected. Therefore, co-administration of MAS-ER Capsules and proton pump inhibitors should be monitored for changes in clinical effect.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.8 Drug/Laboratory Test Interactions
                     
                        Amphetamines can cause a significant elevation in plasma corticosteroid levels. This increase is greatest in the evening. Amphetamines may interfere with urinary steroid determinations.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         