


Drug Interactions





CYP3A4 Interactions
Simvastatin is metabolized by CYP3A4 but has no CYP3A4 inhibitory activity; therefore it is not expected to affect the plasma concentrations of other drugs metabolized by CYP3A4. Potent inhibitors of CYP3A4 (below) increase the risk of myopathy by reducing the elimination of simvastatin.See WARNINGS, Myopathy/Rhabdomyolysis, and CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY, Pharmacokinetics.WARNINGS, Myopathy/Rhabdomyolysis, and See WARNINGS, Myopathy/Rhabdomyolysis, and CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY, Pharmacokinetics.WARNINGS, Myopathy/Rhabdomyolysis, and  Itraconazole  Itraconazole  Ketoconazole  Ketoconazole  Erythromycin  Erythromycin  Clarithromycin  Clarithromycin  Telithromycin  Telithromycin  HIV protease inhibitors  HIV protease inhibitors  Nefazodone  Nefazodone  Large quantities of grapefruit juice (>1 quart daily) Large quantities of grapefruit juice (>1 quart daily) Itraconazole  Itraconazole  Ketoconazole  Ketoconazole  Erythromycin  Erythromycin  Clarithromycin  Clarithromycin  Telithromycin  Telithromycin  HIV protease inhibitors  HIV protease inhibitors  Nefazodone  Nefazodone  Large quantities of grapefruit juice (>1 quart daily) Large quantities of grapefruit juice (>1 quart daily)







Interactions with lipid-lowering drugs that can cause myopathy when given alone
See WARNINGS, Myopathy/Rhabdomyolysis.WARNINGS, Myopathy/Rhabdomyolysis.See WARNINGS, Myopathy/Rhabdomyolysis.WARNINGS, Myopathy/Rhabdomyolysis.The risk of myopathy is increased by gemfibrozil (see DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION) and to a lesser extent by other fibrates and niacin (nicotinic acid) (≥1 g/day).(see DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION) and to a lesser extent by other fibrates and niacin (nicotinic acid) (≥1 g/day)







Other drug interactions





Cyclosporine or Danazol
The risk of myopathy/rhabdomyolysis is increased by concomitant administration of cyclosporine or danazol particularly with higher doses of simvastatin (see CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY, Pharmacokinetics; WARNINGS, Myopathy/Rhabdomyolysis).CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY, Pharmacokinetics; 







Amiodarone or Verapamil
The risk of myopathy/rhabdomyolysis is increased by concomitant administration of amiodarone or verapamil with higher doses of simvastatin (see WARNINGS, Myopathy/Rhabdomyolysis).WARNINGS, Myopathy/Rhabdomyolysis).







 Propranolol
In healthy male volunteers there was a significant decrease in mean Cmax, but no change in AUC, for simvastatin total and active inhibitors with concomitant administration of single doses of simvastatin and propranolol. The clinical relevance of this finding is unclear. The pharmacokinetics of the enantiomers of propranolol were not affected.max, but no change in AUC, for simvastatin total and active inhibitors with concomitant administration of single doses of simvastatin and propranolol. The clinical relevance of this finding is unclear. The pharmacokinetics of the enantiomers of propranolol were not affected.







Digoxin
Concomitant administration of a single dose of digoxin in healthy male volunteers receiving simvastatin resulted in a slight elevation (less than 0.3 ng/mL) in digoxin concentrations in plasma (as measured by a radioimmunoassay) compared to concomitant administration of placebo and digoxin. Patients taking digoxin should be monitored appropriately when simvastatin is initiated.







Warfarin
In two clinical studies, one in normal volunteers and the other in hypercholesterolemic patients, simvastatin 20-40 mg/day modestly potentiated the effect of coumarin anticoagulants: the prothrombin time, reported as International Normalized Ratio (INR), increased from a baseline of 1.7 to 1.8 and from 2.6 to 3.4 in the volunteer and patient studies, respectively. With other reductase inhibitors, clinically evident bleeding and/or increased prothrombin time has been reported in a few patients taking coumarin anticoagulants concomitantly. In such patients, prothrombin time should be determined before starting simvastatin and frequently enough during early therapy to ensure that no significant alteration of prothrombin time occurs. Once a stable prothrombin time has been documented, prothrombin times can be monitored at the intervals usually recommended for patients on coumarin anticoagulants. If the dose of simvastatin is changed or discontinued, the same procedure should be repeated. Simvastatin therapy has not been associated with bleeding or with changes in prothrombin time in patients not taking anticoagulants.






