
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Mipomersen is an antisense oligonucleotide targeted to human messenger ribonucleic acid (mRNA) for apo B-100, the principal apolipoprotein of LDL and its metabolic precursor, VLDL.  Mipomersen is complementary to the coding region of the mRNA for apo B-100, and binds by Watson and Crick base pairing.  The hybridization of mipomersen to the cognate mRNA results in RNase H-mediated degradation of the cognate mRNA thus inhibiting translation of the apo B-100 protein. 
                        The 
                              in vitro
                            pharmacologic activity of mipomersen was characterized in human hepatoma cell lines (HepG2, Hep3B) and in human and cynomolgus monkey primary hepatocytes.  In these experiments, mipomersen selectively reduced apo B mRNA, protein and secreted protein in a concentration- and time-dependent manner.  The effects of mipomersen were shown to be highly sequence-specific.  The binding site for mipomersen lies within the coding region of the apo B mRNA at the position 3249-3268 relative to the published sequence GenBank accession number NM_000384.1.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        
                           
                              Cardiac ECG Effects
                           
                        
                        At a concentration of 3.8 times the Cmax of the maximum recommended dose (200 mg subcutaneous injection), mipomersen does not prolong the QTc interval to any clinically relevant extent.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        Single- and multiple-dose pharmacokinetics of mipomersen in healthy volunteers and in patients with FH and non-FH has shown that mipomersen plasma exposure increases with increasing dose in the range of 30 mg to 400 mg.  
                        
                           
                              Absorption
                           
                        
                        Following subcutaneous injection, peak concentrations of mipomersen are typically reached in 3 to 4 hours.  The estimated plasma bioavailability of mipomersen following subcutaneous administration over a dose range of 50 mg to 400 mg, relative to intravenous administration, ranged from 54% to 78%.  
                        
                           
                              Distribution
                           
                        
                        Mipomersen is highly bound to human plasma proteins (≥ 90%) at clinically relevant concentrations (1-8 µg/mL).  Mipomersen has a distribution plasma half-life of approximately 2 to 5 hours.
                        With once weekly dosing, plasma trough levels increase over time and approach steady-state, typically within 6 months.  
                        
                           
                              Metabolism
                           
                        
                        Mipomersen is not a substrate for CYP450 metabolism, and is metabolized in tissues by endonucleases to form shorter oligonucleotides that are then substrates for additional metabolism by exonucleases.
                        
                           
                              Excretion
                           
                        
                        The elimination of mipomersen involves both metabolism in tissues and excretion, primarily in urine.  Both mipomersen and putative shorter oligonucleotide metabolites were identified in human urine.  Urinary recovery was limited in humans with less than 4% within the 24 hours post dose.  Following subcutaneous administration, elimination half-life for mipomersen is approximately 1 to 2 months.
                        
                           
                              Drug Interactions
                           
                        
                        No clinically relevant pharmacokinetic interactions were reported between mipomersen and warfarin, or between mipomersen and simvastatin or ezetimibe.  The results of these studies are summarized in Figures 1 and 2.
                        
                           
                              Figure 1: Impact of Other Drugs on Mipomersen Pharmacokinetics
                           
                        
                        
                           
                        
                        
                           
                              Figure 2: Impact of Mipomersen on the Pharmacokinetics of Other Drugs
                           
                        
                        
                           
                        
                        
                           
                              Specific Populations
                           
                        
                        Renal Impairment
                        Pharmacokinetics of KYNAMRO in patients with renal impairment has not been established [see
                               Use in Specific Populations (8.7)
                           ].
                        Hepatic Impairment
                        Pharmacokinetics of KYNAMRO in patients with hepatic impairment has not been established [see
                               Use in Specific Populations (8.8)
                           ]. 
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           Impact of Other Drugs on Mipomersen Pharmacokinetics
                           
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           Impact of Mipomersen on the Pharmacokinetics of Other Drugs
                           
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         