
                     
                     
                     Drug Interactions
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Hypotension—Patients on Diuretic Therapy
                           
                           
                              Patients on diuretics and especially those in whom diuretic therapy was recently instituted, may occasionally experience an excessive reduction of blood pressure after initiation of therapy with enalapril. The possibility of hypotensive effects with enalapril can be minimized by either discontinuing the diuretic or increasing the salt intake prior to initiation of treatment with enalapril. If it is necessary to continue the diuretic, provide close medical supervision after the initial dose for at least 2 hours and until blood pressure has stabilized for at least an additional hour. (See WARNINGS and DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION.)
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Agents Causing Renin Release
                           
                           
                              The antihypertensive effect of enalapril is augmented by antihypertensive agents that cause renin release (e.g., diuretics).
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Non-Steroidal Anti-Inflammatory Agents
                           
                           
                              In some patients with compromised renal function who are being treated with non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, the coadministration of enalapril may result in a further deterioration of renal function. These effects are usually reversible.
                              In a clinical pharmacology study, indomethacin or sulindac was administered to hypertensive patients receiving enalapril. In this study there was no evidence of a blunting of the antihypertensive action of enalapril. However, reports suggest that NSAIDs may diminish the antihypertensive effect of ACE inhibitors. This interaction should be given consideration in patients taking NSAIDs concomitantly with ACE inhibitors.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Other Cardiovascular Agents
                           
                           
                              Enalapril has been used concomitantly with beta adrenergic-blocking agents, methyldopa, nitrates, calcium-blocking agents, hydralazine, prazosin and digoxin without evidence of clinically significant adverse interactions.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Agents Increasing Serum Potassium
                           
                           
                              Enalapril attenuates potassium loss caused by thiazide-type diuretics. Potassium-sparing diuretics (e.g., spironolactone, triamterene, or amiloride), potassium supplements, or potassium-containing salt substitutes may lead to significant increases in serum potassium. Therefore, if concomitant use of these agents is indicated because of demonstrated hypokalemia, they should be used with caution and with frequent monitoring of serum potassium. Potassium sparing agents should generally not be used in patients with heart failure receiving enalapril.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Lithium
                           
                           
                              Lithium toxicity has been reported in patients receiving lithium concomitantly with drugs which cause elimination of sodium, including ACE inhibitors. A few cases of lithium toxicity have been reported in patients receiving concomitant enalapril and lithium and were reversible upon discontinuation of both drugs. It is recommended that serum lithium levels be monitored frequently if enalapril is administered concomitantly with lithium.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Gold
                           
                           
                              Nitritoid reactions (symptoms include facial flushing, nausea, vomiting and hypotension)  have been reported rarely in patients on therapy with injectable gold (sodium aurothiomalate) and concomitant ACE inhibitor therapy including enalapril.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               