
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  Sulfasalazine has been used in the treatment of ulcerative 
colitis for over 55 years. It is split by bacterial action in the colon into 
sulfapyridine (SP) and mesalamine (5-ASA). It is thought that the mesalamine 
component only is therapeutically active in ulcerative colitis.
                  
                  Mechanism of ActionThe mechanism of action of mesalamine (and sulfasalazine) is not 
fully understood, but appears to be topical rather than systemic. Although the 
pathology of inflammatory bowel disease is uncertain, both prostaglandins and 
leukotrienes have been implicated as mediators of mucosal injury and 
inflammation. Recently, however, the role of mesalamine as a free radical 
scavenger or inhibitor of tumor necrosis factor (TNF) has also been 
postulated.
                  
                  Pharmacokinetics
                  Absorption:Mesalamine (5-ASA) administered as a rectal suppository is 
variably absorbed. In patients with ulcerative colitis treated with mesalamine 
500 mg rectal suppositories, administered once every eight hours for six days, 
the mean mesalamine peak plasma concentration (Cmax) was 
353 ng/mL (CV=55%) following the initial dose and 361 ng/mL (CV=67%) at steady 
state. The mean minimum steady state plasma concentration (Cmin) was 89 ng/mL (CV=89%). Absorbed mesalamine does not 
accumulate in the plasma.
                  
                  Distribution:Mesalamine administered as rectal suppositories distributes in 
rectal tissue to some extent. In patients with ulcerative proctitis treated with 
CANASA® (mesalamine, USP) 1000 mg rectal suppositories, 
rectal tissue concentrations for 5-ASA and N-acetyl-5-ASA have not been 
rigorously quantified.
                  
                  Metabolism:Mesalamine is extensively metabolized, mainly to N-acetyl-5-ASA. 
The site of metabolism has not been elucidated. In patients with ulcerative 
colitis treated with one 500 mg mesalamine rectal suppository every eight hours 
for six days, peak concentration (Cmax) of N-acetyl-5-ASA 
ranged from 467 ng/mL to 1399 ng/mL following the initial dose and from 193 
ng/mL to 1304 ng/mL at steady state.
                  
                  Elimination:Mesalamine is eliminated from plasma mainly by urinary excretion, 
predominantly as N-acetyl-5-ASA. In patients with ulcerative proctitis treated 
with one mesalamine 500 mg rectal suppository every eight hours for six days, ≤ 
12% of the dose was eliminated in urine as unchanged 5-ASA and 8-77% as 
N-acetyl-5-ASA following the initial dose. At steady state, ≤ 11% of the dose 
was eliminated as unchanged 5-ASA and 3-35% as N-acetyl-5-ASA. The mean 
elimination half-life was five hours (CV=73%) for 5-ASA and six hours (CV=63%) 
for N-acetyl-5-ASA following the initial dose. At steady state, the mean 
elimination half-life was seven hours for both 5-ASA and N-acetyl-5-ASA (CV=102% 
for 5-ASA and 82% for N-acetyl-5-ASA).
                  
                  Drug-Drug Interactions:The potential for interactions between mesalamine, administered 
as 1000 mg rectal suppositories, and other drugs has not been studied.
                  
                  Special Populations (Patients with Renal or Hepatic 
Impairment):The effect of renal or hepatic impairment on elimination of 
mesalamine in ulcerative proctitis patients treated with mesalamine 1000 mg 
suppositories has not been studied.
                  
                  Preclinical ToxicologyPreclinical studies of mesalamine were conducted in rats, mice, 
rabbits and dogs, and kidney was the main target organ of toxicity. In rats, 
adverse renal effects were observed at a single oral dose of 600 mg/kg (about 
3.2 times the recommended human intra-rectal dose, based on body surface area) 
and at IV doses of >214 mg/kg (about 1.2 times the recommended human 
intra-rectal dose, based on body surface area). In a 13-week oral gavage 
toxicity study in rats, papillary necrosis and/or multifocal tubular injury were 
observed in males receiving 160 mg/kg (about 0.86 times the recommended human 
intra-rectal dose, based on body surface area) and in both males and females at 
640 mg/kg (about 3.5 times the recommended human intra-rectal dose, based on 
body surface area). In a combined 52-week toxicity and 127-week carcinogenicity 
study in rats, degeneration of the kidneys and hyalinization of basement 
membranes and Bowman’s capsule were observed at oral doses of 100 mg/kg/day 
(about 0.54 times the recommended human intra-rectal dose, based on body surface 
area) and above. In a 14-day rectal toxicity study of mesalamine suppositories 
in rabbits, intra-rectal doses up to 800 mg/kg (about 8.6 times the recommended 
human intra-rectal dose, based on body surface area) was not associated with any 
adverse effects. In a six-month oral toxicity study in dogs, doses of 80 mg/kg 
(about 1.4 times the recommended human intra-rectal dose, based on body surface 
area) and higher caused renal pathology similar to that described for the rat. 
In a rectal toxicity study of mesalamine suppositories in dogs, a dose of 166.6 
mg/kg (about 3.0 times the recommended human intra-rectal dose, based on body 
surface area) produced chronic nephritis and pyelitis. In the 12-month eye 
toxicity study in dogs, Keratoconjunctivitis sicca (KCS) occurred at oral doses 
of 40 mg/kg (about 0.72 times the recommended human intra-rectal dose, based on 
body surface area) and above.
               
               
            
         