
                     
                     
                     4. Drug Interactions
                     
                        Change in contraceptive effectiveness associated with co-administration of other products:
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           a. Anti-infective agents and anticonvulsants
                           
                              Contraceptive effectiveness may be reduced when hormonal contraceptives are co-administered with antibiotics, anticonvulsants, and other drugs that increase the metabolism of contraceptive steroids. This could result in unintended pregnancy or breakthrough bleeding. Examples include rifampin, barbiturates, phenylbutazone, phenytoin, carbamazepine, felbamate, oxcarbazepine, topiramate, and griseofulvin.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           b. Anti-HIV protease inhibitors
                           
                              Several of the anti-HIV protease inhibitors have been studied with co-administration of oral contraceptives; significant changes (increase and decrease) in the plasma levels of the estrogen and progestin have been noted in some cases. The safety and efficacy of OC products may be affected with the co-administration of anti-HIV protease inhibitors. Health care providers should refer to the label of the individual anti-HIV protease inhibitors for further drug-drug interaction information.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           c. Herbal products
                           
                              Herbal products containing St. John’s Wort (hypericum perforatum) may induce hepatic enzymes (cytochrome P450) and p-glycoprotein transporter and may reduce the effectiveness of contraceptive steroids. This may also result in breakthrough bleeding.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               