
                     
                     
                     
                        Drug Interactions
                     
                     
                        
                           
                              ACE-Inhibitors:
                           
                        
                        Reports suggest that NSAIDs may diminish the antihypertensive effect of ACE-inhibitors. This interaction should be given consideration in patients taking NSAIDs concomitantly with ACE-inhibitors.

                           
In patients who are elderly, volume-depleted (including those on diuretic therapy), or with compromised renal function, coadministration of NSAIDs, including selective COX-2 inhibitors, with ACE inhibitors, may result in deterioration of renal function, including possible acute renal failure. These effects are usually reversible.

                           

                        
                        
                           
                              Aspirin
                           
                           :
                        
                        When diclofenac sodium and misoprostol delayed-release tablets are administered with aspirin, the protein binding of diclofenac is reduced, although the clearance of the free diclofenac sodium and misoprostol delayed-release tablets is not altered. The clinical significance of this interaction is not known; however, as with other NSAIDs, concomitant administration of diclofenac sodium and aspirin is not generally recommended because of the potential risk of increased adverse effects.
                        
                           
                              Digoxin
                           
                           :
                        
                        Elevated digoxin levels have been reported in patients receiving digoxin and diclofenac sodium.
                        Patients receiving digoxin and diclofenac sodium and misoprostol delayed-release tablets should be monitored for possible digoxin toxicity.
                        
                           
                              Warfarin
                           
                           :
                        
                        The effects of warfarin and NSAIDs on GI bleeding are synergistic, such that users of both drugs together have a risk of serious bleeding greater than users of either drug alone.
                        
                           
                              Oral hypoglycemics
                           
                           :
                        
                        Diclofenac sodium does not alter glucose metabolism in healthy people nor does it alter the effects of oral hypoglycemic agents. There are rare reports, however, from marketing experience, of changes in effects of insulin or oral hypoglycemic agents in the presence of diclofenac sodium that necessitated change in the doses of such agents. Both hypo- and hyperglycemic effects have been reported. A direct causal relationship has not been established, but physicians should consider the possibility that diclofenac sodium may alter a diabetic patient’s response to insulin or oral hypoglycemic agents.
                        
                           
                              Methotrexate
                           
                           :
                        
                        NSAIDs have been reported to competitively inhibit methotrexate accumulation in rabbit kidney slices. This may indicate that they could enhance the toxicity of methotrexate. Caution should be used when NSAIDs are administered concomitantly with methotrexate.

                           

                           
                              Tacrolimus:
                           
                           

                           
Possible increased risk of nephrotoxicity when NSAIDs are given with tacrolimus.

                        
                        
                           
                              Cyclosporine
                           
                           :
                        
                        Diclofenac sodium and misoprostol delayed-release tablets, like other NSAID containing products, may affect renal prostaglandins and increase the toxicity of certain drugs. Ingestion of diclofenac sodium and misoprostol delayed-release tablets may increase cyclosporine nephrotoxicity. Patients who begin taking diclofenac sodium and misoprostol delayed-release tablets or who increase their dose of diclofenac sodium and misoprostol delayed-release tablets while taking cyclosporine may develop toxicity characteristic for cyclosporine. They should be observed closely, particularly if renal function is impaired.
                        
                           
                              Lithium
                           
                           :
                        
                        NSAIDs have produced an elevation of plasma lithium levels and a reduction in renal lithium clearance. The mean minimum lithium concentration increased 15% and the renal clearance was decreased by approximately 20%. These effects have been attributed to inhibition of renal prostaglandin synthesis by the NSAID. Thus, when NSAIDs and lithium are administered concurrently, subjects should be observed carefully for signs of lithium toxicity.
                        
                           
                              Antacids
                           
                           :
                        
                        Antacids reduce the bioavailability of misoprostol acid. Antacids may also delay absorption of diclofenac sodium. Magnesium-containing antacids exacerbate misoprostol-associated diarrhea. Thus, it is not recommended that diclofenac sodium and misoprostol delayed-release tablets be coadministered with magnesium-containing antacids.
                        
                           
                              Diuretics
                           
                           :
                        
                        Clinical studies, as well as postmarketing observations, have shown that diclofenac sodium and misoprostol delayed-release tablets can reduce the natriuretic effect of furosemide and thiazides in some patients. This response has been attributed to inhibition of renal prostaglandin synthesis. During concomitant therapy with NSAIDs, the patient should be observed closely for signs of renal failure (see 
                              WARNINGS
                           
                           , 
                           
                              Renal Effects
                           ), as well as to assure diuretic efficacy. Concomitant therapy with potassium-sparing diuretics may be associated with increased serum potassium levels.

                           

                           
                              CYP2C9 inhibitors
                           
                           

                           
Use caution when dosing diclofenac with CYP2C9 inhibitors (e.g. voriconazole). Concomitant use of CYP2C9 inhibitors may enhance toxicity of diclofenac due to an increase in systemic exposure to diclofenac. When concomitant use of CYP2C9 inhibitors is necessary, the total daily dose of diclofenac should not exceed the lowest recommended dose of diclofenac sodium and misoprostol delayed-release tablets, 50 mg/0.2 mg twice daily (see DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION ).

                           

                        
                        
                           
                              Voriconazole:
                           
                        
                        In a published study, single dose diclofenac (50 mg) was coadministered with the last dose of voriconazole (400 mg every 12 hours on Day 1, followed by 200 mg every 12 hours on Day 2).  The mean Cmax and AUC of diclofenac were increased by 2.1-fold and 1.8-fold respectively when coadministered with voriconazole compared to diclofenac alone.
                        
                           
                              Other drugs
                           
                           :
                        
                        In small groups of patients (7 to 10 patients/interaction study), the concomitant administration of azathioprine, gold, chloroquine, D-penicillamine, prednisolone, doxycycline, or digitoxin did not significantly affect the peak levels and AUC levels of diclofenac sodium. Phenobarbital toxicity has been reported to have occurred in a patient on chronic phenobarbital treatment following the initiation of diclofenac therapy. In vitro
                           , diclofenac interferes minimally with the protein binding of prednisolone (10% decrease in binding). Benzylpenicillin, ampicillin, oxacillin, chlortetracycline, doxycycline, cephalothin, erythromycin, and sulfamethoxazole have no influence, in vitro
                           , on the protein binding of diclofenac in human serum.
                     
                     
                  
               