
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  
                  
                     Mechanism of Action
                  
                  Metformin is an antihyperglycemic agent which improves glucose tolerance in patients with type 2 diabetes, lowering both basal and postprandial plasma glucose. Its pharmacologic mechanisms of action are different from other classes of oral antihyperglycemic agents. Metformin decreases hepatic glucose production, decreases intestinal absorption of glucose, and improves insulin sensitivity by increasing peripheral glucose uptake and utilization. Unlike sulfonylureas, metformin does not produce hypoglycemia in either patients with type 2 diabetes or normal subjects (except in special circumstances, see 
                        PRECAUTIONS
                     ) and does not cause hyperinsulinemia. With metformin therapy, insulin secretion remains unchanged while fasting insulin levels and day-long plasma insulin response may actually decrease.
                  
                     Pharmacokinetics
                  
                  
                     Absorption and Bioavailability
                  
                  Following a single oral dose of metformin HCl extended-release tablets, Cmax is achieved with a median value of 7 hours and a range of 4 hours to 8 hours.
                  At steady-state, the AUC and Cmax are less than dose proportional for metformin HCl extended-release tablets within the range of 500 mg to 2000 mg administered once daily. Peak plasma levels are approximately 0.6, 1.1, 1.4, and 1.8 mcg/mL for 500, 1000, 1500, and 2000 mg once-daily doses, respectively. After repeated administration of metformin HCl extended-release tablets, metformin did not accumulate in plasma.
                  Although the extent of metformin absorption (as measured by AUC) from the metformin HCl extended-release tablets increased by approximately 50% when given with food, there was no effect of food on Cmax and Tmax of metformin. Both high and low fat meals had the same effect on the pharmacokinetics of metformin HCl extended-release tablets.
                  
                     Metabolism and Elimination
                  
                  Intravenous single-dose studies in normal subjects demonstrate that metformin is excreted unchanged in the urine and does not undergo hepatic metabolism (no metabolites have been identified in humans) nor biliary excretion. Renal clearance is approximately 3.5 times greater than creatinine clearance, which indicates that tubular secretion is the major route of metformin elimination. Following oral administration, approximately 90% of the absorbed drug is eliminated via the renal route within the first 24 hours, with a plasma elimination half-life of approximately 6.2 hours. In blood, the elimination half-life is approximately 17.6 hours, suggesting that the erythrocyte mass may be a compartment of distribution.
                  
                     Special Populations
                  
                  
                     Patients with Type 2 Diabetes
                  
                  In the presence of normal renal function, there are no differences between single- or multiple-dose pharmacokinetics of metformin between patients with type 2 diabetes and normal subjects nor is there any accumulation of metformin in either group at usual clinical doses.
                  The pharmacokinetics of metformin HCl extended-release tablets in patients with type 2 diabetes are comparable to those in healthy normal adults.
                  
                     Renal Insufficiency
                  
                  In patients with decreased renal function (based on measured creatinine clearance), the plasma and blood half-life of metformin is prolonged and the renal clearance is decreased in proportion to the decrease in creatinine clearance (see 
                        WARNINGS
                     ).
                  
                     Hepatic Insufficiency
                  
                  No pharmacokinetic studies of metformin have been conducted in patients with hepatic insufficiency.
                  
                     Geriatrics
                  
                  Metformin HCl extended-release tablets treatment should not be initiated in patients ≥ 80 years of age unless measurement of creatinine clearance demonstrates that renal function is not reduced (see 
                        WARNINGS
                      and 
                        DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION
                     ).
                  
                     Gender
                  
                  Metformin pharmacokinetic parameters did not differ significantly between normal subjects and patients with type 2 diabetes when analyzed according to gender (males = 19, females = 16).
                  
                     Race
                  
                  No studies of metformin pharmacokinetic parameters according to race have been performed.
                  
                     Clinical Studies
                  
                  
                     Metformin HCl Extended-Release Tablets
                  
                  A 24-week, double-blind, placebo-controlled study of metformin HCl extended-release tablets, taken once daily with the evening meal, was conducted in patients with type 2 diabetes who had failed to achieve glycemic control with diet and exercise (HbA1c 7% to 10%, FPG 126 to 270 mg/dL). Patients entering the study had a mean baseline HbA1c of 8% and a mean baseline FPG of 176 mg/dL. After 12 weeks treatment, mean HbA1c had increased from baseline by 0.1% and mean FPG decreased from baseline by 2 mg/dL in the placebo group, compared with a decrease in mean HbA1c of 0.6% and a decrease in mean FPG of 23 mg/dL in patients treated with metformin HCl extended-release tablets 1000 mg once daily.
                  Subsequently, the treatment dose was increased to 1500 mg once daily if HbA1c was ≥7% but <8% (patients with HbA1c ≥8% were discontinued from the study). At the final visit (24-week), mean HbA1c had increased 0.2% from baseline in placebo patients and decreased 0.6% with metformin HCl extended-release tablets.
                  A 16-week, double-blind, placebo-controlled, dose-response study of metformin HCl extended-release tablets, taken once daily with the evening meal or twice daily with meals, was conducted in patients with type 2 diabetes who had failed to achieve glycemic control with diet and exercise (HbA1c 7% to 11%, FPG 126 to 280 mg/dL). Changes in glycemic control and body weight are shown in Table 1.
                  


                  



                     * All patients on diet therapy at Baseline
                  
                     a All comparisons versus Placebo
                  
                     ** Not statistically significant
                  Compared with placebo, improvement in glycemic control was seen at all dose levels of metformin HCl extended-release tablets and treatment was not associated with any significant change in weight (see 
                        DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION
                     ) for dosing recommendations for metformin HCl extended-release tablets.
                  A 24-week, double-blind, randomized study of metformin HCl extended-release tablets, taken once daily with the evening meal, was conducted in patients with type 2 diabetes who had been treated with metformin HCl 500 mg twice daily for at least 8 weeks prior to study entry.
                  The metformin HCl dose had not necessarily been titrated to achieve a specific level of glycemic control prior to study entry. Patients qualified for the study if HbA1c was ≤8.5% and FPG was ≤200 mg/dL. Changes in glycemic control and body weight are shown in Table 2.
                  


                  


After 12 weeks of treatment, there was an increase in mean HbA1c in all groups; in the metformin HCl extended-release tablets 1000 mg group, the increase from baseline of 0.23% was statistically significant (see 
                        DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION
                     ).
                  Changes in lipid parameters in the previously described placebo-controlled dose-response study of metformin HCl extended-release tablets are shown in Table 3.
                  


                  



                     
                        *
                     All patients on diet therapy at Baseline
                  Changes in lipid parameters in the previously described study of metformin HCl extended-release tablets are shown in Table 4.
                  


                  



 

               
               
            
         