
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  Desmopressin acetate tablets contain as active substance, desmopressin acetate, a synthetic analogue of the natural hormone arginine vasopressin.
               
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        The mean time to reach maximum plasma desmopressin levels (tmax) was 1.1 hours following desmopressin acetate tablet administration.The plasma halflife of desmopressin after desmopressin acetate tablet administration followed amonoexponential time course withmean t½value of 2.0 hours. Geometricmeans of maximum plasma concentrations and area under the plasma concentration-time curves were 32.7 pg/mL and 85.2 pg*hr/mL, respectively, for desmopressin after 3 × 0.2mg desmopressin acetate tablet administration in healthy adult volunteers. The bioavailability of desmopressin acetate oral tablets is about 5% compared to intranasal formulation, and about 0.16% compared to intravenous formulation.
                        Desmopressin is mainly excreted in the urine. A pharmacokinetic study conducted in healthy volunteers and patients with mild, moderate, and severe renal impairment (n=24, 6 subjects in each group) receiving single dose desmopressin acetate (2 mcg) injection demonstrated a difference in desmopressin terminal half-life. Terminal half life significantly increased from 3 hours in normal healthy patients to 9 hours in patients with severe renal impairment. (See
                               CONTRAINDICATIONS
                           .)
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Central Diabetes Insipidus
                           
                              Dose response studies in patients with diabetes insipidus have demonstrated that oral doses of 0.025 mg to 0.4 mg produced clinically significant antidiuretic effects. In most patients, doses of 0.1 mg to 0.2 mg produced optimal antidiuretic effects lasting up to eight hours. With doses of 0.4 mg, antidiuretic effects were observed for up to 12 hours; measurements beyond 12 hours were not recorded. Increasing oral doses produced dose dependent increases in the plasma levels of desmopressin.
                              Following administration of desmopressin acetate tablets, the onset of antidiuretic effect occurs at around 1 hour, and it reaches a maximum at about 4 to 7 hours based on the measurement of increased urine osmolality.
                              The use of desmopressin acetate tablets in patients with an established diagnosis will result in a reduction in urinary output with an accompanying increase in urine osmolality. These effects usually will allow resumption of a more normal life style, with a decrease in urinary frequency and nocturia.
                              There are reports of an occasional change in response to the intranasal formulations of desmopressin acetate (desmopressin acetate nasal spray and desmopressin acetate rhinal tube). Usually, the change occurred over a period of time greater than six months. This change may be due to decreased responsiveness, or to shortened duration of effect. There is no evidence that this effect is due to the development of binding antibodies. No lessening of effect was observed in the 46 patients who were treated with desmopressin acetate tablets for 12 to 44 months and no serum antibodies to desmopressin were detected.
                              The change in structure of arginine vasopressin to desmopressin acetate resulted in less vasopressor activity and decreased action on visceral smooth muscle relative to enhanced antidiuretic activity. Consequently, clinically effective antidiuretic doses are usually below the threshold for effects on vascular or visceral smooth muscle. In the four long-term studies of desmopressin acetate tablets, no increases in blood pressure in 46 patients receiving desmopressin acetate tablets for periods of 12 to 44 months were reported.
                              In one study, the pharmacodynamic characteristics of desmopressin acetate tablets and intranasal formulation were compared during an 8-hour dosing interval at steady state. The doses administered to 36 hydrated (water loaded) healthy male adult volunteers every 8 hours were 0.1, 0.2, 0.4 mg orally and 0.01 mg intranasally by rhinal tube. The results are shown in the following table:
                              


                              


With respect to the mean values of total urine volume decrease and maximum urine osmolality increase from baseline, the 90% confidence limits estimated that the 0.4 mg and 0.2 mg oral dose produced between 95% and 110% and 84% to 99% of pharmacodynamic activity, respectively, when compared to the 0.01 mg intranasal dose.
                              While both the 0.2 mg and 0.4 mg oral doses are considered pharmacodynamically similar to the 0.01 mg intranasal dose, the pharmacodynamic data on an inter-subject basis was highly variable and, therefore, individual dosing is recommended.
                              In another study in diabetes insipidus patients, the pharmacodynamic characteristics of desmopressin acetate tablets and intranasal formulations were compared over a 12-hour period. Ten fluid-controlled patients under age 18 were administered tablet doses of 0.2 mg and 0.4 mg, and intranasal doses of 0.01 mg and 0.02 mg.
                              


                              


All four dose formulations (0.01 mg IN, 0.02 mg IN, 0.2 mg PO and 0.4 mg PO) have a similar, pronounced pharmacodynamic effect on urine volume and urine osmolality. At two hours after study drug administration, mean urine volume was 4 mL/min and urine osmolality was >500 mOsm/kg. Mean plasma osmolality remained relatively constant over the time course recorded (0 to 12 hours). A statistical separation from baseline did not occur at any dose or time point. In these patients, the 0.2 mg tablets and the 0.01 mg intranasal spray exhibited similar pharmacodynamic profiles as did the 0.4 mg tablets and the 0.02mg intranasal spray formulation. In another study of adult diabetes insipidus patients previously controlled on desmopressin acetate intranasal spray, after one week of self-titration from spray to tablets, patients'diuresis was controlled with 0.1 mg desmopressin acetate tablets three times a day.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Primary Nocturnal Enuresis in Pediatrics
                           
                              Two double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled studies were conducted in 340 patients with primary nocturnal enuresis. Patients were 5-17 years old, and 72% were males. A total of 329 patients were evaluated for efficacy. Patients were evaluated over a two-week baseline period in which the average number of wet nights was 10 (range 4-14). Patients were then randomized to receive 0.2, 0.4, or 0.6 mg of desmopressin acetate or placebo. The pooled results after two weeks are shown in the following table:
                              


                              


Patients treated with desmopressin acetate tablets showed a statistically significant reduction in the number of wet nights compared to placebo-treated patients. A greater response was observed with increasing doses up to 0.6 mg.
                              In a six month, open-label extension study, patients completing the placebo-controlled studies were started on 0.2 mg/day desmopressin acetate, and the dose was progressively increased until the optimal response was achieved (maximum dose 0.6 mg/day). A total of 230 patients were evaluated for efficacy; the average number of wet nights/2 weeks during the untreated baseline period was 10 (range 4-14), and the average duration (SD) of treatment was 4.2 (1.8) months. Twenty-five (25) patients (11%) achieved a complete or near complete response (≤2 wet nights/2 weeks) and did not require titration to the 0.6 mg/day dose. The majority of patients (198 of 230, 86%) were titrated to the highest dose. When all dose groups were combined, 128 (56%) showed at least a 50% reduction from baseline in the number of wet nights/2 weeks, while 87 (38%) patients achieved a complete or near complete response.
                              The study showed a similar mean reduction from baseline to end of treatment: 3.2 wet nights/week (95% CI 2.4-4.1, p<0.01) on the 0.2 mg dose and 3.4 wet nights/week (95% CI 2.7-4.1, p<0.01) on the 0.4 mg dose.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Primary Nocturnal Enuresis in Adolescents and Adults
                           
                              A double-blind, randomized, parallel-group study was conducted in 66 patients with primary nocturnal enuresis who were determined to be responders to therapy with desmopressin acetate nasal spray (e.g., >50% reduction in the number of wet nights/week) and continued to have at least one wet night per week during the washout period. The median age of the subjects was 17 with a range of 12 to 45 years, 56% were males, and they had an average of 5 wet nights per week (range 2-7). Patients were randomized to receive 0.2 or 0.4 mg of desmopressin acetate tablets. Treatment outcome was measured as a mean reduction in the number of wet nights per week at the end of the four week treatment period relative to the baseline observation period. The results by age group are shown in the following table:
                              


                           



                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Renal Concentration Capacity Test in Pediatrics
                           
                              A multi-center, randomized, double-blind, double-dummy, four-period, cross-over trial was performed in 153 patients aged 3 to 18 years to compare desmopressin acetate tablets (0.6 mg), desmopressin acetate nasal spray (20 mcg) and placebo. All subjects were given medication in the evening before bedtime, with fluid restriction maintained from one hour before dosing to 8 hours after dosing. Any urine sample within one hour of drug administration was discarded. Urine osmolality was measured in the first voided specimen, at least one hour but not more than 12 hours after drug administration. The results of the test are shown in the following table:
                              


