
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  PHARMACODYNAMICS
Ketorolac tromethamine is a nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID) that exhibits analgesic activity in animal models. Ketorolac tromethamine inhibits synthesis of prostaglandins and may be considered a peripherally-acting analgesic. The biological activity of ketorolac tromethamine is associated with the S-form. Ketorolac tromethamine possesses no sedative or anxiolytic properties. Pain relief was statistically different after ketorolac tromethamine dosing  from that of placebo at 1/2 hour (the first time point at which it was measured) following the largest recommentded doses of ketorolac tromethamine, and by 1 hour following the smallest recommeded doses.The peak analgesic effect of ketorolac tromethamine occurs within 2 to 3 hours and is not statistically significantly different over the recommended dosage range of ketorolac tromethamine. The greatest difference between large and small doses of ketorolac tromethamine by either route is in the duration of analgesia.

                     
PHARMACOKINETICS
Ketorolac tromethamine is a racemic mixture of [-]S- and [+]R-enantiomeric forms, with the S-form having analgesic activity. 

                     
Comparison of IV, IM and Oral Pharmacokinetics
The pharmacokinetics of ketorolac tromethamine, following IV, IM and oral doses of ketorolac tromethamine, are compared in Table 1.  The extent of bioavailability following administration of the oral and IM forms of ketorolac tromethamine was equal to that following an IV bolus.

                     
Linear Kinetics
Following administration of single oral, IM or IV doses of ketorolac tromethamine, in the recommended dosage ranges, the clearance of the racemate does not change. This implies that the pharmacokinetics of ketorolac tromethamine in humans, following single or multiple IM, IV, or recommended oral doses of ketorolac tromethamine, are linear. At the higher recommended doses, there is a proportional increase in the concentrations of free and bound racemate.

                     
Binding and Distribution
The ketorolac tromethamine racemate has been shown to be highly protein-bound (99%). Nevertheless, even plasma concentrations as high as 10 mcg/mL will only occupy approximately 5% of the albumin binding sites. Thus, the unbound fraction for each enantiomer will be constant over the therapeutic range. A decrease in serum albumin, however, will result in increased free drug concentrations. The mean apparent volume (VB) of ketorlac tromethamine following complete distribution was approximately 13 liters. This parameter was determined from single-dose data.

                     
Metabolism
Ketorolac tromethamine is largely metabolized in the liver. The metabolic products are hydroxylated and conjugated forms of the parent drug. The products of metabolism, and some unchanged drug, are excreted in the urine. 

                     
Clearance and Excretion
A single-dose study with 10 mg ketorolac tromethamine (n=9) demonstrated that the S-enantiomer is cleared approximately two times faster than the R-enantiomer, and that the clearance was independent of the route of administration. This means that the ratio of S/R plasma concentrations decreases with time after each dose. There is little or no inversion of the R- to S- form in humans. The clearance of the racemate in normal subjects, elderly individuals, and in hepatically and renally impaired patients, is outlined in Table 2. The half-life of the ketorolac tromethamine S-enantiomer was approximately 2.5 hours (SD±0.4) compared with 5 hours (SD±1.7) for the R-enantiomer. In other studies, the half-life for the racemate has been reported to lie within the range of 5 to 6 hours.
                  Accumulation
                  Ketorolac tromethamine administered as an IV bolus, every 6 hours, for 5 days, to healthy subjects (n=13), showed no significat difference in Cmax on Day 1 and Day 5. Trough levels averaged 0.29 mcg/mL (SD±0.13) on Day 1 and 0.55 mcg/mL (SD±0.23) on Day 6. Steady-state was approached after the fourth dose. 

                  
                  Accumulation of ketorolac tromethamine has not been studies in special populations (elderly patients, renal failure patients or hepatic disease patients).
                  Table 1
Table of Approximate Average Pharmacokinetic Parameters (Mean±SD) Following Oral, Intramuscular and Intravenous Doses of Ketorolac Tromethamine

                  
                  

% Dose metabolized =less than 50  % Dose excreted in feces = 6




                  
% Dose in urine =91  % Plasma protein binding = 99 excreted

                  
1Time-to-peak plasma concentration
2Peak plasma concentration
3Trough plasma concentration
4Average plasma concentration
5Volume of distribution

                  
† Derived from PO pharmacokinetic studies in 77 normal fasted volunteers
*Derived from IM pharmacokinetic studies in 54 normal volunteers
‡ Derived from IV pharmacokinetic studies in 24 normal volunteers
††Not applicable because 60 mg is only recommended as a single dose
**Mean value was simulated from observed plasma concentration data and standard deviation was simulated from percent coefficient of variation for observed Cmax and Tmax data

                  
Table 2
The Influence of Age, Liver and Kidney Function, on the Clearance and Terminal Half-life of Ketorolac Tromethamine (IM 1 and ORAL 2) 

                  

                  


                  



1Estimated from 30 mg single IM doses of ketorolac tromethamine
2Estimated from 10 mg single oral doses of ketorolac tromethamine 
3Liters/hour/kilogram

                  
IV-Administration: In normal subjects (n=37), the total clearance of 30 mg IV-administered ketorolac tromethamine was 0.030 (0.017-0.051) L/h/kg. The terminal half-life was 5.6 (4-7.9) hours.

                  
Kinetics in Special Populations
Elderly Patients
Based on single-dose data only, the half-life of the ketorolac tromethamine racemate increased from 5 to 7 hours in the elderly (65 to 78 years) compared with young healthy volunteers (24 to 35 years) (see Table 2). There was little difference in the Cmax for the two groups (elderly, 2.52 mcg/mL±0.77; young, 2.99 mcg/mL±1.03) (see PRECAUTIONS - Use in the Elderly).

                  
Renal Impaired Patients
Based on single-dose data only, the mean half-life of ketorolac tromethamine in renally impaired patients is between 6 and 19 hours and is dependent on the extent of the impairment. There is poor correlation between creatinine clearance and total ketorolac tromethamine clearance in the elderly and populations with renal impairment (r=0.5). In patients with renal disease, the AUC¥ of each enantiomer increased by approximately 100% compared with healthy volunteers. The volume of distribution doubles for the S-enantiomer and increases by 1/5th for the R-enantiomer. The increase in volume of distribution of ketorolac tromethamine implies an increase in unbound fraction. The AUC¥ ratio of the ketorolac tromethamine enantiomers in healthy subjects and patients remained similar, indicating there was no selective excretion of either enantiomer in patients compared to healthy subjects (see WARNINGS– Renal Effects).
Hepatic Effects
There was no significant difference in estimates of half-life, AUC¥ and Cmax in 7 patients with liver disease compared to healthy volunteers (see PRECAUTIONS – Hepatic Effects).

                  

                  

                  

               
               
            
         