
               
               
               
                  7  DRUG INTERACTIONS 

               
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                            Mixed agonist/antagonist opioid analgesics: Avoid use with morphine sulfate extended-release tablets because they may reduce analgesic effect of morphine sulfate extended-release tablets or precipitate withdrawal symptoms. (5.11, 7.2)
                            Muscle relaxants: Avoid use with morphine sulfate extended-release tablets because of increased risk of respiratory depression. (7.3)
                            Monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs): Avoid morphine sulfate extended-release tablets in patients taking MAOIs or within 14 days of stopping such treatment. (7.4)
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                        7.1	CNS Depressants

                     
                     
                        Concurrent use of morphine sulfate extended-release tablets and other central nervous system (CNS) depressants including sedatives or hypnotics, general anesthetics, phenothiazines, tranquilizers, and alcohol can increase the risk of respiratory depression, hypotension, profound sedation or coma.  Monitor patients receiving CNS depressants and morphine sulfate extended-release tablets for signs of respiratory depression and hypotension.  When such combined therapy is contemplated, reduce the initial dose of one or both agents.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                        7.2	Mixed Agonists/Antagonist Opioid Analgesics

                     
                     
                        Mixed agonist/antagonist analgesics (i.e., pentazocine, nalbuphine, butorphanol) may reduce the analgesic effect of morphine sulfate extended-release tablets or may precipitate withdrawal symptoms in these patients.  Avoid the use of agonist/antagonist analgesics in patients receiving morphine sulfate extended-release tablets.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                        7.3	Muscle Relaxants

                     
                     
                        Morphine may enhance the neuromuscular blocking action of skeletal muscle relaxants and produce an increased degree of respiratory depression.  Monitor patients receiving muscle relaxants and morphine sulfate extended-release tablets for signs of respiratory depression that may be greater than otherwise expected.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                        7.4 	Monoamine Oxidase Inhibitors (MAOIs)

                     
                     
                        The effects of morphine may be potentiated by MAOIs.  Monitor patients on concurrent therapy with an MAOI and morphine sulfate extended-release tablets for increased respiratory and central nervous system depression. MAOIs have been reported to potentiate the effects of morphine anxiety, confusion, and significant depression of respiration or coma. Morphine sulfate extended-release tablets should not be used in patients taking MAOIs or within 14 days of stopping such treatment.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                        7.5	Cimetidine

                     
                     
                        Cimetidine can potentiate morphine-induced respiratory depression. There is a report of confusion and severe respiratory depression when a patient undergoing hemodialysis was concurrently administered morphine and cimetidine.  Monitor patients for respiratory depression when morphine sulfate extended-release tablets and cimetidine are used concurrently.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                        7.6 	Diuretics

                     
                     
                        Morphine can reduce the efficacy of diuretics by inducing the release of antidiuretic hormone. Morphine may also lead to acute retention of urine by causing spasm of the sphincter of the bladder, particularly in men with enlarged prostates.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                        7.7 	Anticholinergics

                     
                     
                        Anticholinergics or other medications with anticholinergic activity when used concurrently with opioid analgesics may result in increased risk of urinary retention and/or severe constipation, which may lead to paralytic ileus. Monitor patients for signs of urinary retention or reduced gastric motility when morphine sulfate extended-release tablets are used concurrently with anticholinergic drugs.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                        7.8	P-Glycoprotein (PGP) Inhibitors

                     
                     
                        PGP-inhibitors (e.g., quinidine) may increase the absorption/exposure of morphine sulfate by about two-fold. Therefore, monitor patients for signs of respiratory and central nervous system depression when morphine sulfate extended-release tablets are used concurrently with PGP inhibitors.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         