
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  When administered intravenously, Normosol-R pH 7.4 provides water and electrolytes for replacement of acute extracellular fluid losses without disturbing normal electrolyte relationships. The electrolyte composition approaches that of the principal ions of normal plasma (extracellular fluid). The electrolyte concentration is approximately isotonic in relation to the extracellular fluid (approx. 280 mOsmol/liter) and provides a physiologic sodium to chloride ratio, normal plasma concentrations of potassium and magnesium and two bicarbonate alternates, acetate and gluconate.
                  Sodium chloride in water dissociates to provide sodium (Na+) and chloride (Cl−) ions. Sodium (Na+) is the principal cation of the extracellular fluid and plays a large part in the therapy of fluid and electrolyte disturbances. Chloride (Cl−) has an integral role in buffering action when oxygen and carbon dioxide exchange occurs in the red blood cells. The distribution and excretion of sodium (Na+) and chloride (Cl−) are largely under the control of the kidney which maintains a balance between intake and output.
                  Potassium chloride in water dissociates to provide potassium (K+) and chloride (Cl−) ions. Potassium is the chief cation of body cells (160 mEq/liter of intracellular water). It is found in low concentration in plasma and extracellular fluids (3.5 to 5.0 mEq/liter in a healthy adult and child over 10 days old; 3.5 to 6.0 mEq/liter in a child less than 10 days old). Potassium plays an important role in electrolyte balance.
                  Normally about 80 to 90% of the potassium intake is excreted in the urine; the remainder in the stools and to a small extent, in the perspiration. The kidney does not conserve potassium well so that during fasting or in patients on a potassium-free diet, potassium loss from the body continues resulting in potassium depletion.
                  Magnesium chloride in water dissociates to provide magnesium (Mg++) and chloride (Cl−) ions. Magnesium is the second most plentiful cation of the intracellular fluids. It is an important cofactor for enzymatic reactions and plays an important role in neurochemical transmission and muscular excitability. Normal plasma concentration ranges from 1.5 to 2.5 or 3.0 mEq per liter. Magnesium is excreted solely by the kidney at a rate proportional to the plasma concentration and glomerular filtration.
                  Sodium acetate provides sodium (Na+) and acetate (CH3COO−) ions, the latter anion (a source of hydrogen ion acceptors) serving as an alternate source of bicarbonate (HCO3
                     −) by metabolic conversion in the liver. This has been shown to proceed readily even in the presence of severe liver disease. Thus, acetate anion exerts a mild systemic antiacidotic action that may be advantageous during fluid and electrolyte replacement therapy.
                  Sodium gluconate provides sodium (Na+) and gluconate (C6H11O7
                     −) ions. Although gluconate is a theoretical alternate metabolic source of bicarbonate (HCO3
                     −) anion, a significant antiacidotic action has not been established. Thus, the gluconate anion serves primarily to complete the cation-anion balance of the solutions.
                  Water is an essential constituent of all body tissues and accounts for approximately 70% of total body weight. Average normal adult daily requirement ranges from two to three liters (1.0 to 1.5 liters each for insensible water loss by perspiration and urine production).
                  Average normal pediatric daily requirements are based on the child’s weight as described in the table below:
                  


                  


Water balance is maintained by various regulatory mechanisms. Water distribution depends primarily on the concentration of electrolytes in the body compartments and sodium (Na+) plays a major role in maintaining physiologic equilibrium.
               
               
            
         