
               
               
               7.	DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
                  
                     General:  Celecoxib metabolism is predominantly mediated via cytochrome P450 (CYP) 2C9 in the liver.  Co-administration of celecoxib with drugs that are known to inhibit CYP2C9 should be done with caution. Significant interactions may occur when celecoxib is administered together with drugs that inhibit CYP2C9.
                  
                     In vitro studies indicate that celecoxib, although not a substrate, is an inhibitor of CYP2D6.  Therefore, there is a potential for an in vivo drug interaction with drugs that are metabolized by CYP2D6.  
               
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           Concomitant use of celecoxib and warfarin may result in increased risk of bleeding complications. (7.1)
                           Concomitant use of celecoxib increases lithium plasma levels. (7.2)
                           Concomitant use of celecoxib may reduce the antihypertensive effect of ACE Inhibitors and angiotensin II antagonists (7.4)
                           Use caution with drugs known to inhibit P450 2C9 or metabolized by 2D6  due to the potential for increased plasma levels (2.6, 8.4, 8.8, 12.3)
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1	Warfarin
                     
                        Anticoagulant activity should be monitored, particularly in the first few days, after initiating or changing celecoxib therapy in patients receiving warfarin or similar agents, since these patients are at an increased risk of bleeding complications. The effect of celecoxib on the anticoagulant effect of warfarin was studied in a group of healthy subjects receiving daily 2 to 5 mg doses of warfarin. In these subjects, celecoxib did not alter the anticoagulant effect of warfarin as determined by prothrombin time. However, in post-marketing experience, serious bleeding events, some of which were fatal, have been reported, predominantly in the elderly, in association with increases in prothrombin time in patients receiving celecoxib concurrently with warfarin.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2	Lithium
                     
                        In a study conducted in healthy subjects, mean steady-state lithium plasma levels increased approximately 17% in subjects receiving lithium 450 mg twice daily with celecoxib 200 mg twice daily as compared to subjects receiving lithium alone. Patients on lithium treatment should be closely monitored when celecoxib is introduced or withdrawn.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3	Aspirin
                     
                        Celecoxib can be used with low-dose aspirin. However, concomitant administration of aspirin with celecoxib increases the rate of GI ulceration or other complications, compared to use of celecoxib alone [see Warnings and Precautions (5.1, 5.4) and Clinical Studies (14.6)
                           ]. Because of its lack of platelet effects, celecoxib is not a substitute for aspirin for cardiovascular prophylaxis
                            [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.2)
                              ].
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4	ACE-inhibitors and Angiotensin II Antagonists
                     
                        Reports suggest that NSAIDs may diminish the antihypertensive effect of Angiotensin Converting Enzyme (ACE) inhibitors and angiotensin II antagonists. This interaction should be given consideration in patients taking celecoxib capsules concomitantly with ACE-inhibitors and angiotensin II antagonists [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.2
                           ].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.5	Fluconazole
                     
                        Concomitant administration of fluconazole at 200 mg once daily resulted in a two-fold increase in celecoxib plasma concentration. This increase is due to the inhibition of celecoxib metabolism via P450 2C9 by fluconazole [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)
                           ]. Celecoxib should be introduced at the lowest recommended dose in patients receiving fluconazole.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.6	Furosemide
                     
                        Clinical studies, as well as post-marketing observations, have shown that NSAIDs can reduce the natriuretic effect of furosemide and thiazides in some patients. This response has been attributed to inhibition of renal prostaglandin synthesis.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.7 Methotrexate
                     
                        In an interaction study of rheumatoid arthritis patients taking methotrexate, celecoxib did not have an effect on the pharmacokinetics of methotrexate [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)
                           ].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.8 Concomitant NSAID Use
                     
                        The concomitant use of celecoxib  with any dose of a non-aspirin NSAID should be avoided due to the potential for increased risk of adverse reactions.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         