
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  In subjects with normal kidney function, multiple intravenous dosing of 1 g of vancomycin (15 mg/kg) infused over 60 minutes produces mean plasma concentrations of approximately 63 mcg/mL immediately at the completion of infusion, mean plasma concentrations of approximately 23 mcg/mL two hours after infusion, and mean plasma concentrations of approximately 8 mcg/mL 11 hours after the end of the infusion. Multiple dosing of 500 mg infused over 30 minutes produces mean plasma concentrations of about 49 mcg/mL at the completion of infusion, mean plasma concentrations of about 19 mcg/mL two hours after infusion, and mean plasma concentrations of about 10 mcg/mL six hours after infusion. The plasma concentrations during multiple dosing are similar to those after a single dose.
                  The mean elimination half-life of vancomycin from plasma is four to six hours in subjects with normal renal function. In the first 24 hours, about 75% of an administered dose of vancomycin is excreted in urine by glomerular filtration. Mean plasma clearance is about 0.058 L/kg/hr, and mean renal clearance is about 0.048 L/kg/hr. Renal dysfunction slows excretion of vancomycin. In anephric patients, the average half-life of elimination is 7.5 days. The distribution coefficient is from 0.3 to 0.43 L/kg. There is no apparent metabolism of the drug. About 60% of an intraperitoneal dose of vancomycin administered during peritoneal dialysis is absorbed systemically in six hours. Serum concentrations of about 10 mcg/mL are achieved by intraperitoneal injection of 30 mg/kg of vancomycin. However, the safety and efficacy of the intraperitoneal use of vancomycin has not been established in adequate and well-controlled trials (see 
                        
                           PRECAUTIONS
                        
                     ).
                  Total systemic and renal clearance of vancomycin may be reduced in the elderly.
                  Vancomycin is approximately 55% serum protein bound as measured by ultrafiltration at vancomycin serum concentrations of 10 to 100 mcg/mL. After I.V. administration of vancomycin, inhibitory concentrations are present in pleural, pericardial, ascitic, and synovial fluids; in urine; in peritoneal dialysis fluid; and in atrial appendage tissue. Vancomycin does not readily diffuse across normal meninges into the spinal fluid; but, when the meninges are inflamed, penetration into the spinal fluid occurs.
                  
                     
                        
                           Microbiology:
                        
                     
                  
                  The bactericidal action of vancomycin results primarily from inhibition of cell-wall biosynthesis. In addition, vancomycin alters bacterial-cell-membrane permeability and RNA synthesis. There is no cross-resistance between vancomycin and other antibiotics. Vancomycin is not active 
                        in vitro 
                     against gram-negative bacilli, mycobacteria, or fungi.
                  
                     
                        
                           Synergy:
                        
                     
                  
                  The combination of vancomycin and an aminoglycoside acts synergistically 
                        in vitro 
                     against many strains of 
                        Staphylococcus aureus, Streptococcus bovis
                     , enterococci, and the viridans group streptococci.
                  Vancomycin has been shown to be active against most strains of the following microorganism, both 
                        in vitro
                      and in clinical infections as described in the 
                        
                           INDICATIONS AND USAGE
                        
                      section.
                  
                     
                        Aerobic gram-positive microorganisms 
                     
                  
                  Diphtheroids
                  Enterococci (e.g., 
                        Enterococcus faecalis
                     )
                  Staphylococci, including 
                        Staphylococcus aureus 
                     and 
                        Staphylococcus epidermidis
                      (including heterogeneous methicillin-resistant strains)
                  
                     
                        Streptococcus bovis
                     
                  
                  Viridans group streptococci
                  The following 
                        in vitro
                      data are available, 
                        
                           but their clinical significance is unknown.
                        
                     
                  
                  Vancomycin exhibits 
                        in vitro
                      MIC’s of 1 mcg/mL or less against most (≥90%) strains of streptococci listed below and MIC’s of 4 mcg/mL or less against most (≥90%) strains of other listed microorganisms; however, the safety and effectiveness of vancomycin in treating clinical infections due to these microorganisms have not been established in adequate and well-controlled clinical trials.
                  
                     
                        Aerobic gram-positive microorganisms
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Listeria monocytogenes
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Streptococcus pyogenes
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Streptococcus pneumoniae
                      (including penicillin-resistant strains)
                  
                     
                        Streptococcus agalactiae
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Anaerobic gram-positive microorganisms
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Actinomyces 
                     species
                  
                     
                        Lactobacillus 
                     species
                  
                     
                        
                           Susceptibility Test Methods
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Dilution Techniques
                     
                  
                  Quantitative methods are used to determine antimicrobial minimum inhibitory concentrations (MIC's). These MIC's provide estimates of the susceptibility of bacteria to antimicrobial compounds. The MIC's should be determined using a standardized procedure. Standardized procedures are based on dilution method1 (broth or agar) or equivalent using standardized inoculum concentrations and standardized concentrations of vancomycin powder. The MIC values should be interpreted according to the following criteria: 
                  For testing aerobic microorganisms* other than streptococci: 
                  


                  


* A ß-lactamase test using an inoculum ≥107 CFU/mL (or direct colony growth) and a nitrocefin-based substrate should be performed to detect either ampicillin or penicillin resistance among enteroccocci due to ß-lactamase production. 
                  For testing streptococci* other than 
                        Streptococcus pneumoniae
                     :
                  


                  


* Interpretative criteria applicable only to tests performed by broth microdilution method using cation-adjusted Mueller-Hinton broth with 2 to 5% lysed horse blood1. 
                  The current absence of data on resistant strains precludes defining any categories other than “Susceptible”.
                  Strains yielding MIC results suggestive of a “nonsusceptible” category should be submitted to a reference laboratory for further testing. 
                  A report of “Susceptible” indicates that the pathogen is likely to be inhibited if the antimicrobial compound in the blood reaches the concentrations usually achievable. A report of “Intermediate” indicates that the result should be considered equivocal, and, if the microorganism is not fully susceptible to alternative, clinically feasible drugs, the test should be repeated. This category implies possible clinical applicability in body sites where the drug is physiologically concentrated or in situations where high dosage of drug can be used. This category also provides a buffer zone which prevents small uncontrolled technical factors from causing major discrepancies in interpretation. A report of “Resistant” indicates that the pathogen is not likely to be inhibited if the antimicrobial compound in the blood reaches the concentrations usually achievable; other therapy should be selected. Standardized susceptibility test procedures require the use of laboratory control microorganisms to control the technical aspects of the laboratory procedures. Standard vancomycin powder should provide the following MIC values: 
                  


                  


* Interpretative criteria applicable only to tests performed by broth microdilution method using cation-adjusted Mueller-Hinton broth with 2 to 5% lysed horse blood1.
                  
                     
                        Diffusion Techniques
                     
                  
                  Quantitative methods that require measurement of zone diameters also provide reproducible estimates of the susceptibility of bacteria to antimicrobial compounds. One such standardized procedure² requires the use of standardized inoculum concentrations. This procedure uses paper disks impregnated with 30 mcg of vancomycin to test the susceptibility of microorganisms to vancomycin.
                  Reports from the laboratory providing results of the standard single-disk susceptibility test with a 30 mcg vancomycin disk should be interpreted according to the following criteria:
                  For testing aerobic microorganisms other than enterococci and streptococci: 
                  


                  


For testing enterococci*+: 
                  


                  


* A direct nitrocefin-base ß-lactamase test using direct colony growth should be performed to detect either ampicillin or penicillin resistance among enterococci due to ß-lactamase production.
                  
                     + When testing for enterococci resistance to vancomycin, plates should be held for a full 24 hours and examined using transmitted light. The presence of a haze or any growth within the zone of inhibition indicates resistance. Those enterococci with intermediate zones of inhibition should be tested by a standardized procedure based on a dilution method1 (broth or agar) or equivalent. 
                  For testing streptococci* other than 
                        Streptococcus pneumoniae
                     : 
                  


                  


*Interpretative criteria applicable only to tests performed by disk diffusion method using Mueller-Hinton agar with 5% defibrinated sheep blood and incubated in 5% CO2
                     2. 
                  The current absence of data on resistant strains precludes defining any categories other than “Susceptible”. Strains yielding zone diameter results suggestive of a “nonsusceptible” category should be submitted to a reference laboratory for further testing. 
                  Interpretation should be as stated above for results using dilution techniques. Interpretation involves correlation of the diameter obtained in the disk test with the MIC for vancomycin. 
                  As with standardized dilution techniques, diffusion methods require the use of laboratory control microorganisms that are used to control the technical aspects of the laboratory procedures. For the diffusion technique, the 30 mcg vancomycin disk should provide the following zone diameters in these laboratory test quality control strains: 
                  


                  


* Interpretative criteria applicable only to tests performed by disk diffusion method using Mueller-Hinton agar with 5% defibrinated sheep blood and incubated in 5% CO2
                     2.
               
               
            
         