
               
               
               7	DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
                  
                     See also Dosage and Administration (2), Contraindications (4), Warnings and Precautions (5.3, 5.4), and Clinical Pharmacology (12.3).
                  
               
               
               
                  
                     
                        TYBOST, in combination with atazanavir or darunavir, can alter the concentration of drugs metabolized by CYP3A or CYP2D6. Drugs that induce CYP3A can alter the concentrations of TYBOST, atazanavir and darunavir. Consult the full prescribing information prior to and during treatment for potential drug interactions. (4, 5.3, 7, 12.3)
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1	Potential Effect of Cobicistat (Coadministered with Atazanavir or Darunavir) on the Pharmacokinetics of Concomitant Drugs
                     
                        Cobicistat is an inhibitor of CYP3A and CYP2D6. The transporters that cobicistat inhibits include p-glycoprotein (P-gp), BCRP, OATP1B1 and OATP1B3. The plasma concentration of drugs that are primarily metabolized by CYP3A or CYP2D6, or are substrates of P-gp, BCRP, OATP1B1 or OATP1B3 may be increased if those drugs are coadministered with TYBOST.  
                        Based on in vitro data, cobicistat is not expected to induce CYP1A2 or CYP2B6 and based on in vivo data, cobicistat is not expected to induce MDR1 or, in general, CYP3A to a clinically significant extent. The induction effect of cobicistat on CYP2C9, CYP2C19, or UGT1A1 is unknown, but is expected to be low based on CYP3A in vitro induction data.
                        Coadministration of TYBOST with atazanavir or darunavir with drugs highly dependent on CYP3A for clearance and for which elevated plasma concentrations are associated with serious and/or life-threatening events is contraindicated. Coadministration with other CYP3A substrates may require a dose adjustment or additional monitoring as shown in Table 6.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2	Potential Effect of Concomitant Drugs on the Pharmacokinetics of Cobicistat (Coadministered with Atazanavir or Darunavir)
                     
                        Cobicistat is metabolized by CYP3A, and to a minor extent, by CYP2D6. Atazanavir and darunavir are also metabolized by CYP3A.
                        Coadministration of TYBOST with atazanavir or darunavir in combination with drugs that induce CYP3A activity have the potential to decrease plasma concentrations of cobicistat, atazanavir and darunavir, which may lead to loss of therapeutic effect and development of resistance (see Table 6). 
                        Coadministration of TYBOST with atazanavir or darunavir in combination with other drugs that inhibit CYP3A may further increase the plasma concentrations of cobicistat, atazanavir and darunavir (see Table 6).
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3	Established and Other Potentially Significant Interactions
                     
                        Coadministration of TYBOST with fosamprenavir, saquinavir, or tipranavir is not recommended because pharmacokinetic data are not available to provide appropriate dosing recommendations. Use of TYBOST with lopinavir is not recommended because lopinavir is co-formulated with ritonavir.
                        Drug interaction trials were not conducted for TYBOST in combination with atazanavir or darunavir. As a single entity, drug interaction trials were conducted with TYBOST and desipramine, digoxin, and efavirenz. Drug interaction trials of TYBOST coadministered with elvitegravir were conducted that included rosuvastatin and rifabutin.
                        Table 6 provides dosing recommendations as a result of drug interactions with TYBOST. These recommendations are based on either drug interaction trials or predicted interactions due to the expected magnitude of the interaction and potential for serious adverse events or loss of therapeutic effect.
                        In Table 6, if not specifically stated, the drug interaction information applies to both coadministered agents: TYBOST coadministered with atazanavir or darunavir [see also Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                        In addition to the drug interactions noted in Table 6, TYBOST is not recommended for use in combination with STRIBILD tablets, lopinavir/ritonavir or regimens containing ritonavir, or in combination with more than one antiretroviral agent that requires pharmacokinetic enhancement [see also Warnings and Precautions (5.4)].
                        
                        
                           Evaluate whether dosing adjustments of concomitant medications or coadministered antiretroviral drugs are necessary in:
                        
                        
                           
                              Patients   on a stable concomitant medication who initiate or switch to a TYBOST-containing   regimen
                           
                           
                              Patients   on a TYBOST-containing regimen who initiate a new concomitant medication
                           
                           
                              Patients   initiating a TYBOST-containing regimen and a new concomitant   medication simultaneously  
                           
                        
                        
                           Under these circumstances, also monitor for adverse events and/or monitor concentrations of concomitant medications if appropriate.
                        
                        No dose adjustment is required when tenofovir DF or rilpivirine are coadministered with TYBOST and atazanavir or darunavir.
                        


