
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  Endogenous estrogens are largely responsible for the development 
and maintenance of the female reproductive system and secondary sexual 
characteristics. Although circulating estrogens exist in a dynamic equilibrium 
of metabolic interconversions, estradiol is the principal intracellular human 
estrogen and is substantially more potent than its metabolites, estrone and 
estriol at the receptor level. 
                  The primary source of estrogen in normally cycling adult women is the ovarian 
follicle, which secretes 70 to 500 mcg of estradiol daily, depending on the 
phase of the menstrual cycle. After menopause, most endogenous estrogen is 
produced by conversion of androstenedione, secreted by the adrenal cortex, to 
estrone by peripheral tissues. Thus, estrone and the sulfate-conjugated form, 
estrone sulfate, are the most abundant circulating estrogens in postmenopausal 
women. 
                  Estrogens act through binding to nuclear receptors in estrogen-responsive 
tissues. To date, two estrogen receptors have been identified. These vary in 
proportion from tissue to tissue.
                  Circulating estrogens modulate the pituitary secretion of the gonadotropins, 
luteinizing hormone (LH) and follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH), through a 
negative feedback mechanism. Estrogens act to reduce the elevated levels of 
these hormones seen in postmenopausal women.
                  
                  Pharmacokinetics:
                  Distribution:The distribution of exogenous estrogens is similar to that of 
endogenous estrogens. Estrogens are widely distributed in the body and are 
generally found in higher concentrations in the sex hormone target organs. 
Estrogens circulate in the blood largely bound to sex hormone binding globulin 
(SHBG) and albumin. 
                  
                  Metabolism:Exogenous estrogens are metabolized in the same manner as 
endogenous estrogens. Circulating estrogens exist in a dynamic equilibrium of 
metabolic interconversions. These transformations take place mainly in the 
liver. Estradiol is converted reversibly to estrone, and both can be converted 
to estriol, which is the major urinary metabolite. Estrogens also undergo 
enterohepatic recirculation via sulfate and glucuronide conjugation in the 
liver, biliary secretion of conjugates into the intestine, and hydrolysis in the 
gut followed by reabsorption. In postmenopausal women, a significant proportion 
of the circulating estrogens exist as sulfate conjugates, especially estrone 
sulfate, which serves as a circulating reservoir for the formation of more 
active estrogens. 
                  
                  Excretion:Estradiol, estrone, and estriol are excreted in the urine along 
with glucuronide and sulfate conjugates.
                  
                  Special Populations:No pharmacokinetic studies were conducted in special populations, 
including patients with renal or hepatic impairment.
                  
                  Drug Interactions:
                     In vitro and in 
vivo studies have shown that estrogens are metabolized partially by 
cytochrome P450 3A4 (CYP3A4). Therefore, inducers or inhibitors of CYP3A4 may 
affect estrogen drug metabolism. Inducers of CYP3A4 such as St. John’s Wort 
preparations (Hypericum perforatum), phenobarbital, carbamazepine, and rifampin 
may reduce plasma concentrations of estrogens, possibly resulting in a decrease 
in therapeutic effects and/or changes in the uterine bleeding profile. 
Inhibitors of CYP3A4 such as erythromycin, clarithromycin, ketoconazole, 
itraconazole, ritonavir and grapefruit juice may increase plasma concentrations 
of estrogens and may result in side effects.
               
               
            
         