
               
               
               7  DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 Meperidine
                     
                        Serious, sometimes fatal reactions have been reported in patients treated with concomitant meperidine (e.g., Demerol and other tradenames) and MAO inhibitors including selective MAO-B inhibitors [see
                               Contraindications (4)
                           ].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 Dextromethorphan
                     
                        The combination of MAO inhibitors and dextromethorphan has been reported to cause brief episodes of psychosis or bizarre behavior. Therefore, in view of ZELAPAR’s MAO inhibitory activity, dextromethorphan should not be used concomitantly with ZELAPAR [see
                               Contraindications (4)
                           ].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3 MAO Inhibitors
                     
                        ZELAPAR should not be administered along with other selegiline products (e.g., EMSAM or ELDEPRYL®) because of the increased risk of non-selective MAO inhibition that may lead to a hypertensive crisis [see
                               Contraindications (4)
                           ].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4 Sympathomimetic Medications
                     
                        Uncontrolled hypertension, including hypertensive crisis, has been reported when taking the recommended dose of swallowed selegiline and a sympathomimetic medication (ephedrine). 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.5 Tyramine/Selegiline Interaction
                     
                        The enzyme, monoamine oxidase (MAO) (primarily type A), in the gastrointestinal tract and liver provides protection from ingested amines (e.g., tyramine) that, if absorbed, have the capacity to cause uncontrolled hypertension (tyramine reaction). If MAO is inhibited in the gastrointestinal tract and liver, ingestion of exogenous amines contained in some foods such as fermented cheese, herring, or over-the-counter cough/cold medicines may be absorbed systemically causing release of norepinephrine and a rise in systemic blood pressure with the potential for uncontrolled hypertension. Selective MAO-B inhibitors lose their selectivity for MAO-B when taken in doses higher than recommended. Non-selective MAO-A inhibitors or MAO-B inhibitors in higher than recommended doses may result in MAO-A inhibition in the gastrointestinal tract and liver.
                        Results of a tyramine challenge study indicate that ZELAPAR is relatively selective for MAO-B at the recommended dose. In most cases, there is no need for dietary tyramine restriction in patients prescribed ZELAPAR [see
                                Clinical Pharmacology (12.2)
                           ] at the recommended dose. Because the selectivity for inhibiting MAO-B diminishes as the dose of ZELAPAR is increased above the recommended daily dose, patients should not take more than 2.5 mg of ZELAPAR daily.
                        Reports of hypertensive reactions have occurred in patients who ingested tyramine-containing consumables (i.e., food or drink) while receiving swallowed selegiline at the recommended dose (a dose believed to be relatively selective for MAO-B). Hypertensive crisis has also been reported with ZELAPAR use that was not above the recommended dosing.
                        Uncontrolled hypertension has been reported when taking the recommended dose of swallowed selegiline and a sympathomimetic medication (ephedrine). 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.6 Tricyclic Antidepressants and Selective Serotonin Reuptake Inhibitors
                     
                        Severe toxicity has also been reported in patients receiving the combination of tricyclic antidepressants and swallowed selegiline, or selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors and swallowed selegiline [see
                               Warnings and Precautions (5.2)
                           ]. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.7 Drugs that Induce CYP450
                     
                        Adequate studies have not been done investigating the effect of CYP3A4-inducers on selegiline. Drugs that induce CYP3A4 (e.g., phenytoin, carbamazepine, nafcillin, phenobarbital, and rifampin) should be used with caution. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.8 Dopaminergic Antagonists
                     
                        It is possible that dopamine antagonists, such as antipsychotics or metoclopramide, could diminish the effectiveness of ZELAPAR.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         