
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  
                     
                        Concurrent use of other CNS depressants may cause respiratory depression, hypotension, and profound sedation or coma. (7.1)
                        Mixed agonist/antagonist analgesics may reduce the analgesic effect and may precipitate withdrawal symptoms in these patients. (7.2)
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 Interactions with other CNS Depressants
                     
                        Hydromorphone Hydrochloride Injection, USP (HIGH POTENCY) should be used with caution and in reduced dosages when administered to patients concurrently receiving other central nervous system depressants including sedatives or hypnotics, general anesthetics, phenothiazines, centrally acting anti-emetics, tranquilizers, and alcohol because respiratory depression, hypotension, and profound sedation or coma may result. 
                        When such combined therapy is contemplated, the dose of one or both agents should be reduced. Opioid analgesics, including Hydromorphone Hydrochloride Injection, USP (HIGH POTENCY), may enhance the action of neuromuscular blocking agents and produce an increased degree of respiratory depression.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 Interactions with Mixed Agonist/Antagonist Opioid Analgesics
                     
                        Agonist/antagonist analgesics (e.g., pentazocine, nalbuphine, and butorphanol) and partial agonist analgesics (buprenorphine) should be administered with caution to a patient who has received or is receiving a course of therapy with a pure opioid agonist analgesic such as Hydromorphone Hydrochloride Injection, USP (HIGH POTENCY). In this situation, mixed agonist/antagonist analgesics may reduce the analgesic effect of Hydromorphone Hydrochloride Injection, USP (HIGH POTENCY) and/or may precipitate withdrawal symptoms in these patients.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3 Monoamine Oxidase Inhibitors (MAOIs) 
                     
                        MAOIs may potentiate the action of Hydromorphone Hydrochloride Injection, USP (HIGH POTENCY). Allow at least 14 days after stopping treatment with MAOIs before initiating treatment with Hydromorphone Hydrochloride Injection, USP (HIGH POTENCY). 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4 Anticholinergics 
                     
                        Anticholinergics or other medications with anticholinergic activity when used concurrently with Hydromorphone Hydrochloride Injection, USP (HIGH POTENCY) may result in increased risk of urinary retention and severe constipation, which may lead to paralytic ileus. 
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         