
                     
                     
                     Drug/Drug Interactions with Oxycodone
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           CYP3A4 Inhibitors and CYP450 Inducers
                           
                              Oxycodone is extensively metabolized by multiple metabolic pathways. CYP3A4 is the major enzyme involved in noroxycodone formation followed by CYP2B6, CYP2C9/19 and CYP2D6. Drugs that inhibit CYP3A4 activity, such as macrolide antibiotics (e.g., erythromycin), azole-antifungal agents (e.g., ketoconazole), and protease inhibitors (e.g., ritonavir), may cause decreased clearance of oxycodone which could lead to an increase in oxycodone plasma concentrations and prolonged opioid effects. Similarly, CYP450 inducers, such as rifampin, carbamazepine, and phenytoin, may induce the metabolism of oxycodone and, therefore, may cause increased clearance of the drug which could lead to a decrease in oxycodone plasma concentrations, lack of efficacy or, possibly, development of an abstinence syndrome in a patient who had developed physical dependence to oxycodone.
                              If co-administration with oxycodone and aspirin tablets is necessary, caution is advised when initiating therapy with, currently taking, or discontinuing CYP3A4 inhibitors or CYP450 inducers. Evaluate these patients at frequent intervals and consider dose adjustments until stable drug effects are achieved.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Skeletal Muscle Relaxants
                           
                              Opioid analgesics may enhance the neuromuscularblocking action of skeletal muscle relaxants and produce an increase in the degree of respiratory depression.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           CNS Depressants
                           
                              Patients receiving CNS depressants such as other opioid analgesics, general anesthetics, phenothiazines, other tranquilizers, centrally-acting anti-emetics, sedative-hypnotics or other CNS depressants (including alcohol) concomitantly with oxycodone and aspirin tablets may exhibit an additive CNS depression. When such combined therapy is contemplated, the dose of one or both agents should be reduced.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Analgesics
                           
                              Agonist/antagonist analgesics (i.e., pentazocine, nalbuphine, naltrexone, and butorphanol) should be administered with caution to a patient who has received or is receiving a pure opioid agonist such as oxycodone. These agonist/antagonist analgesics may reduce the analgesic effect of oxycodone or may precipitate withdrawal symptoms.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               