
                     
                     
                     Drug Interactions
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                           
                              Because candesartan is not significantly metabolized by the cytochrome P450 system and at therapeutic concentrations has no effects on P450 enzymes, interactions with drugs that inhibit or are metabolized by those enzymes would not be expected.
                              
                                 Interactions common to both candesartan cilexetil and hydrochlorothiazide
                              
                              
                                 Non-Steroidal Anti-Inflammatory Agents including Selective Cyclooxygenase-2 Inhibitors (COX-2 Inhibitors) 
                              
                              In patients who are elderly, volume-depleted (including those on diuretic therapy), or with compromised renal function, co-administration of NSAIDs, including selective COX-2 inhibitors, with angiotensin II receptor antagonists, including candesartan, may result in deterioration of renal function, including possible acute renal failure. These effects are usually reversible. Monitor renal function periodically in patients receiving candesartan and NSAID therapy.
                              The antihypertensive effect of angiotensin II receptor antagonists, including candesartan may be attenuated by NSAIDs including selective COX-2 inhibitors.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Lithium − Renal clearance of lithium is reduced by thiazides and increases the risk of lithium toxicity. Reversible increases in serum lithium concentrations and toxicity have been reported during concomitant administration of lithium with ACE inhibitors, and with some angiotensin II receptor antagonists. An increase in serum lithium concentration has been reported during concomitant administration of lithium with candesartan cilexetil. Monitor serum lithium levels. 
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Interactions with candesartan cilexetil
                              
                              Dual Blockade of the Renin-Angiotensin System (RAS)
                              Dual blockade of the RAS with angiotensin receptor blockers, ACE inhibitors, or aliskiren is associated with increased risks of hypotension, hyperkalemia, and changes in renal function (including acute renal failure) compared to monotherapy. Closely monitor blood pressure, renal function and electrolytes in patients on candesartan cilexetil and hydrochlorothiazide and other agents that affect the RAS. 
                              Do not co-administer aliskiren with candesartan cilexetil and hydrochlorothiazide in patients with diabetes. Avoid use of aliskiren with candesartan cilexetil and hydrochlorothiazide in patients with renal impairment (GFR <60 ml/min) (see CONTRAINDICATIONS).
                              
                                 Interactions with hydrochlorothiazide 
                              Alcohol, barbiturates, or narcotics – Potentiation of orthostatic hypotension may occur. 
                              Antidiabetic drugs (oral agents and insulin) – Dosage adjustment of the antidiabetic drug may be required. 
                              Ion Exchange resins − Single doses of either cholestyramine or colestipol resins bind the hydrochlorothiazide and reduce its absorption from the gastrointestinal tract by up to 85% and 43% respectively. Stagger the dosage of hydrochlorothiazide and ion exchange resins such that hydrochlorothiazide is administered at least 4 hours before or 4-6 hours after the administration of resins. 
                              Skeletal muscle relaxants, nondepolarizing (eg, tubocurarine) −Possible increased responsiveness to muscle relaxants such as curare derivatives. 
                              Digitalis: Thiazide-induced hypokalemia or hypomagnesemia may predispose to digoxin toxicity. 
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               