
               
               
               12  CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1	Mechanism of Action
                     
                        The activity of GLIADEL Wafer is due to release of cytotoxic concentrations of carmustine, a DNA and RNA alkylating agent, into the tumor resection cavity. On exposure to the aqueous environment of the resection cavity, the anhydride bonds in the copolymer are hydrolyzed, releasing carmustine, carboxyphenoxypropane, and sebacic acid into the surrounding brain tissue.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3	Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        Carmustine concentrations delivered by GLIADEL Wafer in human brain tissue have not been determined.
                        Following an intravenous infusion of carmustine at doses ranging from 30 to 170 mg/m2, the average terminal half-life, clearance and steady-state volume of distribution were 22 minutes, 56 mL/min/kg and 3.25 L/kg, respectively. Approximately 60% of the intravenous 200-mg/m2 dose of 14C-carmustine was excreted in the urine over 96 hours and 6% was expired as CO2. Carmustine degrades both spontaneously and metabolically. The relevance of these data to elimination of intracranial implant-delivered carmustine are unknown.
                        GLIADEL Wafers are biodegradable when implanted into the human brain. Wafer remnants may be observed on brain imaging scans or at re-operation. Wafer remnants were visible in 11 of 18 patients on CT scans obtained 49 days after implantation of GLIADEL Wafer. More than 70% of the copolymer degrades within three weeks. Wafer remnants have been present at re-operation and autopsy up to 232 days after GLIADEL Wafer implantation, and consisted mostly of water and monomeric components with minimal detectable carmustine present.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         