
               
               
               12. CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1     Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Blinatumomab is a bispecific CD19-directed CD3 T-cell engager that binds to CD19 expressed on the surface of cells of B-lineage origin and CD3 expressed on the surface of T cells. It activates endogenous T cells by connecting CD3 in the T-cell receptor (TCR) complex with CD19 on benign and malignant B cells. Blinatumomab mediates the formation of a synapse between the T cell and the tumor cell, upregulation of cell adhesion molecules, production of cytolytic proteins, release of inflammatory cytokines, and proliferation of T cells, which result in redirected lysis of CD19+ cells. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2     Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        During the continuous intravenous infusion over 4 weeks, the pharmacodynamic response was characterized by T-cell activation and initial redistribution, reduction in peripheral B cells, and transient cytokine elevation. 
                        Peripheral T cell redistribution (ie, T cell adhesion to blood vessel endothelium and/or transmigration into tissue) occurred after start of BLINCYTO infusion or dose escalation. T cell counts initially declined within 1 to 2 days and then returned to baseline levels within 7 to 14 days in majority patients. Increase of T cell counts above baseline (T cell expansion) was observed in few patients. 
                        Peripheral B cell counts decreased to less than or equal to 10 cells/microliter during the first treatment cycle at doses ≥ 5 mcg/m2/day or ≥ 9 mcg/day in the majority of patients. No recovery of peripheral B-cell counts was observed during the 2-week BLINCYTO-free period between treatment cycles. Incomplete depletion of B cells occurred at doses of 0.5 mcg/m2/day and 1.5 mcg/m2/day and in a few patients at higher doses. 
                         Cytokines including IL-2, IL-4, IL-6, IL-8, IL-10, IL-12, TNF-α, and IFN-γ were measured, and IL-6, IL-10, and IFN-γ were elevated. The highest elevation of cytokines was observed in the first 2 days following start of BLINCYTO infusion. The elevated cytokine levels returned to baseline within 24 to 48 hours during the infusion. In subsequent treatment cycles, cytokine elevation occurred in fewer patients with lesser intensity compared to the initial 48 hours of the first treatment cycle.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3     Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        The pharmacokinetics of blinatumomab appear linear over a dose range from 5 to 90 mcg/m2/day (approximately equivalent to 9 to 162 mcg/day) in adult patients. Following continuous intravenous infusion, the steady-state serum concentration (Css) was achieved within a day and remained stable over time. The increase in mean Css values was approximately proportional to the dose in the range tested. At the clinical doses of 9 mcg/day and 28 mcg/day for the treatment of relapsed/refractory ALL, the mean (SD) Css was 211 (258) pg/mL and 621 (502) pg/mL, respectively.  
                        
                           Distribution

                           The estimated mean (SD) volume of distribution based on terminal phase (Vz) was 4.52 (2.89) L with continuous intravenous infusion of blinatumomab. 
                        
                           Metabolism

                           The metabolic pathway of blinatumomab has not been characterized.  Like other protein therapeutics, BLINCYTO is expected to be degraded into small peptides and amino acids via catabolic pathways. 
                        
                           Elimination

                           The estimated mean (SD) systemic clearance with continuous intravenous infusion in patients receiving blinatumomab in clinical studies was 2.92 (2.83) L/hour. The mean (SD) half-life was 2.11 (1.42) hours.  Negligible amounts of blinatumomab were excreted in the urine at the tested clinical doses. 
                        
                           Body Weight, Body Surface Area, Gender, and Age

                           Results of population pharmacokinetic analyses indicate that age (18 to 80 years of age), gender, body weight (44 to 134 kg), and body surface area (1.39 to 2.57 m2) do not influence the pharmacokinetics of blinatumomab.  
                        
                           Renal Impairment

                           No formal pharmacokinetic studies of blinatumomab have been conducted in patients with renal impairment.  
                        Pharmacokinetic analyses showed an approximately 2-fold difference in mean blinatumomab clearance values between patients with moderate renal impairment (CrCL ranging from 30 to 59 mL/min, N = 21) and normal renal function (CrCL more than 90 mL/min, N = 215). However, high interpatient variability was discerned (CV% up to 95.6%), and clearance values in renal impaired patients were essentially within the range observed in patients with normal renal function. There is no information available in patients with severe renal impairment (CrCL less than 30 mL/min) or patients on hemodialysis.
                        
                           Drug Interactions

                           Transient elevation of cytokines may suppress CYP450 enzyme activities [see Drug Interactions (7) and Clinical Pharmacology (12.2)].
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         