
               
               
               7	DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           Avoid concomitant administration of ZELBORAF with strong CYP3A4 inhibitors or inducers. (7.1)
                           CYP1A2 Substrates: ZELBORAF can increase concentrations of CYP1A2 substrates. Avoid concomitant use of ZELBORAF with CYP1A2 substrates with a narrow therapeutic window. If coadministration cannot be avoided, monitor closely for toxicities and consider dose reduction of CYP1A2 substrates. (7.2).
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1	Effect of Strong CYP3A4 Inhibitors or Inducers on Vemurafenib
                     
                        Vemurafenib is a substrate of CYP3A4 based on in vitro data; therefore, coadministration of strong CYP3A4 inhibitors or inducers may alter vemurafenib concentrations [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)]. Avoid coadministration of ZELBORAF with strong CYP3A4 inhibitors (e.g., ketoconazole, itraconazole, clarithromycin, atazanavir, nefazodone, saquinavir, telithromycin, ritonavir, indinavir, nelfinavir, voriconazole) or strong inducers (e.g., phenytoin, carbamazepine, rifampin, rifabutin, rifapentine, phenobarbital), and replace these drugs with alternative drugs when possible.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2	Effect of Vemurafenib on CYP1A2 Substrates
                     
                        Concomitant use of ZELBORAF with drugs with a narrow therapeutic window that are predominantly metabolized by CYP1A2 is not recommended as ZELBORAF may increase concentrations of CYP1A2 substrates [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)]. If coadministration cannot be avoided, monitor closely for toxicities and consider a dose reduction of concomitant CYP1A2 substrates.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3	Concurrent Ipilimumab
                     
                        Increases in transaminases and bilirubin occurred in a majority of patients who received concurrent ipilimumab and ZELBORAF [see Warnings and Precautions Section 5.6].
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4    Effect of Vemurafenib on P-gp Substrates
                     
                        Coadministration of ZELBORAF with digoxin, a sensitive P-glycoprotein (P-gp) substrate, increased digoxin systemic exposure by 1.8-fold. Avoid concurrent use of P-gp substrates known to have narrow therapeutic indices. If use of these medications is unavoidable, consider dose reduction of P-gp substrates with narrow therapeutic indices.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         