
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY 
               
                  

                  Sulfamethoxazole and trimethoprim oral suspension is rapidly 
absorbed by following oral administration. Both sulfamethoxazole and 
trimethoprim exist in the blood as unbound, protein-bound, and metabolized 
forms; sulfamethoxazole also exists as the conjugated form. The metabolism of 
sulfamethoxazole occurs predominantly by N4-acetylation, although the 
glucuronide conjugate has been identified. The principal metabolites of 
trimethoprim are the 1- and 3-oxides and the 3’- and 4’-hydroxy derivatives. The 
free forms of sulfamethoxazole and trimethoprim are considered to be the 
therapeutically active forms. Approximately 44% of trimethoprim and 70% of 
sulfamethoxazole are bound to plasma proteins. The presence of 10 mg percent 
sulfamethoxazole in plasma decreases the protein binding of trimethoprim by an 
insignificant degree; trimethoprim does not influence the protein binding of 
sulfamethoxazole. Peak blood levels for the individual components occur 1 to 4 
hours after oral administration. The mean serum half-lives of sulfamethoxazole 
and trimethoprim are 10 and 8 to 10 hours, respectively. However, patients with 
severely impaired renal function exhibit an increase in the half-lives of both 
components, requiring dosage regimen adjustment (see DOSAGE AND 
ADMINISTRATION). Detectable amounts of trimethoprim and sulfamethoxazole 
are present in the blood 24 hours after drug administration. During 
administration of 160 mg trimethoprim and 800 mg sulfamethoxazole b.i.d., the 
mean steady-state plasma concentration of trimethoprim was 1.72 mcg/mL. The 
steady-state minimal plasma levels of free and total sulfamethoxazole were 57.4 
mcg/mL and 68.0 mcg/mL, respectively. These steady-state levels were achieved 
after 3 days of drug administration.1
                  
                  Excretion of sulfamethoxazole and trimethoprim is primarily by the kidneys 
through both glomerular filtration and tubular secretion. Urine concentrations 
of both sulfamethoxazole and trimethoprim are considerably higher than are the 
concentrations in the blood. The average percentage of the dose recovered in 
urine from 0 to 72 hours after a single oral dose is 84.5% for total sulfonamide 
and 66.8% for free trimethoprim. Thirty percent of the total sulfonamide is 
excreted as free sulfamethoxazole, with the remaining as N
                     4-acetylated metabolite.2 When 
administered together, neither sulfamethoxazole nor trimethoprim affects the 
urinary excretion pattern of the other.
                  Both sulfamethoxazole and trimethoprim distribute to sputum, vaginal fluid, 
and middle ear fluid; trimethoprim also distributes to bronchial secretions, and 
both pass the placental barrier and are excreted in human milk.
                  
                     
                     Geriatric 
Pharmacokinetics 
                  
                  The pharmacokinetics of sulfamethoxazole 800 mg and trimethoprim 160 mg were 
studied in 6 geriatric subjects (mean age: 78.6 years) and 6 young healthy 
subjects (mean age: 29.3 years) using a non-US approved formulation. 
Pharmacokinetic values for sulfamethoxazole in geriatric subjects were similar 
to those observed in young adult subjects. The mean renal clearance of 
trimethoprim was significantly lower in geriatric subjects compared with young 
adult subjects (19 mL/h/kg vs. 55 mL/h/kg). However, after normalizing by body 
weight, the apparent total body clearance of trimethoprim was on average 19% 
lower in geriatric subjects compared with young adult subjects.3
                  
                  Microbiology: Sulfamethoxazole inhibits bacterial 
synthesis of dihydrofolic acid by competing with para-aminobenzoic acid (PABA). Trimethoprim blocks the 
production of tetrahydrofolic acid from dihydrofolic acid by binding to and 
reversibly inhibiting the required enzyme,
                  dihydrofolate reductase. Thus, this combination blocks two consecutive steps 
in the biosynthesis of nucleic acids and proteins essential to many 
bacteria.
                  
                     In vitro studies have shown that bacterial 
resistance develops more slowly with this combination than with either 
sulfamethoxazole or trimethoprim alone.
                  
                     In vitro serial dilution tests have shown that the 
spectrum of antibacterial activity of sulfamethoxazole and trimethoprim includes 
the common urinary tract pathogens with the exception of Pseudomonas aeruginosa. The following organisms are usually 
susceptible: Escherichia coli, Klebsiella species, Enterobacter 
species, Morganella morganii, Proteus mirabilis and indole-positive Proteus species including Proteus 
vulgaris. The usual spectrum of antimicrobial activity of 
sulfamethoxazole and trimethoprim includes the following bacterial pathogens 
isolated from middle ear exudate and from bronchial secretions: Haemophilus influenzae, including ampicillin-resistant 
strains, and Streptococcus pneumoniae. Shigella flexneri and Shigella sonnei 
are usually susceptible. The usual spectrum also includes enterotoxigenic 
strains of Escherichia coli (ETEC) causing bacterial 
gastroenteritis.
                  

                  
                  

                  

                  

                  

                  

                  

                  

                  
                     
Susceptibility Testing:
                  
The recommended quantitative disc susceptibility 
method may be used for estimating the susceptibility of bacteria to 
sulfamethoxazole and trimethoprim.3,4 With this 
procedure, a report from the laboratory of “Susceptible to trimethoprim and 
sulfamethoxazole” indicates that the infection is likely to respond to therapy 
with this product. If the infection is confined to the urine, a report of 
“Intermediate susceptibility to trimethoprim and sulfamethoxazole” also 
indicates that the infection is likely to respond. A report of “Resistant to 
trimethoprim and sulfamethoxazole” indicates that the infection is unlikely to 
respond to therapy with this product.

               
               
               
                  
                     image of table
                     
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         