
               
               
               7	DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           See Boxed Warning and Warnings and Precautions (5.4)
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1	Metabolic Drug Interactions
                     
                        Fentanyl is metabolized mainly via the human cytochrome P450 3A4 isoenzyme system (CYP3A4); therefore potential interactions may occur when Lazanda is given concurrently with agents that affect CYP3A4 activity. 
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 CYP3A4 inhibitors
                              
                              The concomitant use of Lazanda with CYP3A4 inhibitors (e.g., indinavir, nelfinavir, ritonavir, clarithromycin, itraconazole, ketoconazole, nefazodone, saquinavir, telithromycin, aprepitant, diltiazem, erythromycin, fluconazole, grapefruit juice, verapamil, or cimetidine) may result in a potentially dangerous increase in fentanyl plasma concentrations, which could increase or prolong adverse drug effects and may cause potentially fatal respiratory depression. Patients receiving Lazanda who begin therapy with, or increase the dose of, CYP3A4 inhibitors are to be carefully monitored for signs of opioid toxicity over an extended period of time. Increase dose conservatively [see 
                                    Warnings and Precautions (5.4)
                                 ]. 
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 CYP3A4 inducers
                              
                              The concomitant use of Lazanda with CYP3A4 inducers (e.g., barbiturates, carbamazepine, efavirenz, glucocorticoids, modafinil, nevirapine, oxcarbazepine, phenobarbital, phenytoin, pioglitazone, rifabutin, rifampin, St. John's wort, or troglitazone) may result in a decrease in fentanyl plasma concentrations, which could decrease the efficacy of Lazanda. Patients receiving Lazanda who stop therapy with, or decrease the dose of, CYP3A4 inducers may experience sudden increase in fentanyl plasma concentrations and are to be monitored for signs of increased Lazanda activity. Adjust the dose of Lazanda accordingly.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2	Non-metabolic Drug Interactions
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Agents used to treat Allergic Rhinitis
                              
                              The presence of allergic rhinitis is not expected to affect Lazanda absorption. However, co-administration of a vasoconstrictive nasal decongestant such as oxymetazoline to treat allergic rhinitis leads to lower peak plasma concentrations and a delayed Tmax of fentanyl that may cause Lazanda to be less effective in patients with allergic rhinitis who use such decongestants, thus potentially impairing pain management. Additionally, in view of the possibility that the titration of a patient while they are experiencing an acute episode of rhinitis could lead to incorrect dose identification (particularly if they are using a vasoconstrictive decongestant), titration under these circumstances must be avoided [see 
                                    Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)
                                 ].
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 MAO inhibitor
                              
                              Concomitant use of Lazanda with an MAO inhibitor, or within 14 days of discontinuing an MAO inhibitor, is not recommended.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         