
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  Endogenous estrogens are largely responsible for the development 
and maintenance of the female reproductive system and secondary sexual 
characteristics. Although circulating estrogens exist in a dynamic equilibrium 
of metabolic interconversions, estradiol is the principal intracellular human 
estrogen and is substantially more potent than its metabolites, estrone and 
estriol at the receptor level. 
                  The primary source of estrogen in normally cycling adult women is the ovarian 
follicle, which secretes 70 mcg to 500 mcg of estradiol daily, depending on the 
phase of the menstrual cycle. After menopause, most endogenous estrogen is 
produced by conversion of androstenedione, secreted by the adrenal cortex, to 
estrone by peripheral tissues. Thus, estrone and the sulfate conjugated form, 
estrone sulfate, are the most abundant circulating estrogens in postmenopausal 
women.
                  Estrogens act through binding to nuclear receptors in estrogen-responsive 
tissues. To date, two estrogen receptors have been identified. These vary in 
proportion from tissue to tissue.
                  Circulating estrogens modulate the pituitary secretion of the gonadotropins 
luteinizing hormone (LH) and follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH), through a 
negative feedback mechanism. Estrogens act to reduce the elevated levels of 
these hormones seen in postmenopausal women.
                  
                  
                  PharmacokineticsTransdermal administration of Estradiol Transdermal System 
Continuous Delivery (Once-Weekly) produces mean serum concentrations of 
estradiol comparable to those produced by premenopausal women in the early 
follicular phase of the ovulatory cycle. The pharmacokinetics of estradiol 
following application of the Estradiol Transdermal System Continuous Delivery 
(Once-Weekly) were investigated in 197 healthy postmenopausal women in six 
studies. In five of the studies Estradiol Transdermal System Continuous Delivery 
(Once-Weekly) was applied to the abdomen and in a sixth study application to the 
buttocks and abdomen were compared.
                  
                  
                  AbsorptionThe Estradiol Transdermal System Continuous Delivery 
(Once-Weekly) continuously releases estradiol which is transported across intact 
skin leading to sustained circulating levels of estradiol during a 7 day 
treatment period. The systemic availability of estradiol after transdermal 
administration is about 20 times higher than that after oral administration. 
This difference is due to the absence of first-pass metabolism when estradiol is 
given by the transdermal route.
                  In a bioavailability study, the Estradiol Transdermal System Continuous 
Delivery (Once-Weekly) 7.75 cm2 was studied with the 
Estradiol Transdermal System Continuous Delivery (Once-Weekly) 15.5 cm2 as reference. The mean estradiol levels in serum from the two 
sizes are shown in Figure 1.
                  
                  
                  Figure 1 Mean Serum 17ß-Estradiol Concentrations vs. 
Time Profile following Application of a 7.75 cm2 
Transdermal Patch and Application of a 15.5 cm2 Estradiol 
Transdermal System Continuous Delivery (Once-Weekly) Patch
                  Dose proportionality was demonstrated for the Estradiol Transdermal System 
Continuous Delivery (Once-Weekly) 7.75 cm2 transdermal 
system as compared to the Estradiol Transdermal System Continuous Delivery 
(Once-Weekly) 15.5 cm2 transdermal system in a 2 week 
crossover study with a 1 week washout period between the two transdermal systems 
in 24 postmenopausal women.
                  Dose proportionality was also demonstrated for the Estradiol Transdermal 
System Continuous Delivery (Once-Weekly) (15.5 cm2 and 31 
cm2) in a 1 week study conducted in 54 postmenopausal 
women. The mean steady-state levels (Cavg) of the 
estradiol during the application of Estradiol Transdermal System Continuous 
Delivery (Once-Weekly) 31 cm2 and 15.5 cm2 on the abdomen were about 80 pg/mL and 40 pg/mL, 
respectively.
                  In a 3 week multiple application study in 24 postmenopausal women, the 31 
cm2 Estradiol Transdermal System Continuous Delivery 
(Once-Weekly) produced average peak estradiol concentrations (Cmax) of approximately 100 pg/mL. Trough values at the end of 
each wear interval (Cmin) were approximately 35 pg/mL. 
Nearly identical serum curves were seen each week, indicating little or no 
accumulation of estradiol in the body. Serum estrone peak and trough levels were 
60 pg/mL and 40 pg/mL, respectively.
                  In a single-dose, randomized, crossover study conducted to compare the effect 
of site of application, 38 postmenopausal women wore a single Estradiol 
Transdermal System Continuous Delivery (Once-Weekly) 31 cm2 system for one week on the abdomen and buttocks. The 
estradiol serum concentration profiles are shown in Figure 2. Cmax and Cavg values were, respectively, 
25% and 17% higher with the buttock application than with the abdomen 
application.
                  
                  
                  Figure 2 Observed Mean (± S.E.) Estradiol Serum 
Concentrations for a One Week Application of the Estradiol Transdermal System 
Continuous Delivery (Once-Weekly) (31 cm2) to the abdomen 
and buttocks of 38 postmenopausal women
               
               
               
                  
                     image of Figure 1 Mean Serum graph
                     
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     image of Figure 2 Observed Mean graph
                     
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         