
                     
                     
                     Drug Interactions
                     
                        
                           In vitro metabolic studies indicate that verapamil is metabolized by cytochrome P450 including CYP3A4, CYP1A2, CYP2C8, CYP2C9 and CYP2C18.  Verapamil has been shown to be an inhibitor of CYP3A4 enzymes and P-glycoprotein (P-gp).
                        Clinically significant interactions have been reported with inhibitors of CYP3A4 (e.g. erythromycin, ritonavir) causing elevation of plasma levels of verapamil while inducers of CYP3A4 (e.g. rifampin) have caused a lowering of plasma levels of verapamil. Therefore, patients receiving inhibitors or inducers of the cytochrome P450 system should be monitored for drug interactions.
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Digitalis
                           
                           
                              Clinical use of verapamil in digitalized patients has shown the combination to be well tolerated if digoxin doses are properly adjusted.  Chronic verapamil treatment can increase serum digoxin levels by 50 to 75% during the first week of therapy, and this can result in digoxin toxicity.  In patients with hepatic cirrhosis, the influence of verapamil on digoxin kinetics is magnified.  Verapamil may reduce total body clearance and extrarenal clearance of digitoxin by 27% and 29%, respectively.  Maintenance digoxin doses should be reduced when verapamil is administered, and the patient should be carefully monitored to avoid over- or under-digitalization.  Whenever overdigitalization is suspected, the daily dose of digoxin should be reduced or temporarily discontinued.  Upon discontinuation of any verapamil-containing regime including trandolapril and verapamil hydrochloride extended-release tablets, the patient should be reassessed to avoid underdigitalization.  No clinically significant pharmacokinetic interaction has been found between trandolapril (or its metabolites) and digoxin.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Lithium
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    Verapamil Component
                                 
                                 
                                    Increased sensitivity to the effects of lithium (neurotoxicity) has been reported during concomitant verapamil-lithium therapy with either no change or an increase in serum lithium levels.  Increased serum lithium levels and symptoms of lithium toxicity have been reported in patients receiving concomitant lithium and ACE inhibitor therapy.  Trandolapril and verapamil hydrochloride extended-release tablets and lithium should be coadministered with caution, and frequent monitoring of serum lithium levels is recommended.  If a diuretic is also used, the risk of lithium toxicity may be increased.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Clarithromycin
                           
                           
                              Hypotension, bradyarrhythmias, and lactic acidosis have been observed in patients receiving concurrent clarithromycin.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Erythromycin
                           
                           
                              Hypotension, bradyarrhythmias, and lactic acidosis have been observed in patients receiving concurrent erythromycin ethylsuccinate.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Cimetidine
                           
                           
                              The interaction between cimetidine and chronically administered verapamil has not been studied.  Variable results on clearance have been obtained in acute studies of healthy volunteers; clearance of verapamil was either reduced or unchanged.  No clinically significant pharmacokinetic interaction has been found between trandolapril (or its metabolites) and cimetidine.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Antiarrhythmic Agents 
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    Verapamil Component
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                       
                                       Disopyramide Phosphate
                                       
                                          Data on possible interactions between verapamil and disopyramide phosphate are not available.  Therefore, disopyramide should not be administered within 48 hours before or 24 hours after verapamil administration. 
                                       
                                       
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                       
                                       Flecainide
                                       
                                          A study of healthy volunteers showed that the concomitant administration of flecainide and verapamil may have additive effects on myocardial contractility, AV conduction, and repolarization.  Concomitant therapy with flecainide and verapamil may result in additive negative inotropic effect and prolongation of atrioventricular conduction. 
                                       
                                       
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                       
                                       Quinidine
                                       
                                          In a small number of patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (IHSS), concomitant use of verapamil and quinidine resulted in significant hypotension.  Until further data are obtained, combined therapy of verapamil and quinidine in patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy should probably be avoided. 
                                          The electrophysiological effects of quinidine and verapamil on AV conduction were studied in 8 patients.  Verapamil significantly counteracted the effects of quinidine on AV conduction.  There has been a report of increased quinidine levels during verapamil therapy.
                                       
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Antihypertensive Agents
                           
                           
                              Concomitant use of trandolapril and verapamil hydrochloride extended-release tablets with other antihypertensive agents including diuretics, vasodilators, beta-adrenergic blockers, and alpha-antagonists may result in additive hypotensive effects.  There are reports that verapamil may result in higher concentrations of the alpha-agonists prazosin and terazosin.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Dual Blockade of the Renin-Angiotensin System (RAS)
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    Trandolapril Component
                                 
                                 
                                    Dual blockade of the RAS with angiotensin receptor blockers, ACE inhibitors, or aliskiren is associated with increased risks of hypotension, hyperkalemia, and changes in renal function (including acute renal failure) compared to monotherapy. Most patients receiving the combination of two RAS inhibitors do not obtain any additional benefit compared to monotherapy. In general, avoid combined use of RAS inhibitors. Closely monitor blood pressure, renal function and electrolytes in patients on trandolapril and verapamil hydrochloride extended-release tablets and other agents that affect the RAS. 
                                    Do not co-administer aliskiren with trandolapril and verapamil hydrochloride extended-release tablets in patients with diabetes.  Avoid use of aliskiren with trandolapril and verapamil hydrochloride extended-release tablets in patients with renal impairment (GFR <60 ml/min).
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Beta Blockers
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    Verapamil Component
                                 
                                 
                                    Concomitant therapy with beta-adrenergic blockers and verapamil may result in additive negative effects on heart rate, atrioventricular conduction, and/or cardiac contractility. Drug interaction studies have indicated that the maximum concentrations of metoprolol and propanolol are increased after the administration of verapamil. The use of verapamil in combination with a beta-adrenergic blocker should be used only with caution, and close monitoring.
                                    Asymptomatic bradycardia (36 beats/min) with a wandering atrial pacemaker has been observed in a patient receiving concomitant timolol (a beta-adrenergic blocker) eyedrops and oral verapamil.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Concomitant Diuretic Therapy
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    Trandolapril Component
                                 
                                 
                                    As with other ACE inhibitors, patients on diuretics, especially those on recently instituted diuretic therapy, may occasionally experience an excessive reduction of blood pressure after initiation of therapy with trandolapril and verapamil hydrochloride extended-release tablets.  The possibility of exacerbation of hypotensive effects with trandolapril and verapamil hydrochloride extended-release tablets may be minimized by either discontinuing the diuretic or cautiously increasing salt intake prior to initiation of treatment with trandolapril and verapamil hydrochloride extended-release tablets.  If it is not possible to discontinue the diuretic, the starting dose of trandolapril and verapamil hydrochloride extended-release tablets should be reduced (see 
                                          DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION
                                       ). No clinically significant pharmacokinetic interaction has been found between trandolapril (or its metabolites) and furosemide.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Agents Increasing Serum Potassium
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    Trandolapril Component  
                                 
                                 
                                    Trandolapril can attenuate potassium loss caused by thiazide diuretics and increase serum potassium when used alone.  Use of potassium-sparing diuretics (spironolactone, triamterene, or amiloride), potassium supplements, or potassium-containing salt substitutes concomitantly with ACE inhibitors can increase the risk of hyperkalemia.  If concomitant use of such agents is indicated, they should be used with caution and with appropriate monitoring of serum potassium (see 
                                          PRECAUTIONS
                                       ). 
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              HMG-CoA Reductase Inhibitors (“Statins”)
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    Verapamil component
                                 
                                 
                                    The use of HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors that are CYP3A4 substrates in combination with verapamil has been associated with reports of myopathy/rhabdomyolysis.
                                    Co-administration of multiple doses of 10 mg of verapamil with 80 mg simvastatin resulted in exposure to simvastatin 2.5-fold that following simvastatin alone.  Limit the dose of simvastatin in patients on verapamil to 10 mg daily.  Limit the daily dose of lovastatin to 40 mg.  Lower starting and maintenance doses of other CYP3A4 substrates (e.g., atorvastatin) may be required as verapamil may increase the plasma concentration of these drugs. 
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Non-Steroidal Anti-Inflammatory Agents including Selective Cyclooxygenase-2 Inhibitors (COX-2 Inhibitors)
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    Trandolapril component
                                 
                                 
                                    In patients who are elderly, volume-depleted (including those on diuretic therapy), or with compromised renal function, co-administration of NSAIDs, including selective COX-2 inhibitors, with ACE inhibitors, including trandolapril, may result in deterioration of renal function, including possible acute renal failure.  These effects are usually reversible.  Monitor renal function periodically in patients receiving trandolapril and NSAID therapy. 
                                    The antihypertensive effect of ACE inhibitors, including trandolapril may be attenuated by NSAIDs.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Other (Verapamil Component)
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    Nitrates
                                 
                                 
                                    Verapamil has been given concomitantly with short- and long-acting nitrates without any undesirable drug interactions. The pharmacologic profile of both drugs and the clinical experience suggest beneficial interactions.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    Carbamazepine
                                 
                                 
                                    Verapamil may increase carbamazepine concentrations during combined therapy.  This may produce carbamazepine side effects such as diplopia, headache, ataxia, or dizziness.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    Anti-infective Agents
                                 
                                 
                                    Therapy with rifampin may markedly reduce oral verapamil bioavailability. There have been reports that erythromycin and telithromycin may increase concentrations of verapamil.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    Barbiturates
                                 
                                 
                                    Phenobarbital therapy may increase verapamil clearance.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    Immunosuppressive Agents
                                 
                                 
                                    Verapamil therapy may increase serum levels of cyclosporin, sirolimus and tacrolimus. 
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    Theophylline
                                 
                                 
                                    Verapamil therapy may inhibit the clearance and increase the plasma levels of theophylline.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    Tranquilizers/ Anti-depressants
                                 
                                 
                                    Due to metabolism via the CYP enzyme system, there have been reports that verapamil may increase the concentrations of buspirone, midazolam, almotriptan and imipramine.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    Colchicine
                                 
                                 
                                    Colchicine is a substrate for both CYP3A and the efflux transporter, P-gp.  Verapamil is known to inhibit CYP3A and P-gp.  When verapamil and colchicine are administered together, the potential inhibition of P-gp and/or CYP3A by verapamil may lead to increased exposure to colchicine (see 
                                          PRECAUTIONS - Drug Interactions
                                       ).
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    Other
                                 
                                 
                                    Concentrations of verapamil may be increased by the concomitant administration of protease inhibitors such as ritonavir, and reduced by the concomitant administration of sulfinpyrazone, or St John’s Wort.
                                    Concentrations of doxorubicin may be increased by the administration of verapamil.
                                    There have been reports that verapamil may elevate the concentrations of the oral anti-diabetic glyburide.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    Inhalation Anesthetics
                                 
                                 
                                    Animal experiments have shown that inhalation anesthetics depress cardiovascular activity by decreasing the inward movement of calcium ions.  When used concomitantly, inhalation anesthetics and calcium antagonists, such as verapamil, should be titrated carefully to avoid excessive cardiovascular depression. 
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    Neuromuscular Blocking Agents
                                 
                                 
                                    Clinical data and animal studies suggest that verapamil may potentiate the activity of neuromuscular blocking agents (curare-like and depolarizing).  It may be necessary to decrease the dose of verapamil and/or the dose of the neuromuscular blocking agent when the drugs are used concomitantly. 
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Gold
                              
                           
                           
                              Nitritoid reactions (symptoms include facial flushing, nausea, vomiting and hypotension) have been reported rarely in patients on therapy with injectable gold (sodium aurothiomalate) and concomitant ACE inhibitor therapy including trandolapril and verapamil hydrochloride extended-release tablets. 
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Other (Trandolapril Component)
                           
                           
                              No clinically significant pharmacokinetic interaction has been found between trandolapril (or its metabolites) and nifedipine.
                              The anticoagulant effect of warfarin was not significantly changed by trandolapril.
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    Anti-diabetic Agents
                                 
                                 
                                    The concomitant use of ACE inhibitors such as trandolapril with antidiabetic medications (insulin or oral hypoglycemic agents) may result in increased blood glucose lowering effects.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               