
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Bendamustine is a bifunctional mechlorethamine derivative containing a purine-like benzimidazole ring. Mechlorethamine and its derivatives form electrophilic alkyl groups.  These groups form covalent bonds with electron-rich nucleophilic moieties, resulting in interstrand DNA crosslinks. The bifunctional covalent linkage can lead to cell death via several pathways. Bendamustine is active against both quiescent and dividing cells. The exact mechanism of action of bendamustine remains unknown. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        Based on the pharmacokinetics/pharmacodynamics analyses of data from adult NHL patients, nausea increased with increasing bendamustine Cmax. 
                        
                           Cardiac Electrophysiology
                        
                        The effect of bendamustine on the QTc interval was evaluated in 53 patients with indolent NHL and mantle cell lymphoma on Day 1 of Cycle 1 after administration of rituximab at 375 mg/m2 intravenous infusion followed by a 30-minute intravenous infusion of bendamustine at 90 mg/m2/day. No mean changes greater than 20 milliseconds were detected up to one hour post-infusion. The potential for delayed effects on the QT interval after one hour was not evaluated.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        
                           Absorption
                        
                        Following a single IV dose of bendamustine hydrochloride Cmax typically occurred at the end of infusion. The dose proportionality of bendamustine has not been studied.
                        
                           Distribution
                        
                        
                           In vitro, the binding of bendamustine to human serum plasma proteins ranged from 94-96% and was concentration independent from 1-50 μg/mL. Data suggest that bendamustine is not likely to displace or to be displaced by highly protein-bound drugs. The blood to plasma concentration ratios in human blood ranged from 0.84 to 0.86 over a concentration range of 10 to 100 μg/mL indicating that bendamustine distributes freely in human red blood cells.
                        In a mass balance study, plasma radioactivity levels were sustained for a greater period of time than plasma concentrations of bendamustine, γ hydroxybendamustine (M3), and N desmethylbendamustine (M4). This suggests that there are bendamustine derived materials (detected via the radiolabel), that are rapidly cleared and have a longer half-life than bendamustine and its active metabolites. 
                        The mean steady-state volume of distribution (Vss) of bendamustine was approximately 20-25 L. Steady-state volume of distribution for total radioactivity was approximately 50 L, indicating that neither bendamustine nor total radioactivity are extensively distributed into the tissues. 
                        
                           Metabolism
                        
                        
                           In vitro data indicate that bendamustine is primarily metabolized via hydrolysis to monohydroxy (HP1) and dihydroxy-bendamustine (HP2) metabolites with low cytotoxic activity. Two active minor metabolites, M3 and M4, are primarily formed via CYP1A2. However, concentrations of these metabolites in plasma are 1/10th and 1/100th that of the parent compound, respectively, suggesting that the cytotoxic activity is primarily due to bendamustine.
                        Results of a human mass balance study confirm that bendamustine is extensively metabolized via hydrolytic, oxidative, and conjugative pathways.
                        
                           In vitro studies using human liver microsomes indicate that bendamustine does not inhibit CYP1A2, 2C9/10, 2D6, 2E1, or 3A4/5. Bendamustine did not induce metabolism of CYP1A2, CYP2A6, CYP2B6, CYP2C8, CYP2C9, CYP2C19, CYP2E1, or CYP3A4/5 enzymes in primary cultures of human hepatocytes.
                        
                           Elimination
                        
                        Mean recovery of total radioactivity in cancer patients following IV infusion of [14C] bendamustine hydrochloride was approximately 76% of the dose. Approximately 50% the dose was recovered in the urine and approximately a 25% of the dose was recovered in the feces. Urinary excretion was confirmed as a relatively minor pathway of elimination of bendamustine, with approximately 3.3% of the dose recovered in the urine as parent. Less than 1% of the dose was recovered in the urine as M3 and M4, and less than 5% of the dose was recovered in the urine as HP2.
                        Bendamustine clearance in humans is approximately 700 mL/minute. After a single dose of 120 mg/m2 bendamustine IV over 1-hour the intermediate t½ of the parent compound is approximately 40 minutes. The mean apparent terminal elimination t½ of M3 and M4 are approximately 3 hours and 30 minutes respectively. Little or no accumulation in plasma is expected for bendamustine administered on Days 1 and 2 of a 28-day cycle. 
                        
                           Renal Impairment
                        
                        In a population pharmacokinetic analysis of bendamustine in patients receiving 120 mg/m2 there was no meaningful effect of renal impairment (CrCL 40 - 80 mL/min, N=31) on the pharmacokinetics of bendamustine. Bendamustine has not been studied in patients with CrCL < 40 mL/min. 
                        These results are however limited, and therefore bendamustine should be used with caution in patients with mild or moderate renal impairment. Bendamustine should not be used in patients with CrCL < 40 mL/min. 
                              [see Use in Specific Populations (8.6)]
                           
                        
                        
                           Hepatic Impairment
                        
                        In a population pharmacokinetic analysis of bendamustine in patients receiving 120 mg/m2 there was no meaningful effect of mild (total bilirubin ≤ ULN, AST ≥ ULN to 2.5 x ULN, and/or ALP ≥ ULN to 5.0 x ULN, N=26) hepatic impairment on the pharmacokinetics of bendamustine. Bendamustine has not been studied in patients with moderate or severe hepatic impairment.
                        These results are however limited, and therefore bendamustine should be used with caution in patients with mild hepatic impairment. Bendamustine should not be used in patients with moderate (AST or ALT 2.5 - 10 x ULN and total bilirubin 1.5 - 3 x ULN) or severe (total bilirubin > 3 x ULN) hepatic impairment. 
                              [see Use in Specific Populations (8.7)]
                           
                        
                        
                           Effect of Age
                        
                        Bendamustine exposure (as measured by AUC and Cmax) has been studied in adult patients ages 31 through 84 years. The pharmacokinetics of bendamustine (AUC and Cmax) were not significantly different between patients less than or greater than/equal to 65 years of age. 
                              [see Use in Specific Populations (8.4, 8.5)]
                           
                        
                        
                           Effect of Gender
                        
                        The pharmacokinetics of bendamustine were similar in male and female patients. 
                              [see Use in Specific Populations (8.8)]
                           
                        
                        
                           Effect of Race
                        
                        The effect of race on the safety, and/or efficacy of TREANDA has not been established.  Based on a cross-study comparison, Japanese subjects (n = 6) had on average exposures that were 40% higher than non-Japanese subjects receiving the same dose. The significance of this difference on the safety and efficacy of TREANDA in Japanese subjects has not been established.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         