
                     
                     
                     
                        Drug Interactions
                     
                     
                        There has been a report of a patient who passed an orange rubbery precipitate in his stool the day after ingesting carbamazepine suspension immediately followed by Thorazine®* solution. Subsequent testing has shown that mixing carbamazepine suspension and chlorpromazine solution (both generic and brand name) as well as carbamazepine suspension and liquid Mellaril®, resulted in the occurrence of this precipitate. Because the extent to which this occurs with other liquid medications is not known, carbamazepine suspension should not be administered simultaneously with other liquid medicinal agents or diluents (see DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION).
                        Clinically meaningful drug interactions have occurred with concomitant medications and include, but are not limited to, the following:
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Agents That May Affect Carbamazepine Plasma Levels
                           
                           
                              When carbamazepine is given with drugs that can increase or decrease carbamazepine levels, close monitoring of carbamazepine levels is indicated and dosage adjustment may be required.
                              
                                 Agents That Increase Carbamazepine Levels
                              
                              CYP3A4 inhibitors inhibit carbamazepine metabolism and can thus increase plasma carbamazepine levels. Drugs that have been shown, or would be expected, to increase plasma carbamazepine levels include:
                              
		     
	aprepitant, cimetidine, ciprofloxacin, danazol, diltiazem, macrolides, erythromycin, troleandomycin, 

		     
	clarithromycin, fluoxetine, fluvoxamine, nefazodone, trazodone, loxapine,* olanzapine, quetiapine*, 

		     
	loratadine, terfenadine, omeprazole, oxybutynin, dantrolene, isoniazid, niacinamide, nicotinamide, 

		     
	ibuprofen, propoxyphene, azoles (e.g. ketaconazole, itraconazole, fluconazole, voriconazole), 

		     
	acetazolamide, verapamil, ticlopidine, grapefruit juice, protease inhibitors, valproate*.
                              
                              
                                 Agents That Decrease Carbamazepine Levels
                              
                              CYP3A4 inducers can increase the rate of carbamazepine metabolism. Drugs that have been shown, or that would be expected, to decrease plasma carbamazepine levels include:
                              
		     
	cisplatin, doxorubicin HCl, felbamate†, fosphenytoin, rifampin, phenobarbital, phenytoin, primidone, 

		     
	methsuximide, theophylline, aminophylline.
                                 
*increased levels of the active carbamazepine-10,11-epoxide
	

                                 †decreased levels of carbamazepine and increased levels of the 10,11-epoxide
	
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Effect of Carbamazepine on Plasma Levels of Concomitant Agents
                           
                           
                              
                                 Decreased Levels of Concomitant Medications
                              
                              Carbamazepine is a potent inducer of hepatic CYP3A4 and may therefore reduce plasma concentrations of comedications mainly metabolized by CYP3A4 through induction of their metabolism. Carbamazepine causes, or would be expected to cause, decreased levels of the following: 
                              
		     
	acetaminophen, albendazole, alprazolam, aprepitant, buprenorphone, bupropion, citalopram,

		     
	clonazepam, clozapine, corticosteroids (e.g. prednisolone, dexamethasone), cyclosporine, dicumarol,

		     
	dihydropyridine calcium channel blockers (e.g. felodipine), doxycycline, ethosuximide, everolimus,

		     
	haloperidol, imatinib, itraconazole, lamotrigine, levothyroxine, methadone, methsuximide, mianserin,

		     
	midazolam, olanzapine, oral and other hormonal contraceptives, oxcarbazepine, paliperidone,

		     
	phensuximide, phenytoin, praziquantel, protease inhibitors, risperidone, sertraline, sirolimus, tadalafil,

		     
	theophylline, tiagabine, topiramate, tramadol, trazodone, tricyclic antidepressants (e.g. imipramine,

		     
	amitriptyline, nortriptyline), valproate, warfarin, ziprasidone, zonisamide.

                              
                              In concomitant use with carbamazepine, monitoring of concentrations or dosage adjustment of the above agents may be necessary.
                              Cyclophosphamide is an inactive prodrug and is converted to its active metabolite in part by CYP3A.  The rate of metabolism and the leukopenic activity of cyclophosphamide reportedly are increased by chronic administration of high doses of another CYP3A4 inducer.  There is a potential for increased cyclophosphamide toxicity when coadministered with carbamazepine.
                              When carbamazepine is added to aripiprazole therapy, the aripiprazole dose should be doubled. Additional dose increases should be based on clinical evaluation. When carbamazepine is withdrawn from the combination therapy, the aripiprazole dose should be reduced.
                              When carbamazepine is used with tacrolimus, monitoring of tacrolimus blood concentrations and appropriate dosage adjustments are recommended.
                              The use of concomitant strong CYP3A4 inducers such as carbamazepine should be avoided with temsirolimus.  Based on pharmacokinetic studies, if patients must be coadministered carbamazepine with temsirolimus, an adjustment of temsirolimus dosage should be considered.
                              The use of carbamazepine with lapatinib should generally be avoided.  Dosage adjustment should be considered if lapatinib is coadministered with carbamazepine.  If carbamazepine is started in a patient already taking lapatinib, the dose of lapatinib should be gradually titrated up.  If carbamazepine is discontinued, the lapatinib dose should be reduced.
                              Coadministration of carbamazepine with nefazodone results in insufficient plasma concentrations of nefazodone and its active metabolite to achieve a therapeutic effect. Coadministration of carbamazepine with nefazodone is contraindicated (see CONTRAINDICATIONS).
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Other Drug Interactions
                           
                           
                              Concomitant administration of carbamazepine and lithium may increase the risk of neurotoxic side effects.
                              Concomitant use of carbamazepine and isoniazid has been reported to increase isoniazid-induced hepatotoxicity. 
                              Concomitant medication with carbamazepine and some diuretics (hydrochlorothiazide, furosemide) may lead to symptomatic hyponatremia. 
                              Alterations of thyroid function have been reported in combination therapy with other anticonvulsant medications. 
                              Concomitant use of carbamazepine with hormonal contraceptive products (e.g. oral, and levonorgestrel subdermal implant contraceptives) may render the contraceptives less effective because the plasma concentrations of the hormones may be decreased. Breakthrough bleeding and unintended pregnancies have been reported. Alternative or back-up methods of contraception should be considered.
                              Resistance to the neuromuscular blocking action of the nondepolarizing neuromuscular blocking agents pancuronium, vecuronium, rocuronium and cisatracurium has occurred in patients chronically administered carbamazepine.  Whether or not carbamazepine has the same effect on other non-depolarizing agents is unknown. Patients should be monitored closely for more rapid recovery from neuromuscular blockade than expected, and infusion rate requirements may be higher.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               