
                     
                     
                     Drug and Diet Interactions
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                           
                              Diltiazem significantly decreases the clearance and increases the t of quinidine, but quinidine does not alter the kinetics of diltiazem.
                                            Altered pharmacokinetics of quinidine:
                                 1/2
                              
                              Drugs that alkalinize the urine ( ) reduce renal elimination of quinidine.
                                            carbonic-anhydrase inhibitors, sodium bicarbonate, thiazide diuretics
                              
                              By pharmacokinetic mechanisms that are not well understood, quinidine levels are increased by coadministration of or . Very rarely, and again by mechanisms not understood, quinidine levels are decreased by coadministration of .
                                            amiodarone
                                 cimetidine
                                 nifedipine
                              
                              Hepatic elimination of quinidine may be accelerated by coadministration of drugs ( ) that induce production of cytochrome P450 .
                                            phenobarbital, phenytoin, rifampin
                                 IIIA4
                              
                              Perhaps because of competition for the P450 metabolic pathway, quinidine levels rise when is coadministered.
                                            IIIA4
                                 ketoconazole
                              
                              Coadministration of usually does not affect quinidine pharmacokinetics, but in some studies the β-blocker appeared to cause increases in the peak serum levels of quinidine, decreases in quinidine's volume of distribution, and decreases in total quinidine clearance. The effects (if any) of coadministration of on quinidine pharmacokinetics have not been adequately studied.
                                            propranolol
                                 other β-blockers
                              
                              Hepatic clearance of quinidine is significantly reduced during coadministration of , with corresponding increases in serum levels and half-life.
                                            verapamil
                              
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                           
                              Grapefruit juice inhibits P450 3A4-mediated metabolism of quinidine to 3-hydroxyquinidine. Although the clinical significance of this interaction is unknown, grapefruit juice should be avoided.
                                            Grapefruit juice:
                              
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                           
                              The rate and extent of quinidine absorption may be affected by changes in dietary salt intake; a decrease in dietary salt intake may lead to an increase in plasma quinidine concentrations.
                                            Dietary salt:
                              
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                           
                              Quinidine slows the elimination of and simultaneously reduces digoxin's apparent volume of distribution. As a result, serum digoxin levels may be as much as doubled. When quinidine and digoxin are coadministered, digoxin doses usually need to be reduced. Serum levels of are also raised when quinidine is coadministered, although the effect appears to be smaller.
                                            Altered pharmacokinetics of other drugs:
                                 digoxin
                                 digitoxin
                              
                              By a mechanism that is not understood, quinidine potentiates the anticoagulatory action of , and the anticoagulant dosage may need to be reduced.
                                            warfarin
                              
                              Cytochrome P450 is an enzyme critical to the metabolism of many drugs, notably including , some , and most . Constitutional deficiency of cytochrome P450 is found in less than 1% of Orientals, in about 2% of American blacks, and in about 8% of American whites. Testing with debrisoquine is sometimes used to distinguish the P450 -deficient "poor metabolizers" from the majority-phenotype "extensive metabolizers".
                                            IID6
                                 mexiletine
                                 phenothiazines
                                 polycyclic antidepressants
                                 IID6
                                 IID6
                              
                              When drugs whose metabolism is P450 -dependent are given to poor metabolizers, the serum levels achieved are higher, sometimes much higher, than the serum levels achieved when identical doses are given to extensive metabolizers. To obtain similar clinical benefit without toxicity, doses given to poor metabolizers may need to be greatly reduced. In the case of prodrugs whose actions are actually mediated by P450 -produced metabolites (for example, and , whose analgesic and antitussive effects appear to be mediated by morphine and hydromorphone, respectively), it may not be possible to achieve the desired clinical benefits in poor metabolizers.
                                            IID6
                                 IID6
                                 codeine
                                 hydrocodone
                              
                              Quinidine is not metabolized by cytochrome P450 , but therapeutic serum levels of quinidine inhibit the action of cytochrome P450 , effectively converting extensive metabolizers into poor metabolizers. Caution must be exercised whenever quinidine is prescribed together with drugs metabolized by cytochrome P450 .
                                            IID6
                                 IID6
                                 IID6
                              
                              Perhaps by competing for pathways of renal clearance, coadministration of quinidine causes an increase in serum levels of .
                                            procainamide
                              
                              Serum levels of are increased when quinidine is coadministered.
                                            haloperidol
                              
                              Presumably because both drugs are metabolized by cytochrome P450 , coadministration of quinidine causes variable slowing of the metabolism of . Interactions with other dihydropyridine calcium channel blockers have not been reported, but these agents (including and ) are all dependent upon P450 for metabolism, so similar interactions with quinidine should be anticipated.
                                            IIIA4
                                 nifedipine
                                 felodipine, nicardipine,
                                 nimodipine
                                 IIIA4
                              
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                           
                              Quinidine's anticholinergic, vasodilating, and negative inotropic actions may be additive to those of other drugs with these effects, and antagonistic to those of drugs with cholinergic, vasoconstricting, and positive inotropic effects. For example, when quinidine and are coadministered in doses that are each well tolerated as monotherapy, hypotension attributable to additive peripheral α-blockade is sometimes reported.
                                            Altered pharmacodynamics of other drugs:
                                 verapamil
                              
                              Quinidine potentiates the actions of depolarizing (succinylcholine, decamethonium) and non-depolarizing ( -tubocurarine, pancuronium) . These phenomena are not well understood, but they are observed in animal models as well as in humans. In addition, addition of quinidine to the serum of pregnant women reduces the activity of pseudo-cholinesterase, an enzyme that is essential to the metabolism of succinylcholine.
                                            d
                                 neuromuscular blocking agents
                                 in vitro
                              
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                           
                              Quinidine has no clinically significant effect on the pharmacokinetics of or .
                                            Non-interactions of quinidine with other drugs:
                                 diltiazem, flecainide, mephenytoin, metoprolol, propafenone, propranolol, quinine, timolol,
                                 tocainide
                              
                              Conversely, the pharmacokinetics of quinidine are not significantly affected by or . Quinidine's pharmacokinetics are also unaffected by cigarette smoking.
                                            caffeine, ciprofloxacin, digoxin, felodipine, omeprazole,
                                 quinine
                              
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               