
               
               
               12. CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        The mechanism of action of minocycline hydrochloride extended-release tablets for the treatment of acne is unknown.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        The pharmacodynamics of minocycline hydrochloride extended-release tablets for the treatment of acne are unknown.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        Minocycline hydrochloride extended-release tablets are not bioequivalent to non-modified release minocycline products. Based on pharmacokinetic studies in healthy adults, minocycline hydrochloride extended-release tablets produce a delayed Tmax at 3.5 to 4.0 hours as compared to a non-modified release reference minocycline product (Tmax at 2.25 to 3 hours). At steady-state (Day 6), the mean AUC (0-24) and Cmax were 33.32 mcg  hr/mL and 2.63 mcg/mL for minocycline hydrochloride extended-release tablets and 46.35 mcg   hr/mL and 2.92 mcg/mL for Minocin® capsules, respectively. These parameters are based on dose adjusted to 135 mg per day for both products.
                        A single-dose, four-way crossover study demonstrated that minocycline hydrochloride extended-release tablets used in the study (45 mg, 90 mg, 135 mg) exhibited dose-proportional pharmacokinetics. 
                        When minocycline hydrochloride extended-release tablets were administered concomitantly with a meal that included dairy products, the extent and timing of absorption of minocycline did not differ from that of administration under fasting conditions.
                        Minocycline is lipid soluble and distributes into the skin and sebum.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         