
                     
                     
                     
                        Drug Interactions
                     
                     
                        Caution should be exercised when propranolol is administered with drugs that have an effect on CYP2D6, 1A2, or 2C19 metabolic pathways. Coadministration of such drugs with propranolol may lead to clinically relevant drug interactions and changes on its efficacy and/or toxicity (see   in ).
                                    
                              Drug Interactions
                           
                           
                              PHARMACOKINETICS AND DRUG METABOLISM
                           
                        
                        
                           Cardiovascular Drugs
                        
                        
                           Antiarrhythmics
                        
                        Propafenone has negative inotropic and beta-blocking properties that can be additive to those of propranolol.
                        Quinidine increases the concentration of propranolol and produces greater degrees of clinical beta-blockade and may cause postural hypotension.
                        Amiodarone is an antiarrhythmic agent with negative chronotropic properties that may be additive to those seen with β-blockers such as propranolol.
                        The clearance of lidocaine is reduced with administration of propranolol. Lidocaine toxicity has been reported following coadministration with propranolol.
                        Caution should be exercised when administering propranolol with drugs that slow A-V nodal conduction, e.g. digitalis, lidocaine and calcium channel blockers.
                        
                           Digitalis Glycosides
                        
                        Both digitalis glycosides and beta-blockers slow atrioventricular conduction and decrease heart rate. Concomitant use can increase the risk of bradycardia.
                        
                           Calcium Channel Blockers
                        
                        Caution should be exercised when patients receiving a beta blocker are administered a calcium-channel-blocking drug with negative inotropic and/or chronotropic effects. Both agents may depress myocardial contractility or atrioventricular conduction.
                        There have been reports of significant bradycardia, heart failure, and cardiovascular collapse with concurrent use of verapamil and beta-blockers.
                        Coadministration of propranolol and diltiazem in patients with cardiac disease has been associated with bradycardia, hypotension, high-degree heart block, and heart failure.
                        
                           ACE Inhibitors
                        
                        When combined with beta-blockers, ACE inhibitors can cause hypotension, particularly in the setting of acute myocardial infarction.
                        The antihypertensive effects of clonidine may be antagonized by beta-blockers. Propranolol should be administered cautiously to patients withdrawing from clonidine.
                        
                           Alpha Blockers
                        
                        Prazosin has been associated with prolongation of first dose hypotension in the presence of beta-blockers.
                        Postural hypotension has been reported in patients taking both beta-blockers and terazosin or doxazosin.
                        
                           Reserpine
                        
                        Patients receiving catecholamine-depleting drugs, such as reserpine, should be closely observed for excessive reduction of resting sympathetic nervous activity, which may result in hypotension, marked bradycardia, vertigo, syncopal attacks, or orthostatic hypotension.
                        
                           Inotropic Agents
                        
                        Patients on long-term therapy with propranolol may experience uncontrolled hypertension if administered epinephrine as a consequence of unopposed alpha-receptor stimulation. Epinephrine is therefore not indicated in the treatment of propranolol overdose (see ).
                                    
                              OVERDOSAGE
                           
                        
                        
                           Isoproterenol and Dobutamine
                        
                        Propranolol is a competitive inhibitor of beta-receptor agonists, and its effects can be reversed by administration of such agents, e.g., dobutamine or isoproterenol. Also, propranolol may reduce sensitivity to dobutamine stress echocardiography in patients undergoing evaluation for myocardial ischemia.
                        
                           Non-Cardiovascular Drugs
                        
                        
                           Nonsteroidal Anti-Inflammatory Drugs
                        
                        Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDS) have been reported to blunt the antihypertensive effect of beta-adrenoreceptor blocking agents.
                        Administration of indomethacin with propranolol may reduce the efficacy of propranolol in reducing blood pressure and heart rate.
                        
                           Antidepressants
                        
                        The hypotensive effects of MAO inhibitors or tricyclic antidepressants may be exacerbated when administered with beta-blockers by interfering with the beta blocking activity of propranolol.
                        
                           Anesthetic Agents
                        
                        Methoxyflurane and trichloroethylene may depress myocardial contractility when administered with propranolol.
                        
                           Warfarin
                        
                        Propranolol when administered with warfarin increases the concentration of warfarin. Prothrombin time, therefore, should be monitored.
                        
                           Neuroleptic Drugs
                        
                        Hypotension and cardiac arrest have been reported with the concomitant use of propranolol and haloperidol.
                        
                           Thyroxine
                        
                        Thyroxine may result in a lower than expected T concentration when used concomitantly with propranolol.
                                    3
                        
                        
                           Alcohol
                        
                        Alcohol, when used concomitantly with propranolol, may increase plasma levels of propranolol.
                     
                     
                  
               