
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS

               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           Androgens may decrease blood glucose and insulin requirement in diabetic patients (7.1).

                           Changes in anticoagulant activity may be seen with androgens. More frequent monitoring of International Normalized Ratio (INR) and prothrombin time is recommended (7.2).

                           Use of testosterone with Adrenocorticotropic Hormone (ACTH) or corticosteroids may result in increased fluid retention. Use with caution, particularly in patients with cardiac, renal, or hepatic disease (7.3).

                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 Insulin

                     
                        Changes in insulin sensitivity or glycemic control may occur in patients treated with androgens. In diabetic patients, the metabolic effects of androgens may decrease blood glucose and, therefore, insulin requirement.

                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 Oral anticoagulants

                     
                        Changes in anticoagulant activity may be seen with androgens. More frequent monitoring of INR and prothrombin time is recommended in patients taking anticoagulants, especially at the initiation and termination of androgen therapy.

                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3 Corticosteroids

                     
                        The concurrent use of testosterone with ACTH or corticosteroids may result in increased fluid retention and should be monitored cautiously, particularly in patients with cardiac, renal or hepatic disease.

                     
                     
                  
               
            
         