
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  
                  Colony-stimulating 
Factors
                  Colony-stimulating factors are glycoproteins which act on 
hematopoietic cells by binding to specific cell surface receptors and 
stimulating proliferation‚ differentiation commitment‚ and some end-cell 
functional activation. 
                  Endogenous G-CSF is a lineage specific colony-stimulating factor which is 
produced by monocytes‚ fibroblasts, and endothelial cells. G-CSF regulates the 
production of neutrophils within the bone marrow and affects neutrophil 
progenitor proliferation‚2‚3 differentiation,2‚4 and selected end-cell functional activation (including 
enhanced phagocytic ability‚5 priming of the cellular 
metabolism associated with respiratory burst‚6 antibody 
dependent killing,7 and the increased expression of some 
functions associated with cell surface antigens8). G-CSF 
is not species specific and has been shown to have minimal direct in vivo or in 
vitro effects on the production of hematopoietic cell types other than the 
neutrophil lineage.
                  
                  
                  
                  Preclinical Experience
                  Filgrastim was administered to monkeys‚ dogs‚ hamsters‚ rats‚ and 
mice as part of a preclinical toxicology program which included single-dose 
acute‚ repeated-dose subacute‚ subchronic‚ and chronic studies. Single-dose 
administration of Filgrastim by the oral‚ intravenous (IV)‚ subcutaneous (SC)‚ 
or intraperitoneal (IP) routes resulted in no significant toxicity in mice‚ 
rats‚ hamsters‚ or monkeys. Although no deaths were observed in mice‚ rats‚ or 
monkeys at dose levels up to 3450 mcg/kg or in hamsters using single doses up to 
approximately 860 mcg/kg‚ deaths were observed in a subchronic (13-week) study 
in monkeys. In this study‚ evidence of neurological symptoms was seen in monkeys 
treated with doses of Filgrastim greater than 1150 mcg/kg/day for up to 18 days. 
Deaths were seen in 5 of the 8 treated animals and were associated with 15- to 
28-fold increases in peripheral leukocyte counts‚ and neutrophil-infiltrated 
hemorrhagic foci were seen in both the cerebrum and cerebellum. In contrast‚ no 
monkeys died following 13 weeks of daily IV administration of Filgrastim at a 
dose level of 115 mcg/kg. In an ensuing 52-week study‚ one 115 mcg/kg dosed 
female monkey died after 18 weeks of daily IV administration of Filgrastim. 
Death was attributed to cardiopulmonary insufficiency.
                  In subacute‚ repeated-dose studies‚ changes observed were attributable to the 
expected pharmacological actions of Filgrastim (ie‚ dose-dependent increases in 
white cell counts‚ increased circulating segmented neutrophils‚ and increased 
myeloid:erythroid ratio in bone marrow). In all species‚ histopathologic 
examination of the liver and spleen revealed evidence of ongoing extramedullary 
granulopoiesis; increased spleen weights were seen in all species and appeared 
to be dose-related. A dose-dependent increase in serum alkaline phosphatase was 
observed in rats‚ and may reflect increased activity of osteoblasts and 
osteoclasts. Changes in serum chemistry values were reversible following 
discontinuation of treatment.
                  In rats treated at doses of 1150 mcg/kg/day for 4 weeks (5 of 32 animals) and 
for 13 weeks at doses of 100 mcg/kg/day (4 of 32 animals) and 500 mcg/kg/day (6 
of 32 animals)‚ articular swelling of the hind legs was observed. Some degree of 
hind leg dysfunction was also observed; however‚ symptoms reversed following 
cessation of dosing. In rats‚ osteoclasis and osteoanagenesis were found in the 
femur‚ humerus‚ coccyx‚ and hind legs (where they were accompanied by synovitis) 
after IV treatment for 4 weeks (115 to 1150 mcg/kg/day)‚ and in the sternum 
after IV treatment for 13 weeks (115 to 575 mcg/kg/day). These effects reversed 
to normal within 4 to 5 weeks following cessation of treatment.
                  In the 52-week chronic‚ repeated-dose studies performed in rats (IP injection 
up to 57.5 mcg/kg/day)‚ and cynomolgus monkeys (IV injection of up to 115 
mcg/kg/day)‚ changes observed were similar to those noted in the subacute 
studies. Expected pharmacological actions of Filgrastim included dose-dependent 
increases in white cell counts‚ increased circulating segmented neutrophils and 
alkaline phosphatase levels‚ and increased myeloid:erythroid ratios in the bone 
marrow. Decreases in platelet counts were also noted in primates. In no animals 
tested were hemorrhagic complications observed. Rats displayed dose-related 
swelling of the hind limb‚ accompanied by some degree of hind limb dysfunction; 
osteopathy was noted microscopically. Enlarged spleens (both species) and livers 
(monkeys)‚ reflective of ongoing extramedullary granulopoiesis‚ as well as 
myeloid hyperplasia of the bone marrow‚ were observed in a dose-dependent 
manner.
                  
                  
                  
                  Pharmacologic Effects of 
NEUPOGEN®
                  
                  In phase 1 studies involving 96 patients with various nonmyeloid 
malignancies‚ NEUPOGEN® administration resulted in a 
dose-dependent increase in circulating neutrophil counts over the dose range of 
1 to 70 mcg/kg/day.9-11 This increase in neutrophil 
counts was observed whether NEUPOGEN® was administered IV 
(1 to 70 mcg/kg twice daily)‚9 SC (1 to 3 mcg/kg once 
daily)‚11 or by continuous SC infusion (3 to 11 
mcg/kg/day).10 With discontinuation of NEUPOGEN® therapy‚ neutrophil counts returned to baseline‚ in most 
cases within 4 days. Isolated neutrophils displayed normal phagocytic (measured 
by zymosan-stimulated chemoluminescence) and chemotactic (measured by migration 
under agarose using N-formyl-methionyl-leucyl-phenylalanine [fMLP] as the 
chemotaxin) activity in vitro.
                  The absolute monocyte count was reported to increase in a dose-dependent 
manner in most patients receiving NEUPOGEN®; however‚ the 
percentage of monocytes in the differential count remained within the normal 
range. In all studies to date‚ absolute counts of both eosinophils and basophils 
did not change and were within the normal range following administration of 
NEUPOGEN®. Increases in lymphocyte counts following 
NEUPOGEN® administration have been reported in some 
normal subjects and cancer patients.
                  White blood cell (WBC) differentials obtained during clinical trials have 
demonstrated a shift towards earlier granulocyte progenitor cells (left shift)‚ 
including the appearance of promyelocytes and myeloblasts‚ usually during 
neutrophil recovery following the chemotherapy-induced nadir. In addition‚ Dohle 
bodies‚ increased granulocyte granulation‚ and hypersegmented neutrophils have 
been observed. Such changes were transient and were not associated with clinical 
sequelae, nor were they necessarily associated with infection.
                  
                  
                  
                  Pharmacokinetics
                  Absorption and clearance of NEUPOGEN® 
follows first-order pharmacokinetic modeling without apparent concentration 
dependence. A positive linear correlation occurred between the parenteral dose 
and both the serum concentration and area under the concentration-time curves. 
Continuous IV infusion of 20 mcg/kg of NEUPOGEN® over 24 
hours resulted in mean and median serum concentrations of approximately 48 and 
56 ng/mL‚ respectively. Subcutaneous administration of 3.45 mcg/kg and 11.5 
mcg/kg resulted in maximum serum concentrations of 4 and 49 ng/mL‚ respectively‚ 
within 2 to 8 hours. The volume of distribution averaged 150 mL/kg in both 
normal subjects and cancer patients. The elimination half-life‚ in both normal 
subjects and cancer patients‚ was approximately 3.5 hours. Clearance rates of 
NEUPOGEN® were approximately 0.5 to 0.7 mL/minute/kg. 
Single parenteral doses or daily IV doses‚ over a 14-day period‚ resulted in 
comparable half-lives. The half-lives were similar for IV administration 
(231 minutes‚ following doses of 34.5 mcg/kg) and for SC administration (210 
minutes‚ following NEUPOGEN® doses of 3.45 mcg/kg). 
Continuous 24-hour IV infusions of 20 mcg/kg over an 11- to 20-day period 
produced steady-state serum concentrations of NEUPOGEN® 
with no evidence of drug accumulation over the time period investigated.
                  Pharmacokinetic data in geriatric patients (≥ 65 years) are not available.
               
               
            
         