
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
                  
                     
                  
                  7.1 Cyclosporine
                  Cyclosporine significantly increased rosuvastatin exposure. Therefore, in patients taking cyclosporine, therapy should be limited to CRESTOR 5 mg once daily. [see Dosage and Administration (2.5), Warnings and Precautions (5.1), and Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                  
                     
                  
                  
                     
                  
                  
                     
                  
                  7.2 Gemfibrozil
                  Gemfibrozil significantly increased rosuvastatin exposure. Therefore, combination therapy with CRESTOR and gemfibrozil should be avoided. If used, do not exceed CRESTOR 10 mg once daily. [see Dosage and Administration (2.6) and Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                  
                     
                  
                  
                     
                  
                  
                     
                  
                  7.3 Lopinavir/Ritonavir
                  The combination of lopinavir and ritonavir significantly increased rosuvastatin exposure. Therefore, in patients taking a combination of lopinavir and ritonavir, the dose of CRESTOR should be limited to 10 mg once daily. The effect of other protease inhibitors on rosuvastatin pharmacokinetics has not been examined. [see Dosage and Administration (2.5), Warnings and Precautions (5.1) and Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)]
                  
                     
                  
                  
                     
                  
                  
                     
                  
                  7.4 Coumarin Anticoagulants
                  CRESTOR significantly increased INR in patients receiving coumarin anticoagulants. Therefore, caution should be exercised when coumarin anticoagulants are given in conjunction with CRESTOR. In patients taking coumarin anticoagulants and CRESTOR concomitantly, INR should be determined before starting CRESTOR and frequently enough during early therapy to ensure that no significant alteration of INR occurs. [see Warnings and Precautions (5.3) and Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)]
                  
                     
                  
                  
                     
                  
                  
                     
                  
                  7.5 Niacin
                  The risk of skeletal muscle effects may be enhanced when CRESTOR is used in combination with niacin; a reduction in CRESTOR dosage should be considered in this setting [see Warnings and Precautions (5.1)]
                  
                     
                  
                  
                     
                  
                  
                     
                  
                  7.6 Fenofibrate
                  When CRESTOR was coadministered with fenofibrate no clinically significant increase in the AUC of rosuvastatin or fenofibrate was observed. The benefit of further alterations in lipid levels by the combined use of CRESTOR with fibrates should be carefully weighed against the potential risks of this combination. [see Warnings and Precautions (5.1) and Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
               
               
            
         