
               
               
               Drug Interactions
               
                  Rarely, concomitant treatment with ACE inhibitors and 
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory agents have been associated with worsening of 
renal failure and an increase in serum potassium.
                            With nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory 
agents:
                  
                  
                  
                  
                  Patients on 
diuretics, especially those in whom diuretic therapy was recently instituted, 
may occasionally experience an excessive reduction of blood pressure after 
initiation of therapy with ramipril. The possibility of hypotensive effects with 
ramipril can be minimized by either discontinuing the diuretic or increasing the 
salt intake prior to initiation of treatment with ramipril. If this is not 
possible, the starting dose should be reduced. (See Dosage and Administration).
                            With diuretics:
                  
                  
                  
                  
                  Ramipril can attenuate potassium loss caused 
by thiazide diuretics. Potassium-sparing diuretics (spironolactone, amiloride, 
triamterene, and others) or potassium supplements can increase the risk of 
hyperkalemia. Therefore, if concomitant use of such agents is indicated, they 
should be given with caution, and the patient's serum potassium should be 
monitored frequently.
                            With potassium supplements and 
potassium-sparing diuretics:
                  
                  
                  
                  
                  Increased serum 
lithium levels and symptoms of lithium toxicity have been reported in patients 
receiving ACE inhibitors during therapy with lithium. These drugs should be 
coadministered with caution, and frequent monitoring of serum lithium levels is 
recommended. If a diuretic is also used, the risk of lithium toxicity may be 
increased.
                            With lithium:
                  
                  
                  
                  
                  Neither ramipril nor its 
metabolites have been found to interact with food, digoxin, antacid, furosemide, 
cimetidine, indomethacin, and simvastatin. The combination of ramipril and 
propranolol showed no adverse effects on dynamic parameters (blood pressure and 
heart rate). The co-administration of ramipril and warfarin did not adversely 
affect the anticoagulant effects of the latter drug. Additionally, 
co-administration of ramipril with phenprocoumon did not affect minimum 
phenprocoumon levels or interfere with the subjects' state of anti-coagulation.
                            Other:
                  
                  
                  
                  
                  Carcinogenesis, Mutagenesis, 
Impairment of Fertility
                  No evidence of a tumorigenic effect was found when ramipril was 
given by gavage to rats for up to 24 months at doses of up to 500 mg/kg/day or 
to mice for up to 18 months at doses of up to 1000 mg/kg/day. (For either 
species, these doses are about 200 times the maximum recommended human dose when 
compared on the basis of body surface area.) No mutagenic activity was detected 
in the Ames test in bacteria, the micronucleus test in mice, unscheduled DNA 
synthesis in a human cell line, or a forward gene-mutation assay in a Chinese 
hamster ovary cell line. Several metabolites and degradation products of 
ramipril were also negative in the Ames test. A study in rats with dosages as 
great as 500 mg/kg/day did not produce adverse effects on fertility.
                  
                  
                  
                  Pregnancy
                  See Fetal/Neonatal Morbidity and Mortality.
                            Pregnancy Categories C (first trimester) and 
D (second and third trimesters).
                  
                  
                  
                  
                  Nursing Mothers
                  Ingestion of single 10 mg oral dose of ramipril resulted in 
undetectable amounts of ramipril and its metabolites in breast milk. However, 
because multiple doses may produce low milk concentrations that are not 
predictable from single doses, women receiving ramipril should not breast feed.
                  
                  
                  
                  Geriatric Use
                  Of the total number of patients who received ramipril in US 
clinical studies of ramipril 11.0% were 65 and over while 0.2% were 75 and over. 
No overall differences in effectiveness or safety were observed between these 
patients and younger patients, and other reported clinical experience has not 
identified differences in responses between the elderly and younger patients, 
but greater sensitivity of some older individuals cannot be ruled out.
                  One pharmacokinetic study conducted in hospitalized elderly patients 
indicated that peak ramiprilat levels and area under the plasma concentration 
time curve (AUC) for ramiprilat are higher in older patients.
                  
                  
                  
                  Pediatric Use
                  Safety and effectiveness in pediatric patients have not been 
established. Irreversible kidney damage has been observed in very young rats 
given a single dose of ramipril.
               
               
            
         