
               
               
               Clinical Pharmacology
               
                  
                   
                  Ramipril and ramiprilat inhibit angiotensin-converting enzyme 
(ACE) in human subjects and animals. ACE is a peptidyl dipeptidase that 
catalyzes the conversion of angiotensin I to the vasoconstrictor substance, 
angiotensin II. Angiotensin II also stimulates aldosterone secretion by the 
adrenal cortex. Inhibition of ACE results in decreased plasma angiotensin II, 
which leads to decreased vasopressor activity and to decreased aldosterone 
secretion. The latter decrease may result in a small increase of serum 
potassium. In hypertensive patients with normal renal function treated with 
ramipril alone for up to 56 weeks, approximately 4% of patients during the trial 
had an abnormally high serum potassium and an increase from baseline greater 
than 0.75 mEq/L, and none of the patients had an abnormally low potassium and a 
decrease from baseline greater than 0.75 mEq/L. In the same study, approximately 
2% of patients treated with ramipril and hydrochlorothiazide for up to 56 weeks 
had abnormally high potassium values and an increase from baseline of 0.75 mEq/L 
or greater, and approximately 2% had abnormally low values and decreases from 
baseline of 0.75 mEq/L or greater. ( See Precautions). Removal of angiotensin II negative feedback 
on renin secretion leads to increased plasma renin activity.
                  The effect of ramipril on hypertension appears to result at least in part 
from inhibition of both tissue and circulating ACE activity, thereby reducing 
angiotensin II formation in tissue and plasma.
                  ACE is identical to kininase, an enzyme that degrades bradykinin. Whether 
increased levels of bradykinin, a potent vasodepressor peptide, play a role in 
the therapeutic effects of ramipril remains to be elucidated.
                  While the mechanism through which ramipril lowers blood pressure is believed 
to be primarily suppression of the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system, 
ramipril has an antihypertensive effect even in patients with low-renin 
hypertension. Although ramipril was antihypertensive in all races studied, black 
hypertensive patients (usually a low-renin hypertensive population) had a 
smaller average response to monotherapy than non-black patients.
                  
                     

                  
               
               
            
         