
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  Orally administered erythromycin base and its salts are readily absorbed in the microbiologically active form. Interindividual variations in the absorption of erythromycin are, however, observed, and some patients do not achieve optimal serum levels. Erythromycin is largely bound to plasma proteins. After absorption, erythromycin diffuses readily into most body fluids. In the absence of meningeal inflammation, low concentrations are normally achieved in the spinal fluid but the passage of the drug across the blood-brain barrier increases in meningitis. Erythromycin crosses the placental barrier, but fetal plasma levels are low. The drug is excreted in human milk. Erythromycin is not removed by peritoneal dialysis or hemodialysis.
                  In the presence of normal hepatic function, erythromycin is concentrated in the liver and is excreted in the bile; the effect of hepatic dysfunction on biliary excretion of erythromycin is not known. After oral administration, less than 5% of the administered dose can be recovered in the active form in the urine.
                  ERY-TAB tablets are coated with a polymer whose dissolution is pH dependent. This coating allows for minimal release of erythromycin in acidic environments, e.g., stomach. The tablets are designed for optimal drug release and absorption in the small intestine. In multiple-dose, steady-state studies, ERY-TAB tablets have demonstrated adequate drug delivery in both fasting and non-fasting conditions. Bioavailability data are available.
                            ®
                     ®
                  
               
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Microbiology
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Mechanism of Action
                           
                              Erythromycin acts by inhibition of protein synthesis by binding 50S ribosomal subunits of susceptible organisms. It does not affect nucleic acid synthesis.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Mechanism of Resistance
                           
                              The major route of resistance is modification of the 23S rNA in the 50S ribosomal subunit to insensitivity while efflux can also be significant.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Interactions with Other Antibiotics
                           
                              Antagonism exists between erythromycin and clindamycin, lincomycin, and chloramphenicol.
                                            in vitro
                              
                              Erythromycin has been shown to be active against most isolates of the following bacteria both and in clinical infections as described in the section.
                                            in vitro
                                 INDICATIONS AND USAGE
                              
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Gram-positive Bacteria
                           
                              
                                 
                                     
                                    Corynebacterium diphtheriae
                                 
                                 
                                     
                                    Corynebacterium minutissimum
                                 
                                 
                                     
                                    Listeria monocytogenes
                                 
                                 
                                     
                                    Staphylococcus aureus (resistant organisms may emerge during treatment)
                                 
                                 
                                     
                                    Streptococcus pneumoniae
                                 
                                 
                                     
                                    Streptococcus pyogenes
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Gram-negative Bacteria
                           
                              
                                 
                                     
                                    Bordetella pertussis
                                 
                                 
                                     
                                    Haemophilus influenzae
                                 
                                 
                                     
                                    Legionella pneumophila
                                 
                                 
                                     
                                    Neisseria gonorrhoeae
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Other Microorganisms
                           
                              
                                 
                                     
                                    Chlamydia trachomatis
                                 
                                 
                                     
                                    Entamoeba histolytica
                                 
                                 
                                     
                                    Mycoplasma pneumoniae
                                 
                                 
                                     
                                    Treponema pallidum
                                 
                                 
                                     
                                    Ureaplasma urealyticum
                                 
                              
                              The following data are available,
                                            in vitro
                                 but their clinical significance is unknown.
                              
                              At least 90% of the following bacteria exhibit minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) less than or equal to the susceptible breakpoint for erythromycin. However, the efficacy of erythromycin in treating clinical infections due to these bacteria has not been established in adequate and well controlled clinical trials.
                                            in vitro
                              
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Gram-positive Bacteria
                           
                              
                                 
                                     
                                    Viridans group streptococci
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Gram-negative Bacteria
                           
                              
                                 
                                     
                                    Moraxella catarrhalis
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Susceptibility Test Methods
                           
                              When available the clinical microbiology laboratory should provide the results of susceptibility test results for antimicrobial drug products used in resident hospitals to the physician as periodic reports that describe the susceptibility profile of nosocomial and community-acquired pathogens. These reports should aid the physician in selecting an antibacterial drug product for treatment.
                                            in vitro
                              
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Dilution Techniques
                                 
                                    Quantitative methods are used to determine antimicrobial minimum inhibitory concentrations (MIC's). These MICs provide estimates of the susceptibility of bacteria to antimicrobial compounds. The MICs should be determined using a standardized test method (broth and/or agar). The MIC values should be interpreted according to criteria provided in .
                                                    1, 2
                                       Table 1
                                    
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Diffusion techniques
                                 
                                    Quantitative methods that require measurement of zone diameters can also provide reproducible estimates of the susceptibility of bacteria to antimicrobial compounds. The zone size provides an estimate of the susceptibility of bacteria to antimicrobial compounds. The zone size should be determined using a standardized test method. This procedure uses paper disks impregnated with 15 mcg erythromycin to test the susceptibility of microorganisms to erythromycin. The disc diffusion interpretive criteria are provided in .
                                                    2,3
                                       Table 1
                                    
                                    


                                    


A report of "Susceptible" indicates that the antimicrobial is likely to inhibit growth of the pathogen if the antimicrobial compound reaches the concentrations at the site of infection necessary to inhibit growth of the pathogen. A report of "Intermediate" indicates that the result should be considered equivocal, and, if the microorganism is not fully susceptible to alternative, clinically feasible drugs, the test should be repeated. This category implies possible clinical applicability in body sites where the drug product is physiologically concentrated or in situations where high dosage of drug can be used. This category also provides a buffer zone which prevents small uncontrolled technical factors from causing major discrepancies in interpretation. A report of "Resistant" indicates that the antimicrobial is not likely to inhibit growth of the pathogen if the antimicrobial compound reaches the concentrations usually achievable at the infection site; other therapy should be selected.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Quality Control
                                 
                                    Standardized susceptibility test procedures require the use of laboratory controls to monitor and ensure the accuracy and precision of supplies and reagents used in the assay, and the techniques of the individuals performing the test. Standard erythromycin powder should provide the following range of MIC values noted in . For the diffusion technique using the 15 mcg disk, the criteria in should be achieved.
                                                    1, 2, 3, 4
                                       Table 2
                                       Table 2
                                    
                                    


