
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
                  
                     Effects of other drugs
                  
                  Ticagrelor is predominantly metabolized by CYP3A4 and to a lesser extent by CYP3A5.  Ticagrelor is also a p-glycoprotein (P-gp) substrate.
               
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              •Avoid use with strong CYP3A inhibitors or CYP3A inducers. (7.1, 7.2) 
                           
                              •Patients receiving more than 40 mg per day of simvastatin or lovastatin may be at increased risk of statin-related adverse effects. (7.3)
                           
                              •Monitor digoxin levels with initiation of or any change in BRILINTA. (7.4)
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 CYP3A inhibitors
                     
                        Avoid use of strong inhibitors of CYP3A (e.g., ketoconazole, itraconazole, voriconazole, clarithromycin, nefazodone, ritonavir, saquinavir, nelfinavir, indinavir, atazanavir and telithromycin) [see Warnings and Precautions (5.6) and Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 CYP3A inducers
                     
                        Avoid use with potent inducers of CYP3A (e.g., rifampin, dexamethasone, phenytoin, carbamazepine and phenobarbital) [see Warnings and Precautions (5.7) and Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3 Aspirin
                     
                        Use of BRILINTA with aspirin maintenance doses above 100 mg reduced the effectiveness of BRILINTA [see Warnings and Precautions (5.2) and Clinical Studies (14)].
                        
                        
                           Effect of BRILINTA on other drugs 
                        
                        Ticagrelor is an inhibitor of CYP3A4/5 and the P-glycoprotein transporter.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4 Simvastatin, lovastatin
                     
                        BRILINTA will result in higher serum concentrations of simvastatin and lovastatin because these drugs are metabolized by CYP3A4. Avoid simvastatin and lovastatin doses greater than 40 mg [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.5 Digoxin
                     
                        
                           Digoxin: Because of inhibition of the P-glycoprotein transporter, monitor digoxin levels with initiation of or any change in BRILINTA therapy [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.6 Other Concomitant Therapy
                     
                        BRILINTA can be administered with unfractionated or low-molecular-weight heparin, GPIIb/IIIa inhibitors, proton pump inhibitors, beta-blockers, angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitors, and angiotensin receptor blockers.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         