
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY

               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action

                     
                        APTIOM is extensively converted to eslicarbazepine, which is considered to be responsible for therapeutic effects in humans. The precise mechanism(s) by which eslicarbazepine exerts anticonvulsant activity is unknown but is thought to involve inhibition of voltage-gated sodium channels.

                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2  Pharmacodynamics

                     
                        The effect of APTIOM on cardiac repolarization was evaluated in a randomized, double-blind, placebo- and active-controlled 4-period crossover trial in healthy adult men and women. Subjects received APTIOM 1200 mg once daily × 5 days, APTIOM 2400 mg once daily × 5 days, an active-control, moxifloxacin 400 mg × 1 dose on Day 5, and placebo once daily × 5 days. At both doses of APTIOM, no significant effect on the QTc interval was detected.

                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics

                     
                        The pharmacokinetics of eslicarbazepine is linear and dose-proportional in the dose range of 400 mg to 1600 mg once daily, both in healthy subjects and patients. The apparent half-life of eslicarbazepine in plasma was 13-20 hours in epilepsy patients. Steady-state plasma concentrations are attained after 4 to 5 days of once daily dosing.

                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Absorption, Distribution, Metabolism, and Excretion
                              
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Absorption
                                    
                                    APTIOM is mostly undetectable (0.01% of the systemic exposure) after oral administration. Eslicarbazepine, the major metabolite, is primarily responsible for the pharmacological effect of APTIOM. Peak plasma concentrations (Cmax) of eslicarbazepine are attained at 1-4 hours post-dose.  Eslicarbazepine is highly bioavailable, because the amount of eslicarbazepine and glucuronide metabolites recovered in urine corresponded to more than 90% of an APTIOM dose. Food has no effect on the pharmacokinetics of eslicarbazepine after oral administration of APTIOM.

                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Distribution
                                    
                                    The binding of eslicarbazepine to plasma proteins is relatively low (<40%) and independent of concentration.  In vitro studies have shown that plasma protein binding was not relevantly affected by the presence of warfarin, diazepam, digoxin, phenytoin, or tolbutamide.  Similarly, the binding of warfarin, diazepam, digoxin, phenytoin or tolbutamide was not significantly affected by the presence of eslicarbazepine. The apparent volume of distribution of eslicarbazepine is 61 L for body weight of 70 kg based on population PK analysis.

                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Metabolism
                                    
                                    APTIOM is rapidly and extensively metabolized to its major active metabolite eslicarbazepine by hydrolytic first-pass metabolism.  Eslicarbazepine corresponds to 91% of systemic exposure. The systemic exposure to minor active metabolites of (R)-licarbazepine is 5% and oxcarbazepine is 1%. The inactive glucuronides of these active metabolites correspond to approximately 3% of systemic exposure.

                                    In i
                                       n vitro studies in human liver microsomes, eslicarbazepine had no clinically relevant inhibitory effect on the activity of CYP1A2, CYP2A6, CYP2B6, CYP2D6, CYP2E1, and CYP3A4, and only a moderate inhibitory effect on CYP2C19. Studies with eslicarbazepine in fresh human hepatocytes showed no induction of enzymes involved in glucuronidation and sulfation of 7-hydroxy-coumarin. A mild activation of UGT1A1-mediated glucuronidation was observed in human hepatic microsomes.

                                    No apparent autoinduction of metabolism has been observed with APTIOM in humans.

                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Excretion
                                    
                                    APTIOM metabolites are eliminated from the systemic circulation primarily by renal excretion, in the unchanged and glucuronide conjugate forms. In total, eslicarbazepine and its glucuronide account for more than 90% of total metabolites excreted in urine, approximately two thirds in the unchanged form and one third as glucuronide conjugate. Other minor metabolites account for the remaining 10% excreted in the urine. In healthy subjects with normal renal function, the renal clearance of eslicarbazepine (approximately 20 mL/min) is substantially lower than glomerular filtration rate (80-120 mL/min), suggesting that renal tubular reabsorption occurs. The apparent plasma half-life of eslicarbazepine was 13-20 hours in epilepsy patients [see Dosage and Administration (2.4) and Use in Specific Populations (8.6)].
                                    
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Specific Populations
                              
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Elderly (≥65 years of age)
                                    
                                    The pharmacokinetic profile of eslicarbazepine was unaffected in elderly subjects with creatinine clearance >60 mL/min compared to healthy subjects (18-40 years) after single and repeated doses of 600 mg APTIOM during 8 days of dosing. No dose adjustment is necessary in adults based on age, if CrCl is ≥50 mL/min.

                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Gender
                                    
                                    Studies in healthy subjects and patients showed that pharmacokinetics of eslicarbazepine was not affected by gender.

                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Race
                                    
                                    No clinically significant effect of race (Caucasian N=849, Black N=53, Asian N=65, and Other N=51) on the pharmacokinetics of eslicarbazepine was noted in a population pharmacokinetic analysis of pooled data from the clinical studies.

                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Renal Impairment
                                    
                                    APTIOM metabolites are eliminated from the systemic circulation primarily by renal excretion. The extent of systemic exposure of eslicarbazepine following an 800 mg single dose was increased by 62% in patients with mild renal impairment (CrCl 50-80 mL/min), by 2-fold in patients with moderate renal impairment (CrCl 30-49 mL/min) and by 2.5-fold in patients with severe renal impairment (CrCl <30 mL/min) in comparison to the healthy subjects (CrCl >80 mL/min). Dosage adjustment is recommended in patients with creatinine clearance below 50 mL/min [see Dosage and Administration (2.4) and Use in Specific Populations (8.6)].
                                    
                                    In patients with end stage renal disease, repeated hemodialysis removed APTIOM metabolites from systemic circulation.

                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Hepatic Impairment
                                    
                                    The pharmacokinetics and metabolism of APTIOM was evaluated in healthy subjects and patients with moderate liver impairment (7-9 points on the Child-Pugh assessment) after multiple oral doses. Moderate hepatic impairment did not affect the pharmacokinetics of APTIOM. No dose adjustment is recommended in patients with mild to moderate liver impairment.

                                    The pharmacokinetics of APTIOM has not been studied in patients with severe hepatic impairment.

                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         