
                     
                     
                     
                        Drug Interactions

                     
                     
                        
                           Concomitant diuretic therapy: As with other ACE inhibitors, patients on diuretics, especially those on recently instituted diuretic therapy may occasionally experience an excessive reduction of blood pressure after initiation of therapy with quinapril hydrochloride. The possibility of hypotensive effects with quinapril hydrochloride may be minimized by either discontinuing the diuretic or cautiously increasing salt intake prior to initiation of treatment with quinapril hydrochloride. If it is not possible to discontinue the diuretic, the starting dose of quinapril should be reduced (see DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION).
                        
                           Agents increasing serum potassium: Quinapril can attenuate potassium loss caused by thiazide diuretics and increase serum potassium when used alone. If concomitant therapy of quinapril hydrochloride with potassium-sparing diuretics (eg, spironolactone, triamterene, or amiloride), potassium supplements, or potassium-containing salt substitutes is indicated, they should be used with caution along with appropriate monitoring of serum potassium (see PRECAUTIONS).
                        
                           Tetracycline and other drugs that interact with magnesium: Simultaneous administration of tetracycline with quinapril hydrochloride reduced the absorption of tetracycline by approximately 28% to 37%, possibly due to the high magnesium content in quinapril tablets. This interaction should be considered if coprescribing quinapril hydrochloride and tetracycline or other drugs that interact with magnesium.
                        
                           Lithium: Increased serum lithium levels and symptoms of lithium toxicity have been reported in patients receiving concomitant lithium and ACE inhibitor therapy. These drugs should be coadministered with caution and frequent monitoring of serum lithium levels is recommended. If a diuretic is also used, it may increase the risk of lithium toxicity.
                        
                           Gold: Nitritoid reactions (symptoms include facial flushing, nausea, vomiting, and hypotension) have been reported rarely in patients on therapy with injectable gold (sodium aurothiomalate) and concomitant ACE inhibitor therapy.
                        
                           Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory agents including selective cyclooxygenase-2 inhibitors (COX-2 inhibitors): In patients who are elderly, volume-depleted (including those on diuretic therapy), or with compromised renal function, co-administration of NSAIDs, including selective COX-2 inhibitors, with ACE inhibitors, including quinapril, may result in deterioration of renal function, including possible acute renal failure. These effects are usually reversible. Monitor renal function periodically in patients receiving quinapril and NSAID therapy.
The antihypertensive effect of ACE inhibitors, including quinapril may be attenuated by NSAIDs.

                           Agents that inhibit mTOR: Patients taking concomitant mTOR inhibitor (e.g. temsirolimus) therapy may be at increased risk for angioedema.

                           Other agents: Drug interaction studies of quinapril with other agents showed:
Multiple dose therapy with propranolol or cimetidine has no effect on the pharmacokinetics of single doses of quinapril.
                        
                           The anticoagulant effect of a single dose of warfarin (measured by prothrombin time) was not significantly changed by quinapril coadministration twice-daily.
                           Quinapril treatment did not affect the pharmacokinetics of digoxin.
                           No pharmacokinetic interaction was observed when single doses of quinapril and hydrochlorothiazide were administered concomitantly.
                           Co-administration of multiple 10 mg doses of atorvastatin with 80 mg of quinapril resulted in no significant change in the steady-state pharmacokinetic parameters of atorvastatin.
                        
                        
                           Dual Blockade of the Renin-Angiotensin System (RAS): Dual blockade of the RAS with angiotensin receptor blockers, ACE inhibitors, or aliskiren is associated with increased risks of hypotension, hyperkalemia, and changes in renal function (including acute renal failure) compared to monotherapy. Most patients receiving the combination of two RAS inhibitors do not obtain any additional benefit compared to monotherapy. In general, avoid combined use of RAS inhibitors. Closely monitor blood pressure, renal function and electrolytes in patients on quinapril and other agents that affect the RAS.
Do not co-administer aliskiren with quinapril in patients with diabetes. Avoid concomitant use of aliskiren with quinapril in patients with renal impairment (GFR<60 mL/min/1.73 m2).
                     
                     
                  
               