
               
               
               Clinical Pharmacology:
               
                  Tetracyclines are readily absorbed and are bound to plasma protein in varying degrees. They are concentrated by the liver in the bile and excreted in the urine and feces at high concentrations in a biologically active form.
               
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Microbiology:
                     
                        Tetracyclines are primarily bacteriostatic and exert their antimicrobial effect by the inhibition of protein synthesis. Tetracycline is active against a wide range of gram-negative and gram-positive organisms. The drugs in the tetracycline class have closely similar antimicrobial spectra, and cross-resistance among them is common.
                        While in
                           vitro studies have demonstrated the susceptibility of most strains of the following microorganisms, clinical efficacy for infections other than those included in the INDICATIONS AND USAGE section has not been documented.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Gram-Negative Bacteria:
                     
                        
                           Neisseria gonorrhea
                        
                        
                           Haemophilus ducrey
                           i
                        
                        
                           Haemophilus influenzae
                        
                        
                           Yersinia pestis (formerly Pasteurella
                           pestis)
                        
                           Francisella tularensis (formerly Pasterurella tularensis)
                        
                           Vibrio cholera (formerly Vibrio comma)
                        
                           Bartonella bacilliformis
                        
                        
                           Brucella species
                        Because many strains of the following groups of gram-negative microorganisms have been shown to be resistant to tetracyclines, culture and susceptibility testing are recommended:
                        
                           Escherichia coli
                        
                        
                           Klebsiella species
                        
                        
                           Enterobacter aerogenes
                        
                        
                           Shigella species
                        
                           Acinetobacter species (formerly Mima species and Herellea species)
                        
                           Bacteroides species
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Gram-Positive Bacteria:
                     
                        Because many strains of the following groups of gram-positive microorganisms have been shown to be resistant to tetracycline, culture and susceptibility testing are recommended. Up to 44 percent of strains of Streptococcus pyogenes and 74 percent of Streptococcus faecalis have been found to be resistant to tetracycline drugs. Therefore, tetracyclines should not be used for streptococcal disease unless the organisms have been demonstrated to be susceptible.
                        
                           Streptococcus pyogenes
                        
                        
                           Streptococcus pneumoniae
                        
                        
                           Enterococcus group (Streptococcus
                           faecalis and Streptococcus
                           faecium)
                        Alpha-hemolytic Streptococci (viridans group)
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Other Microorganisms:
                     
                        
                           Chlamydia psittaci
                        
                        
                           Chlamydia trachomatis
                        
                        
                           Ureaplasma urealyticum
                        
                        
                           Borrelia recurrentis
                        
                        
                           Treponema pallidum
                        
                        
                           Treponema pertenue
                        
                        
                           Clostridia species
                        
                           Fusobacterium fusiforme
                        
                        
                           Actinomyces species
                        
                           Bacillus anthraxis
                        
                        
                           Propionibacterium acnes
                        
                        
                           Entamoeba species
                        
                           Balantidium coli
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Susceptibility Testing:
                     
                        A tetracycline disk may be used to determine microbial susceptibility to drugs in the tetracycline class. If the Kirby-Bauer method of disk susceptibility testing is used, a 30 mcg tetracycline disk should give a zone of at least 19 mm when tested against a tetracycline susceptible bacterial strain. Microorganisms may be considered susceptible if the MIC (minimum inhibitory concentration) is not more than 4.0 mcg/mL and intermediate if the MIC is 4.0 to 12.5 mcg/mL.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         