
                     
                     
                     Drug Interactions
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Psychotropic Agents
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 MAO Inhibitors: It is recommended that buspirone hydrochloride tablets not be used concomitantly with MAO inhibitors (See 
           
 
  
                                    WARNINGS
                                 ).
          

 
                              
                                 Amitriptyline: After addition of buspirone to the amitriptyline dose regimen, no statistically significant differences in the steady-state pharmacokinetic parameters (C
           
 
  max, AUC, and C
           
 
  min) of amitriptyline or its metabolite nortriptyline were observed.
          

 
                              
                                 Diazepam: After addition of buspirone to the diazepam dose regimen, no statistically significant differences in the steady-state pharmacokinetic parameters (C
           
 
  max, AUC, and C
           
 
  min) were observed for diazepam, but increases of about 15% were seen for nordiazepam, and minor adverse clinical effects (dizziness, headache, and nausea) were observed.
          

 
                              
                                 Haloperidol: In a study in normal volunteers, concomitant administration of buspirone and haloperidol resulted in increased serum haloperidol concentrations. The clinical significance of this finding is not clear.
          

 
                              
                                 Nefazodone: [see 
           
 
  
                                    
                                       Inhibitors and Inducers of Cytochrome P450 3A4 (CYP3A4)
                                    
                                 ]
          

 
                              
                                 Trazodone: There is one report suggesting that the concomitant use of trazodone hydrochloride and buspirone may have caused 3-to 6-fold elevations on SGPT (ALT) in a few patients. In a similar study attempting to replicate this finding, no interactive effect on hepatic transaminases was identified.
          

 
                              
                                 Triazolam/Flurazepam: Coadministration of buspirone with either triazolam or flurazepam did not appear to prolong or intensify the sedative effects of either benzodiazepine.
          

 
                              
                                 Other Psychotropics: Because the effects of concomitant administration of buspirone with most other psychotropic drugs have not been studied, the concomitant use of buspirone with other CNS-active drugs should be approached with caution.
          

 
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Inhibitors and Inducers of Cytochrome P450 3A4 (CYP3A4)
                           
                           
                              Buspirone has been shown 
           
 
  in vitro to be metabolized by CYP3A4. This finding is consistent with the 
           
 
  in vivo interactions observed between buspirone and the following:
          

 
                              
                                 Diltiazem and Verapamil: In a study of nine healthy volunteers, coadministration of buspirone (10 mg as a single dose) with verapamil (80 mg t.i.d.) or diltiazem (60 mg t.i.d.) increased plasma buspirone concentrations (verapamil increased AUC and C
           
 
  max of buspirone 3.4-fold while diltiazem increased AUC and C
           
 
  max 5.5-fold and 4-fold, respectively.) Adverse events attributable to buspirone may be more likely during concomitant administration with either diltiazem or verapamil. Subsequent dose adjustment may be necessary and should be based on clinical assessment.
          

 
                              
                                 Erythromycin: In a study in healthy volunteers, coadministration of buspirone (10 mg as a single dose) with erythromycin (1.5 g/day for 4 days) increased plasma buspirone concentrations (5-fold increase in C
           
 
  max and 6-fold increase in AUC). These pharmacokinetic interactions were accompanied by an increased incidence of side effects attributable to buspirone. If the two drugs are to be used in combination, a low dose of buspirone (e.g., 2.5 mg b.i.d.) is recommended. Subsequent dose adjustment of either drug should be based on clinical assessment.
          

 
                              
                                 Grapefruit Juice: In a study in healthy volunteers, coadministration of buspirone (10 mg as a single dose) with grapefruit juice (200 mL double-strength t.i.d. for 2 days) increased plasma buspirone concentrations (4.3-fold increase in C
           
 
  max; 9.2-fold increase in AUC). Patients receiving buspirone should be advised to avoid drinking such large amounts of grapefruit juice.
          

 
                              
                                 Itraconazole: In a study in healthy volunteers, coadministration of buspirone (10 mg as a single dose) with itraconazole (200 mg/day for 4 days) increased plasma buspirone concentrations (13-fold increase in C
           
 
  max and 19-fold increase in AUC). These pharmacokinetic interactions were accompanied by an increased incidence of side effects attributable to buspirone. If the two drugs are to be used in combination, a low dose of buspirone (e.g., 2.5 mg q.d.) is recommended. Subsequent dose adjustment of either drug should be based on clinical assessment.
          

 
                              
                                 Nefazodone: In a study of steady-state pharmacokinetics in healthy volunteers, coadministration of buspirone (2.5 or 5 mg b.i.d.) with nefazodone (250 mg b.i.d.) resulted in marked increases in plasma buspirone concentrations (increases up to 20-fold in C
           
 
  max and up to 50 fold in AUC) and statistically significant decreases (about 50%) in plasma concentrations of the buspirone metabolite 1-PP. With 5 mg b.i.d. doses of buspirone, slight increases in AUC were observed for nefazodone (23%) and its metabolites hydroxynefazodone (HO-NEF) (17%) and meta-chlorophenylpiperazine (9%). Slight increases in C
           
 
  max were observed for nefazodone (8%) and its metabolite HO-NEF (11%). Subjects receiving buspirone 5 mg b.i.d. and nefazodone 250 mg b.i.d. experienced lightheadedness, asthenia, dizziness, and somnolence, adverse events also observed with either drug alone. If the two drugs are to be used in combination, a low dose of buspirone (e.g., 2.5 mg q.d.) is recommended. Subsequent dose adjustment of either drug should be based on clinical assessment.
          

 
                              
                                 Rifampin: In a study in healthy volunteers, coadministration of buspirone (30 mg as a single dose) with rifampin (600 mg/day for 5 days) decreased the plasma concentrations (83.7% decrease in C
           
 
  max; 89.6% decrease in AUC) and pharmacodynamic effects of buspirone. If the two drugs are to be used in combination, the dosage of buspirone may need adjusting to maintain anxiolytic effect.
          

 
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Other Inhibitors and Inducers of CYP3A4
                           
                           
                              Substances that inhibit CYP3A4, such as ketoconazole or ritonavir, may inhibit buspirone metabolism and increase plasma concentrations of buspirone while substances that induce CYP3A4, such as dexamethasone, or certain anticonvulsants (phenytoin, phenobarbital, carbamazepine), may increase the rate of buspirone metabolism. If a patient has been titrated to a stable dosage on buspirone, a dose adjustment of buspirone may be necessary to avoid adverse events attributable to buspirone or diminished anxiolytic activity. Consequently, when administered with a potent inhibitor of CYP3A4, a low dose of buspirone used cautiously is recommended. When used in combination with a potent inducer of CYP3A4 the dosage of buspirone may need adjusting to maintain anxiolytic effect.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Other Drugs
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Cimetidine
                                 
                                    Coadministration of buspirone with cimetidine was found to increase C
             
 
  max (40%) and T
             
 
  max (2-fold), but had minimal effects on the AUC of buspirone.
            

 
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Protein Binding
                           
                              
                                 In vitro, buspirone does not displace tightly bound drugs like phenytoin, propranolol, and warfarin from serum proteins. However, there has been one report of prolonged prothrombin time when buspirone was added to the regimen of a patient treated with warfarin. The patient was also chronically receiving phenytoin, phenobarbital, digoxin, and levothyroxine sodium. 
           
 
  In vitro, buspirone may displace less firmly bound drugs like digoxin. The clinical significance of this property is unknown.
          

 
                              Therapeutic levels of aspirin, desipramine, diazepam, flurazepam, ibuprofen, propranolol, thioridazine, and tolbutamide had only a limited effect on the extent of binding of buspirone to plasma proteins (see 
           
 
  
                                    CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
                                 ).
          

 
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               