
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        In vitro, tesamorelin binds and stimulates human GRF receptors with similar potency as the endogenous GRF [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.2)]. 
                        
                        Growth Hormone-Releasing Factor (GRF), also known as growth hormone-releasing hormone (GHRH), is a hypothalamic peptide that acts on the pituitary somatotroph cells to stimulate the synthesis and pulsatile release of endogenous growth hormone (GH), which is both anabolic and lipolytic. GH exerts its effects by interacting with specific receptors on a variety of target cells, including chondrocytes, osteoblasts, myocytes, hepatocytes, and adipocytes, resulting in a host of pharmacodynamic effects. Some, but not all these effects, are primarily mediated by IGF-1 produced in the liver and in peripheral tissues.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Effects on IGF-1 and IGFBP-3 levels 
                              
                              Tesamorelin stimulates growth hormone secretion, and subsequently increases IGF-1 and IGFBP-3 levels [see Clinical Studies (14)].
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Other Pituitary Hormones
                              
                              No clinically significant changes in the levels of other pituitary hormones, including thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH), luteinizing hormone (LH), adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) and prolactin, were observed in subjects receiving EGRIFTA® in Phase 3 clinical trials.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Absorption
                              
                              The absolute bioavailability of EGRIFTA® after subcutaneous administration of a 2 mg dose was determined to be less than 4% in healthy adult subjects. Single and multiple dose pharmacokinetics of EGRIFTA® have been characterized in healthy subjects and HIV-infected patients without lipodystrophy following 2 mg subcutaneous administration.
                              The mean values [coefficient of variation (CV)] of the extent of absorption (AUC) for tesamorelin were 634.6 (72.4) and 852.8 (91.9) pg.h/mL in healthy subjects and HIV-infected patients, respectively, after a single subcutaneous administration of a 2 mg EGRIFTA® dose. The mean (CV) peak tesamorelin concentration (Cmax) values were 2874.6 (43.9) pg/mL in healthy subjects and 2822.3 (48.9) pg/mL in HIV-infected patients. The median peak plasma tesamorelin concentration (Tmax) was 0.15 h in both populations.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Distribution 
                              
                              The mean volume of distribution (±SD) of tesamorelin following a single subcutaneous administration was 9.4±3.1 L/kg in healthy subjects and 10.5±6.1 L/kg in HIV-infected patients.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Metabolism
                              
                              No formal metabolism studies have been performed in humans.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Elimination
                              
                              Mean elimination half-life (T1/2) of tesamorelin was 26 and 38 minutes in healthy subjects and HIV-infected patients, respectively, after subcutaneous administration for 14 consecutive days.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Drug Interactions
                              
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Simvastatin
                                    
                                    The effect of multiple dose administration of EGRIFTA® (2 mg) on the pharmacokinetics of simvastatin and simvastatin acid was evaluated in healthy subjects. Co-administration of EGRIFTA® and simvastatin (a sensitive CYP3A substrate) resulted in 8% decrease in extent of absorption (AUCinf) and 5% increase in rate of absorption (Cmax) of simvastatin. For simvastatin acid there was a 15% decrease in AUCinf and 1% decrease in Cmax 
                                       [see Drug Interactions (7.1)].
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Ritonavir
                                    
                                    The effect of multiple dose administration of EGRIFTA® (2 mg) on the pharmacokinetics of ritonavir was evaluated in healthy subjects. Co-administration of EGRIFTA® with ritonavir resulted in 9% decrease in AUCinf and 11% decrease in Cmax of ritonavir [see Drug Interactions].
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Specific Populations
                              
                              Pharmacokinetics of tesamorelin in patients with renal or hepatic impairment, in pediatric patients, or in elderly patients has not been established.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         