
               
               
               12. CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Gatifloxacin is a fluoroquinolone antibacterial (see CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY, 12.4).
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        Gatifloxacin ophthalmic solution 0.3% or 0.5% was administered to one eye of 6 healthy male subjects each in an escalated dosing regimen starting with a single 2 drop dose, then 2 drops 4 times daily for 7 days, and finally 2 drops 8 times daily for 3 days. At all time points, serum gatifloxacin levels were below the lower limit of quantification (5 ng/mL) in all subjects.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.4 Microbiology
                     
                        Gatifloxacin is an 8-methoxyfluoroquinolone with a 3-methylpiperazinyl substituent at C7. The antibacterial action of gatifloxacin results from inhibition of DNA gyrase and topoisomerase IV. DNA gyrase is an essential enzyme that is involved in the replication, transcription, and repair of bacterial DNA. Topoisomerase IV is an enzyme known to play a key role in the partitioning of the chromosomal DNA during bacterial cell division. The mechanism of action of fluoroquinolones including gatifloxacin is different from that of aminoglycoside, macrolide, and tetracycline antibiotics. Therefore, gatifloxacin may be active against pathogens that are resistant to these antibiotics and these antibiotics may be active against pathogens that are resistant to gatifloxacin. There is no cross-resistance between gatifloxacin and the aforementioned classes of antibiotics. Cross resistance has been observed between systemic gatifloxacin and some other fluoroquinolones.
                        Resistance to gatifloxacin in vitro develops via multiple-step mutations. Resistance to gatifloxacin in vitro occurs at a general frequency of 1 x 10-7 to 10-10.
                        Gatifloxacin has been shown to be active against most isolates of the following organisms both microbiologically and clinically, in conjunctival infections as described in the INDICATIONS AND USAGE, Section 1. 
                        
                        
                           Aerobic Gram-Positive Bacteria:
                        
                        
                           Staphylococcus aureus 
                        
                        
                           Staphylococcus epidermidis
                        
                        
                           Streptococcus mitis group*
                        
                        
                           Streptococcus oralis
                           *
                        
                        
                           Streptococcus pneumoniae 
                        
                        
                           Aerobic Gram-Negative Bacteria:
                        
                        
                           Haemophilus influenzae
                        
                        
                           *Efficacy for this organism was studied in fewer than 10 infections.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         