
                     
                     
                     Drug Interactions:
                     
                        (See 
                              
                                 WARNINGS:
                              
                            
                              Concomitant Antiarrhythmic Therapy
                           .) Verapamil hydrochloride injection has been used concomitantly with other cardioactive drugs (especially digitalis) without evidence of serious negative drug interactions. In rare instances, including when patients with severe cardiomyopathy, congestive heart failure, or recent myocardial infarction were given 
                              intravenous
                            beta-adrenergic blocking agents or disopyramide concomitantly with 
                              intravenous
                            verapamil, serious adverse effects have occurred. Concomitant use of verapamil hydrochloride with β-adrenergic blockers may result in an exaggerated hypotensive response. Such an effect was observed in one study, following the concomitant administration of verapamil and prazosin. It may be necessary to decrease the dose of verapamil and/or dose of the neuromuscular blocking agent when the drugs are used concomitantly. As verapamil is highly bound to plasma proteins, it should be administered with caution to patients receiving other highly protein-bound drugs.
                        
                           
                              Other
                           
                        
                        
                           
                              Cimetidine:
                            The interaction between cimetidine and chronically administered verapamil has not been studied. In acute studies of healthy volunteers, clearance of verapamil was either reduced or unchanged.
                        
                           
                              Lithium:
                            Increased sensitivity to the effects of lithium (neurotoxicity) has been reported during concomitant verapamil-lithium therapy with either no change or an increase in serum lithium levels. The addition of verapamil, however, has also resulted in the lowering of serum lithium levels in patients receiving chronic stable oral lithium. Patients receiving both drugs must be monitored carefully.
                        
                           
                              Carbamazepine:
                            Verapamil therapy may increase carbamazepine concentrations during combined therapy. This may produce carbamazepine side effects such as diplopia, headache, ataxia, or dizziness.
                        
                           
                              Rifampin:
                            Therapy with rifampin may markedly reduce oral verapamil bioavailability.
                        
                           
                              Phenobarbital:
                            Phenobarbital therapy may increase verapamil clearance.
                        
                           
                              Cyclosporin:
                            Verapamil therapy may increase serum levels of cyclosporin.
                        
                           
                              Inhalation Anesthetics:
                            Animal experiments have shown that inhalation anesthetics depress cardiovascular activity by decreasing the inward movement of calcium ions. When used concomitantly, inhalation anesthetics and calcium antagonists (such as verapamil) should be titrated carefully to avoid excessive cardiovascular depression.
                        
                           
                              Neuromuscular Blocking Agents:
                            Clinical data and animal studies suggest that verapamil may potentiate the activity of depolarizing and nondepolarizing neuromuscular blocking agents. It may be necessary to decrease the dose of verapamil and/or the dose of the neuromuscular blocking agent when the drugs are used concomitantly.
                        
                           
                              Dantrolene:
                            Two animal studies suggest concomitant intravenous use of verapamil and dantrolene sodium may result in cardiovascular collapse. There has been one report of hyperkalemia and myocardial depression following the coadministration of oral verapamil and intravenous dantrolene.
                     
                     
                  
               