
               
               
               7  DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
                  
                     The active ingredient in CYCLOSET, bromocriptine mesylate, is highly bound to serum proteins.  Therefore, CYCLOSET may increase the unbound fraction of other concomitantly used highly protein-bound therapies (e.g., salicylates, sulfonamides, chloramphenicol and probenecid), which may alter their effectiveness and risk for side effects.
                     CYCLOSET is a dopamine receptor agonist. Concomitant use of dopamine receptor antagonists, such as neuroleptics (e.g., phenothiazines, butyrophenones, thioxanthenes), or metoclopramide may diminish the effectiveness of CYCLOSET and CYCLOSET may diminish the effectiveness of these other therapies. The concurrent use of CYCLOSET with these agents has not been studied in clinical trials and is not recommended [see Warning and Precautions 5.4].
                     
                     CYCLOSET in combination with ergot-related drugs may cause an increase in the occurrence of ergot-related side effects such as nausea, vomiting, and fatigue, and may also reduce the effectiveness of these ergot therapies when used to treat migraine.  The concurrent use of these ergot agents within 6 hours of CYCLOSET dosing is not recommended.
                     CYCLOSET is extensively metabolized by the liver via CYP3A4. Therefore, potent inhibitors or inducers of CYP3A4 may increase or reduce the circulating levels of CYCLOSET, respectively.  Use caution when co-administering drugs that are strong inhibitors, inducers, or substrates of CYP3A4 (e.g., azole antimycotics, HIV protease inhibitors) [See Phamacokinetics (12.3)].
                     There are postmarketing reports of hypertension and tachycardia when bromocriptine was co-administered with sympathomimetic drugs (e.g. phenylpropanolamine and isometheptene) in postpartum women. There are limited clinical trial data supporting the safety of co-administering sympathomimetic drugs and CYCLOSET for more than 10 days. Therefore, concomitant use of these agents with CYCLOSET for more than 10 days duration is not recommended.  Also, there are limited clinical trial data supporting the safety of selective 5-hydroxytryptamine1B (5-HT1B) agonists (e.g. sumatriptan) used concurrently with CYCLOSET and the concomitant use of these agents with CYCLOSET should be avoided.
                  
               
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           May increase the unbound fraction of highly protein-bound therapies, altering their effectiveness and safety profiles (7)
                           May increase ergot-related side effects or reduce ergot effectiveness for migraines if co-administered within 6 hours of ergot-related drugs (7)
                           Extensively metabolized by CYP3A4. Use caution when co-administering strong inhibitors, inducers, or substrates for CYP3A4 (7)
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         