
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        CYCLOSET contains bromocriptine mesylate, an ergot derivative that is a dopamine receptor agonist. The mechanism by which CYCLOSET improves glycemic control is unknown. Morning administration of CYCLOSET improves glycemic control in patients with type 2 diabetes without increasing plasma insulin concentrations.
                        Once daily morning administration of CYCLOSET to humans increases circulating levels of bromocriptine, a dopamine receptor agonist, for 4-5 hours after administration.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Postprandial Glucose and Insulin Response to a Meal
                              
                              Patients with type 2 diabetes and inadequate glycemic control on diet alone were randomized to CYCLOSET or placebo in a 24-week monotherapy clinical trial. At baseline and study end, plasma samples for insulin and glucose were obtained before and 1 hour, and 2 hours after standardized meals for breakfast, lunch, and dinner. In this trial, once-daily (8 a.m.) CYCLOSET improved post-prandial glucose without increasing plasma insulin concentrations.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Absorption and Bioavailability
                              
                              When administered orally, approximately 65-95% of the CYCLOSET dose of bromocriptine mesylate is absorbed. Due to extensive hepatic extraction and first-pass metabolism, approximately 7% of the dose reaches the systemic circulation.  Under fasting conditions the time to maximum plasma concentration is 53 minutes. In contrast, following a standard high-fat meal, the time to maximum plasma concentration is increased to approximately 90-120 minutes.  Also, the relative bioavailability of CYCLOSET is increased under fed as compared to fasting conditions by an average of approximately 55-65% (increase in AUCinf).
                              
                                 Distribution
                              
                              Bromocriptine is 90-96% bound to plasma proteins. The volume of distribution is approximately 61 L.
                              
                                 Metabolism
                              
                              Bromocriptine mesylate is extensively metabolized in the gastrointestinal tract and liver. Metabolism by CYP3A4 is the major metabolic pathway. Most of the absorbed dose (approximately 93%) undergoes first-pass metabolism. The remaining 7% reaches the systemic circulation.
                              
                                 Excretion
                              
                              The major route of excretion of bromocriptine is in the bile with the remaining approximately 2-6% of an oral dose excreted via the urine. The elimination half-life is approximately 6 hours.  Prior consumption of a standard high-fat meal has little to no effect on the elimination half-life of CYCLOSET.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Specific Populations
                              
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Renal Impairment
                              
                              No pharmacokinetic studies have been conducted in patients with renal impairment. Although the kidney is a minor pathway for elimination of CYCLOSET, caution should be used in patients with renal impairment.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Hepatic Impairment
                              
                              No pharmacokinetic studies have been conducted in patients with hepatic impairment. Because CYCLOSET is predominantly metabolized by the liver, caution should be used in patients with hepatic impairment.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Gender
                              The plasma exposure of CYCLOSET is increased 18-30% in females compared to males.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Geriatric
                              
                              No pharmacokinetic studies have been conducted in geriatric subjects.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Pediatric
                              
                              Studies characterizing the pharmacokinetics of CYCLOSET in pediatric patients have not been performed.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Race
                              
                              Studies characterizing the pharmacokinetics of CYCLOSET among different ethnic groups have not been performed.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 In Vitro Assessment of Drug Interactions
                              
                              Results from in vitro studies demonstrate that CYP3A4 is the major enzyme responsible for the metabolism of bromocriptine. Bromocriptine is a competitive inhibitor of CYP3A4. The inhibitory potency for CYP3A4 is approximately 10,000-fold higher than the maximum plasma levels reached in vivo (Cmax of approximately 80-125 pg/mL) following a 4.8 mg oral dose of CYCLOSET.
                              Agents inducing CYP3A4 activity such as rifampin or dexamethasone would be expected to decrease CYCLOSET plasma levels. There was no significant in vitro inhibition of other major CYP450 enzymes (1A2, 2C9/19, 2D6) by bromocriptine.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 In Vivo Assessment of Drug Interactions
                              
                              The concomitant use of macrolide antibiotics such as erythromycin (250 mg four times a day), a known inhibitor of CYP3A4, along with bromocriptine (5 mg) was shown to increase the AUC (2.8 fold) and Cmax (4.6 fold) of bromocriptine. Therefore, use caution when co-administering drugs that are strong inhibitors or substrates of this enzyme, such as azole antimycotics and HIV protease inhibitors.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         