
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  
                     DESMOPRESSIN ACETATE Rhinal Tube contains as active substance desmopressin acetate, a synthetic analogue of the natural hormone arginine vasopressin. One mL (0.1 mg) of intranasal DESMOPRESSIN ACETATE has an antidiuretic activity of about 400 IU; 10 mcg of desmopressin acetate is equivalent to 40 IU.
                  
                     The biphasic half-lives for intranasal DESMOPRESSIN ACETATE were 7.8 and 75.5 minutes for the fast and slow phases, compared with 2.5 and 14.5 minutes for lysine vasopressin, another form of the hormone used in this condition. As a result, intranasal DESMOPRESSIN ACETATE provides a prompt onset of antidiuretic action with a long duration after each administration.
                     The change in structure of arginine vasopressin to DESMOPRESSIN ACETATE has resulted in a decreased vasopressor action and decreased actions on visceral smooth muscle relative to the enhanced antidiuretic activity, so that clinically effective antidiuretic doses are usually below threshold levels for effects on vascular or visceral smooth muscle.
                     DESMOPRESSIN ACETATE administered intranasally has an antidiuretic effect about one-tenth that of an equivalent dose administered by injection.
                  
                  
                     Human Pharmacokinetics: DESMOPRESSIN ACETATE is mainly excreted in the urine. A pharmacokinetic study conducted in healthy volunteers and patients with mild, moderate, and severe renal impairment (n=24, 6 subjects in each group) receiving single dose desmopressin acetate (2mcg) injection demonstrated a difference in DESMOPRESSIN ACETATE terminal half-life. Terminal half-life significantly increased from 3 hours in normal healthy patients to 9 hours in patients with severe renal impairment. (See 
                        CONTRAINDICATIONS
                     .)
               
               
            
         