
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           Muscle relaxants: Avoid use with OxyContin because of increased risk of respiratory depression. (7.2)
                           The CYP3A4 isoenzyme plays a major role in the metabolism of OxyContin, drugs that inhibit CYP3A4 activity may cause decreased clearance of oxycodone which could lead to an increase in oxycodone plasma concentrations. (7.3)
                           Mixed agonist/antagonist opioid analgesics: Avoid use with OxyContin because they may reduce analgesic effect of OxyContin or precipitate withdrawal symptoms. (7.4)
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 CNS Depressants
                     
                        Concurrent use of OxyContin and other central nervous system (CNS) depressants including sedatives or hypnotics, general anesthetics, phenothiazines, tranquilizers, and alcohol can increase the risk of respiratory depression, hypotension, profound sedation or coma. Monitor patients receiving CNS depressants and OxyContin for signs of respiratory depression and hypotension. When such combined therapy is contemplated, start OxyContin at 1/3 to 1/2 of the usual dosage and consider using a lower dose of the concomitant CNS depressant.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 Muscle Relaxants
                     
                        Oxycodone may enhance the neuromuscular blocking action of true skeletal muscle relaxants and produce an increased degree of respiratory depression. Monitor patients receiving muscle relaxants and OxyContin for signs of respiratory depression that may be greater than otherwise expected.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3 Agents Affecting Cytochrome P450 Isoenzymes
                     
                        
                           
                              Inhibitors of CYP3A4
                           
                        
                        Co-administration of a strong CYP3A4 inhibitor ketoconazole, with OxyContin, significantly increased the plasma concentrations of oxycodone. Inhibition of CYP3A4 activity by its inhibitors, such as macrolide antibiotics (e.g., erythromycin), azole-antifungal agents (e.g., ketoconazole), and protease inhibitors (e.g., ritonavir), may prolong opioid effects. If co-administration is necessary, caution is advised when initiating therapy with, currently taking, or discontinuing CYP3A4 inhibitors. Evaluate these patients at frequent intervals and consider dose adjustments until stable drug effects are achieved [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                        
                        
                           
                              Inducers of CYP3A4
                           
                        
                        A published study showed that the co-administration of rifampin, a drug metabolizing enzyme inducer, significantly decreased plasma oxycodone concentrations. CYP450 inducers, such as rifampin, carbamazepine, and phenytoin, may induce the metabolism of oxycodone and, therefore, may cause increased clearance of the drug which could lead to a decrease in oxycodone plasma concentrations, lack of efficacy or, possibly, development of an abstinence syndrome in a patient who had developed physical dependence to oxycodone. If co-administration with OxyContin is necessary, caution is advised when initiating therapy with, currently taking, or discontinuing CYP3A4 inducers. Evaluate these patients at frequent intervals and consider dose adjustments until stable drug effects are achieved [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                        
                        
                           
                              Inhibitors of CYP2D6
                           
                        
                        Oxycodone is metabolized in part to oxymorphone via CYP2D6. While this pathway may be blocked by a variety of drugs such as certain cardiovascular drugs (e.g., quinidine) and antidepressants (e.g., fluoxetine), such blockade has not been shown to be of clinical significance during oxycodone treatment. However, clinicians should be aware of this possible interaction.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4 Mixed Agonist/Antagonist Opioid Analgesics
                     
                        Mixed agonist/antagonist analgesics (i.e., pentazocine, nalbuphine, and butorphanol) should generally not be administered to a patient who has received or is receiving a course of therapy with a pure opioid agonist analgesic such as OxyContin. In this situation, mixed agonist/antagonist analgesics may reduce the analgesic effect of oxycodone and may precipitate withdrawal symptoms in these patients.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.5 Diuretics
                     
                        Opioids can reduce the efficacy of diuretics by inducing the release of antidiuretic hormone. Opioids may also lead to acute retention of urine by causing spasm of the sphincter of the bladder, particularly in men with enlarged prostates.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.6 Anticholinergics
                     
                        Anticholinergics or other medications with anticholinergic activity when used concurrently with opioid analgesics may result in increased risk of urinary retention and/or severe constipation, which may lead to paralytic ileus. Monitor patients for signs of urinary retention or reduced gastric motility when OxyContin is used concurrently with anticholinergic drugs.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         