
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        

                        Oxaliplatin undergoes nonenzymatic conversion in
                                    physiologic solutions to active derivatives via displacement of
                                    the labile oxalate ligand. Several transient reactive species
                                    are formed, including monoaquo and diaquo DACH platinum, which
                                    covalently bind with macromolecules. Both inter- and intrastrand
                                    Pt-DNA crosslinks are formed. Crosslinks are formed between the
                                        
                              N7
                            positions of two adjacent guanines (GG), adjacent
                                    adenine-guanines (AG), and guanines separated by an intervening
                                    nucleotide (GNG). These crosslinks inhibit DNA replication and
                                    transcription. Cytotoxicity is cell-cycle nonspecific.
                               In vivo 
                           studies have shown antitumor activity of oxaliplatin
                                    against colon carcinoma. In combination with 5-fluorouracil
                                    (5-FU), oxaliplatin exhibits 
                              in vitro
                            and 
                              in vivo
                            antiproliferative activity greater than either
                                    compound alone in several tumor models [HT29 (colon), GR
                                    (mammary), and L1210 (leukemia)]. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        

                        The reactive oxaliplatin derivatives are present as a
                                    fraction of the unbound platinum in plasma ultrafiltrate. The
                                    decline of ultrafilterable platinum levels following oxaliplatin
                                    administration is triphasic, characterized by two relatively
                                    short distribution phases (t1/2α; 0.43 hours
                                    and t1/2β; 16.8 hours) and a long terminal
                                    elimination phase (t1/2γ; 391 hours).
                                    Pharmacokinetic parameters obtained after a single 2-hour IV
                                    infusion of oxaliplatin at a dose of
                                    85 mg/m2 expressed as ultrafilterable
                                    platinum were Cmax of 0.814 mcg /mL and volume of
                                    distribution of 440 L.
                        

                        Interpatient and intrapatient variability in
                                    ultrafilterable platinum exposure (AUC0-48hr)
                                    assessed over 3 cycles was moderate to low (23% and
                                    6%, respectively). A pharmacodynamic relationship
                                    between platinum ultrafiltrate levels and clinical safety and
                                    effectiveness has not been established. 
                        

                        
                           
                              
                                 
                                    Distribution
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                        At the end of a 2-hour infusion of oxaliplatin,
                                    approximately 15% of the administered platinum is
                                    present in the systemic circulation. The remaining 85%
                                    is rapidly distributed into tissues or eliminated in the urine.
                                    In patients, plasma protein binding of platinum is irreversible
                                    and is greater than 90%. The main binding proteins are
                                    albumin and gamma-globulins. Platinum also binds irreversibly
                                    and accumulates (approximately 2-fold) in erythrocytes, where it
                                    appears to have no relevant activity. No platinum accumulation
                                    was observed in plasma ultrafiltrate following 85
                                    mg/m2 every two weeks. 
                        

                        
                           
                              
                                 
                                    Metabolism
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                        Oxaliplatin undergoes rapid and extensive nonenzymatic
                                    biotransformation. There is no evidence of cytochrome
                                    P450-mediated metabolism 
                              in vitro
                           .
                        

                        Up to 17 platinum-containing derivatives have been
                                    observed in plasma ultrafiltrate samples from patients,
                                    including several cytotoxic species (monochloro DACH platinum,
                                    dichloro DACH platinum, and monoaquo and diaquo DACH platinum)
                                    and a number of noncytotoxic, conjugated species.
                        

                        
                           
                              
                                 
                                    Elimination
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                        
                           
                              
                            
                        The major route of platinum elimination is renal
                                    excretion. At five days after a single 2-hour infusion of
                                    oxaliplatin, urinary elimination accounted for about 54%
                                    of the platinum eliminated, with fecal excretion accounting for
                                    only about 2%. Platinum was cleared from plasma at a
                                    rate (10 to 17 L/h) that was similar to or exceeded the average
                                    human glomerular filtration rate (GFR; 7.5 L/h). There was no
                                    significant effect of gender on the clearance of ultrafilterable
                                    platinum. The renal clearance of ultrafilterable platinum is
                                    significantly correlated with GFR.
                        
                           
                              
                            
                        
                           
                              Pharmacokinetics in Special
                                            Populations
                           
                           

                           

                        
                        
                           
                              Pediatric
                           
                           

                           

                        
                        
                           
                              
                                 
                                    [See 
                                 
                                 Use In Specific Patient Populations (8.4)
                                 
                                    ] 
                                 
                              
                           .
                        

                        
                           
                              Renal Impairment
                           
                        
                        
                           
                              
                            
                        The AUC0-48hr of platinum in the plasma
                                    ultrafiltrate increases as renal function decreases. The
                                        AUC0-48hr of platinum in patients with mild
                                    (creatinine clearance, CLcr 50 to 80 mL/min),
                                    moderate (CLcr 30 to <50 mL/min) and severe
                                    renal (CLcr <30 mL/min) impairment is
                                    increased by about 60, 140 and 190%, respectively,
                                    compared to patients with normal renal function (CLcr
                                    >80 mL/min) 
                              
                                 
                                    [see 
                                 
                                 Adverse Reactions (6)
                                 
                                    , 
                                 
                                 Drug Interactions (7)
                                 
                                     and 
                                 
                                 Use In Specific Patient Populations (8.6)
                                 
                                    ]
                                 
                              
                           . 
                        

                        
                           
                              Drug - Drug
                                        Interactions
                           
                        
                        No pharmacokinetic interaction between
                                        85 mg/m2 of Oxaliplatin and infusional
                                    5-FU has been observed in patients treated every
                                    2 weeks, but increases of 5-FU plasma concentrations by
                                    approximately 20% have been observed with doses of 130
                                        mg/m2 of oxaliplatin administered every
                                    3 weeks. 
                              In vitro
                           , platinum was not displaced from plasma proteins by
                                    the following medications: erythromycin, salicylate, sodium
                                    valproate, granisetron, and paclitaxel. 
                              In vitro
                           , oxaliplatin is not metabolized by, nor does it
                                    inhibit, human cytochrome P450 isoenzymes. No P450-mediated
                                    drug-drug interactions are therefore anticipated in patients.
                        

                        Since platinum-containing species are eliminated
                                    primarily through the kidney, clearance of these products may be
                                    decreased by co-administration of potentially nephrotoxic
                                    compounds, although this has not been specifically studied.
                                
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         