
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
                  Enter section text here
               
               
               
                  
                     
                        Drugs or herbal products that induce certain enzymes, including 
CYP3A4, may decrease the effectiveness of COCs or increase breakthrough 
bleeding. Counsel patients to use a back-up method or alternative method of 
contraception when enzyme inducers are used with COCs. (7.1)
                        Women taking strong CYP3A4 inducers (for example, carbamazepine, phenytoin, 
rifampicin, and St. John’s wort) should not choose Natazia as their oral 
contraceptive due to the possibility of decreased contraceptive efficacy. (7.1)
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 Effects of Other Drugs on Combined Hormonal Contraceptives 

                     
                        Interactions between oral contraceptives and other drugs may lead 
to breakthrough bleeding and/or contraceptive failure. The following 
interactions have been reported in the literature for COCs in general or were 
studied in clinical trials with Natazia.
                        
                           
                              CYP3A4 Inducers: Drugs or 
herbal products that induce certain enzymes, including CYP3A4, may decrease the 
effectiveness of COCs or increase breakthrough bleeding. Some drugs or herbal 
products that may decrease the effectiveness of hormonal contraceptives include 
barbiturates, bosentan, felbamate, griseofulvin, oxcarbazepine, and topiramate. 
Counsel women to use an alternative method of contraception or a back-up method 
when moderate or weak enzyme inducers are used with COCs, and to continue 
back-up contraception for 28 days after discontinuing the enzyme inducer to 
ensure contraceptive reliability.
                        Dienogest is a substrate of cytochrome P450 (CYP) 3A4. Women who take 
medications that are strong CYP3A4 inducers (for example, carbamazepine, 
phenytoin, rifampicin, and St. John’s wort) should not choose Natazia as their 
oral contraceptive while using these inducers and for at least 28 days after 
discontinuation of these inducers due to the possibility of decreased 
contraceptive efficacy. 
                        The effect of the CYP3A4 inducer rifampicin was studied in healthy 
postmenopausal women. Co-administration of rifampicin with estradiol 
valerate/dienogest tablets led to a 52 % and 83% decrease in the mean Cmax and AUC(0 –24hr), respectively, for dienogest and a 25% and 
44% decrease in Cmax and AUC(0–24hr), respectively, for 
estradiol at steady state. 
                        
                           
                              Strong CYP3A4 Inhibitors
                           : 
Strong CYP3A4 inhibitors such as ketoconazole increased hormone serum 
concentrations. In a study investigating the effect of ketoconazole on dienogest 
and estradiol pharmacokinetics, co-administration with the strong CYP3A4 
inhibitor ketoconazole resulted in a 186% increase of AUC (0 –24hr) at steady 
state for dienogest and a 57% increase for estradiol. There was also a 94% and 
65% increase of Cmax at steady state for dienogest and 
estradiol when co-administered with ketoconazole.
                        
                           
                              Moderate CYP3A4 
Inhibitors
                           : The AUC (0–24hr) of dienogest and estradiol at steady 
state were increased by 62% and 33%, respectively, when co-administered with a 
moderate CYP3A4 inhibitor, erythromycin. There was also a 33% and 51% increase 
of Cmax at steady state for dienogest and estradiol, respectively, when 
co-administered with erythromycin.
                        Other known CYP.3A4 inhibitors like azole antifungals, cimetidine, verapamil, 
macrolides, diltiazem, antidepressants, and grapefruit juice may increase plasma 
levels of dienogest.
                        
                           
                              HIV Protease Inhibitors
                           : 
Significant changes (increase or decrease) in the plasma levels of estrogen and 
progestin have been noted in some cases of co-administration of HIV protease 
inhibitors. 
                        
                           
                              Antibiotics
                           : There have 
been reports of pregnancy while taking hormonal contraceptives and antibiotics, 
but clinical pharmacokinetic studies have not shown consistent effects of 
antibiotics on plasma concentrations of synthetic steroids. 
                        Consult the labeling of all concurrently-used drugs to obtain further 
information about interactions with hormonal contraceptives or the potential for 
enzyme alterations.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 Effects of Combined Hormonal Contraceptives on Other Drugs 

                     
                        COCs containing ethinyl estradiol (or mestranol), may inhibit the 
metabolism of other compounds. COCs have been shown to significantly decrease 
plasma concentrations of lamotrigine, likely due to induction of lamotrigine 
glucuronidation. This may reduce seizure control; therefore, dosage adjustments 
of lamotrigine may be necessary. Consult the labeling of the concurrently-used 
drug to obtain further information about interactions with COCs or the potential 
for enzyme alterations. 
                        
                           In vitro studies with human CYP enzymes did not 
indicate an inhibitory potential of dienogest at clinically relevant 
concentrations.
                     
                  
               
            
         