
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
                  
                     
                        Potential for Other Drugs to Affect Lumacaftor/Ivacaftor
                     
                  
               
               
               
                  
                     
                        See Full Prescribing Information for a complete list. (2.3, 7, 12.3)
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1	Inhibitors of CYP3A
                     
                        Co-administration of lumacaftor/ivacaftor with itraconazole, a strong CYP3A inhibitor, did not impact the exposure of lumacaftor, but increased ivacaftor exposure by 4.3-fold. Due to the induction effect of lumacaftor on CYP3A, at steady-state the net exposure of ivacaftor is not expected to exceed that when given in the absence of lumacaftor at a dose of 150 mg every 12 hours (the approved dose of ivacaftor monotherapy). Therefore, no dose adjustment is necessary when CYP3A inhibitors are initiated in patients currently taking ORKAMBI. However, when initiating ORKAMBI in patients taking strong CYP3A inhibitors, reduce the ORKAMBI dose to 1 tablet daily (lumacaftor 200 mg/ivacaftor 125 mg total daily dose) for the first week of treatment to allow for the steady-state induction effect of lumacaftor. Following this period, continue with the recommended daily dose [see Dosage and Administration (2.3)].
                        Examples of strong CYP3A inhibitors include:
                        
                            ketoconazole, itraconazole, posaconazole, and voriconazole
                            telithromycin, clarithromycin.
                        
                        No dose adjustment is recommended when used with moderate or weak CYP3A inhibitors.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2	Inducers of CYP3A
                     
                        Co-administration of lumacaftor/ivacaftor with rifampin, a strong CYP3A inducer, had minimal effect on the exposure of lumacaftor, but decreased ivacaftor exposure (AUC) by 57%. This may reduce the effectiveness of ORKAMBI. Therefore, co-administration with strong CYP3A inducers, such as rifampin, rifabutin, phenobarbital, carbamazepine, phenytoin, and St. John's wort, is not recommended [see Warnings and Precautions (5.4) and Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                        No dose adjustment is recommended when used with moderate or weak CYP3A inducers.
                        
                           
                              Potential for Lumacaftor/Ivacaftor to Affect Other Drugs
                           
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3	CYP3A Substrates
                     
                        Lumacaftor is a strong inducer of CYP3A. Co-administration of lumacaftor with ivacaftor, a sensitive CYP3A substrate, decreased ivacaftor exposure by approximately 80%. Administration of ORKAMBI may decrease systemic exposure of medicinal products that are substrates of CYP3A, which may decrease the therapeutic effect of the medicinal product.
                        Co-administration of ORKAMBI is not recommended with sensitive CYP3A substrates or CYP3A substrates with a narrow therapeutic index [see Warnings and Precautions (5.4) and Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)] such as:
                        
                           
                              Benzodiazepines: midazolam, triazolam (consider an alternative to these benzodiazepines).
                           
                              Immunosuppressants: cyclosporine, everolimus, sirolimus, and tacrolimus (avoid the use of ORKAMBI).
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4	CYP2B6 and CYP2C Substrates
                     
                        
                           In vitro studies suggest that lumacaftor has the potential to induce CYP2B6, CYP2C8, CYP2C9, and CYP2C19; inhibition of CYP2C8 and CYP2C9 has also been observed in vitro. Additionally, in vitro studies suggest that ivacaftor may inhibit CYP2C9. Therefore, concomitant use of ORKAMBI with CYP2B6, CYP2C8, CYP2C9, and CYP2C19 substrates may alter the exposure of these substrates.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.5	Digoxin and Other P-gp Substrates
                     
                        Based on in vitro results which showed P-gp inhibition and pregnane-X-receptor (PXR) activation, lumacaftor has the potential to both inhibit and induce P-gp. Additionally, a clinical study with ivacaftor monotherapy showed that ivacaftor is a weak inhibitor of P-gp. Therefore, concomitant use of ORKAMBI with P-gp substrates may alter the exposure of these substrates.
                        Monitor the serum concentration of digoxin and titrate the digoxin dose to obtain the desired clinical effect.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.6 Anti-allergics and Systemic Corticosteroids
                     
                        ORKAMBI may decrease the exposure of montelukast, which may reduce its efficacy. No dose adjustment for montelukast is recommended. Employ appropriate clinical monitoring, as is reasonable, when co-administered with ORKAMBI.
                        Concomitant use of ORKAMBI may reduce the exposure and effectiveness of prednisone and methylprednisolone. A higher dose of these systemic corticosteroids may be required to obtain the desired clinical effect.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.7 Antibiotics
                     
                        Concomitant use of ORKAMBI may decrease the exposure of clarithromycin, erythromycin, and telithromycin, which may reduce the effectiveness of these antibiotics. Consider an alternative to these antibiotics, such as ciprofloxacin, azithromycin, and levofloxacin.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.8 Antifungals
                     
                        Concomitant use of ORKAMBI may reduce the exposure and effectiveness of itraconazole, ketoconazole, posaconazole, and voriconazole. Concomitant use of ORKAMBI with these antifungals is not recommended. Monitor patients closely for breakthrough fungal infections if such drugs are necessary. Consider an alternative such as fluconazole.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.9 Anti-inflammatories
                     
                        Concomitant use of ORKAMBI may reduce the exposure and effectiveness of ibuprofen. A higher dose of ibuprofen may be required to obtain the desired clinical effect.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.10 Antidepressants
                     
                        Concomitant use of ORKAMBI may reduce the exposure and effectiveness of citalopram, escitalopram, and sertraline. A higher dose of these antidepressants may be required to obtain the desired clinical effect.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.11 Hormonal Contraceptives
                     
                        ORKAMBI may decrease hormonal contraceptive exposure, reducing the effectiveness. Hormonal contraceptives, including oral, injectable, transdermal, and implantable, should not be relied upon as an effective method of contraception when co-administered with ORKAMBI.
                        Concomitant use of ORKAMBI with hormonal contraceptives increased the menstrual abnormality events [see Adverse Reactions (6.1)]. Avoid concomitant use unless the benefit outweighs the risks. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.12 Oral Hypoglycemics
                     
                        Concomitant use of ORKAMBI may reduce the exposure and effectiveness of repaglinide, and may alter the exposure of sulfonylurea. A dose adjustment may be required to obtain the desired clinical effect. No dose adjustment is recommended for metformin.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.13 Proton Pump Inhibitors, H2 Blockers, Antacids
                     
                        ORKAMBI may reduce the exposure and effectiveness of proton pump inhibitors such as omeprazole, esomeprazole, and lansoprazole, and may alter the exposure of ranitidine. A dose adjustment may be required to obtain the desired clinical effect. No dose adjustment is recommended for calcium carbonate antacid.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.14 Warfarin
                     
                        ORKAMBI may alter the exposure of warfarin. Monitor the international normalized ratio (INR) when warfarin co-administration with ORKAMBI is required.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.15 Concomitant Drugs that do not Need Dose Adjustment
                     
                        No dosage adjustment of ORKAMBI or concomitant drug is recommended when ORKAMBI is given with the following: azithromycin, aztreonam, budesonide, ceftazidime, cetirizine, ciprofloxacin, colistimethate, colistin, dornase alfa, fluticasone, ipratropium, levofloxacin, pancreatin, pancrelipase, salbutamol, salmeterol, sulfamethoxazole and trimethoprim, tiotropium, and tobramycin. Based on the metabolism and route of elimination, ORKAMBI is not expected to impact the exposure of these drugs.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         