
               
               
               DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
                  
                  
                  
                  
                  Cyclosporine increased rosuvastatin exposure (AUC) 7-fold.  Therefore, in patients taking cyclosporine, the dose of CRESTOR should not exceed 5 mg once daily [see Dosage and Administration (2.5), Warnings and Precautions (5.1), and  Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                  
 

                  
                  
                  Gemfibrozil significantly increased rosuvastatin exposure. Due to an observed increased risk of myopathy/rhabdomyolysis, combination therapy with CRESTOR and gemfibrozil should be avoided. If used together, the dose of CRESTOR should not exceed 10 mg once daily  [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                  
 

                  
                  
                  Coadministration of rosuvastatin with certain protease inhibitors given in combination with ritonavir has differing effects on rosuvastatin exposure. The protease inhibitor combinations lopinavir/ritonavir and atazanavir/ritonavir increase rosuvastatin exposure (AUC) up to threefold [see Table 4 – Clinical Pharmacology  (12.3)]. For these combinations the dose of CRESTOR should not exceed 10 mg once daily. The combinations of tipranavir/ritonavir or fosamprenavir/ritonavir produce little or no change in rosuvastatin exposure. Caution should be exercised when rosuvastatin is coadministered with protease inhibitors given in combination with ritonavir [see Dosage and Administration (2.5), Warnings and Precautions (5.1) and Clinical Pharmacology  (12.3)].
                  
 

                  
                  
                  CRESTOR significantly increased INR in patients receiving coumarin anticoagulants. Therefore, caution should be exercised when coumarin anticoagulants are given in conjunction with CRESTOR.  In patients taking coumarin anticoagulants and CRESTOR concomitantly, INR should be determined before starting CRESTOR and frequently enough during early therapy to ensure that no significant alteration of INR occurs [see Warnings and Precautions (5.3) and  Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                  
 

                  
                  
                  The risk of skeletal muscle effects may be enhanced when CRESTOR is used in combination with lipid-modifying doses (≥1 g/day) of niacin; caution should be used when prescribing with CRESTOR [see Warnings and Precautions (5.1)].
                  
 

                  
                  
                  When CRESTOR was coadministered with fenofibrate, no clinically significant increase in the AUC of rosuvastatin or fenofibrate was observed. Because it is known that the risk of myopathy during treatment with HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors is increased with concomitant use of fenofibrates, caution should be used when prescribing fenofibrates with CRESTOR [see Warnings and Precautions (5.1) and Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                  
 

                  
 

               
               
            
         