
                     
                     
                     Drug Interactions
                     
                        Fexofenadine hydrochloride
and pseudoephedrine hydrochloride do not influence the pharmacokinetics
of each other when administered concomitantly.
                        Fexofenadine has been shown to exhibit minimal (ca. 5%) metabolism.
However, co-administration of fexofenadine hydrochloride with either
ketoconazole or erythromycin led to increased plasma concentrations
of fexofenadine. Fexofenadine had no effect on the pharmacokinetics
of either erythromycin or ketoconazole. In 2 separate studies, fexofenadine
hydrochloride 120 mg twice daily (twice the recommended dose) was
co-administered with erythromycin 500 mg every 8 hours or ketoconazole
400 mg once daily under steady-state conditions to healthy volunteers
(n=24, each study). No differences in adverse events or QTc interval were observed when subjects were administered fexofenadine
hydrochloride alone or in combination with either erythromycin or
ketoconazole. The findings of these studies are summarized in the
following table.
                        


                        


The changes in
plasma levels were within the range of plasma levels achieved in adequate
and well-controlled clinical trials.
                        
                        The mechanism
of these interactions has been evaluated in in vitro, in situ, and in vivo animal models.
These studies indicate that ketoconazole or erythromycin co-administration
enhances fexofenadine gastrointestinal absorption. This observed increase
in the bioavailability of fexofenadine may be due to transport-related
effects, such as p-glycoprotein. In vivo animal studies also suggest that in addition to enhancing absorption,
ketoconazole decreases fexofenadine gastrointestinal secretion, while
erythromycin may also decrease biliary excretion.
                        Due to the pseudoephedrine component, ALLEGRA-D 12 HOUR is contraindicated
in patients taking monoamine oxidase inhibitors and for 14 days after
stopping use of an MAO inhibitor. Concomitant use with antihypertensive
drugs which interfere with sympathetic activity (e.g., methyldopa,
mecamylamine, and reserpine) may reduce their antihypertensive effects.
Increased ectopic pacemaker activity can occur when pseudoephedrine
is used concomitantly with digitalis. Care should be taken in the
administration of ALLEGRA-D 12 HOUR concomitantly with other sympathomimetic
amines because combined effects on the cardiovascular system may be
harmful to the patient (see WARNINGS).
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Drug Interactions with Antacids
                           
                              Administration
of 120 mg of fexofenadine hydrochloride (2 × 60 mg capsule) within
15 minutes of an aluminum and magnesium containing antacid (Maalox®)
decreased fexofenadine AUC by 41% and Cmax by 43%. ALLEGRA-D
12 HOUR should not be taken closely in time with aluminum and magnesium
containing antacids.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Interactions with Fruit Juices
                           
                              Fruit juices
such as grapefruit, orange and apple may reduce the bioavailability
and exposure of fexofenadine. This is based on the results from 3
clinical studies using histamine induced skin wheals and flares coupled
with population pharmacokinetic analysis. The size of wheal and flare
were significantly larger when fexofenadine hydrochloride was administered
with either grapefruit or orange juices compared to water. Based on
the literature reports, the same effects may be extrapolated to other
fruit juices such as apple juice. The clinical significance of these
observations is unknown. In addition, based on the population pharmacokinetics
analysis of the combined data from grapefruit and orange juices studies
with the data from a bioequivalence study, the bioavailability of
fexofenadine was reduced by 36%. Therefore, to maximize the effects
of fexofenadine, it is recommended that ALLEGRA-D 12 HOUR should be
taken with water (see DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION).
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               