
               
               
               7. DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  
                     
                        ● Strong CYP3A4 Inducers: Do not administer for at least 2 weeks prior to initiation of Irinotecan therapy (7.2) 
                        ● Strong CYP3A4 Inhibitors: Discontinue at least 1 week prior to starting Irinotecan therapy and do not use during Irinotecan therapy (7.3)
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     7.1 5-Fluorouracil (5-FU) and Leucovorin (LV)
                     
                        In a phase 1 clinical study involving Irinotecan, 5-fluorouracil (5-FU), and leucovorin (LV) in 26 patients with solid tumors, the disposition of Irinotecan was not substantially altered when the drugs were co-administered. Although the Cmax and AUC0-24 of SN-38, the active metabolite, were reduced (by 14% and 8%, respectively) when Irinotecan was followed by 5FU and LV administration compared with when Irinotecan was given alone, this sequence of administration was used in the combination trials and is recommended [see Dosage and Administration (2)]. Formal in vivo or in vitro drug interaction studies to evaluate the influence of Irinotecan on the disposition of 5-FU and LV have not been conducted.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     7.2 Strong CYP 3A4 Inducers
                     
                        
                           Anticonvulsants and other strong inducers: Exposure to Irinotecan and its active metabolite SN-38 is substantially reduced in adult and pediatric patients concomitantly receiving the CYP3A4 enzyme-inducing anticonvulsants phenytoin, phenobarbital or carbamazepine. The appropriate starting dose for patients taking these anticonvulsants or other strong inducers such as rifampin and rifabutin has not been defined. Consideration should be given to substituting non-enzyme inducing therapies at least 2 weeks prior to initiation of Irinotecan therapy. 
                        
                           St. John's wort: Exposure to the active metabolite SN-38 is reduced in patients receiving concomitant St. John's wort. St. John's wort should be discontinued at least 2 weeks prior to the first cycle of Irinotecan, and St. John's wort is contraindicated during Irinotecan therapy. 
                        
                           Dexamethasone, a moderate CYP3A4 inducer, does not appear to alter the pharmacokinetics of Irinotecan.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     7.3 Strong CYP 3A4 Inhibitors
                     
                        Ketoconazole is a strong inhibitor of CYP3A4 enzymes. Patients receiving concomitant ketoconazole have increased exposure to Irinotecan and its active metabolite SN-38. Patients should discontinue ketoconazole at least 1 week prior to starting Irinotecan therapy and ketoconazole is contraindicated during Irinotecan therapy.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     7.4 Atazanavir Sulfate
                     
                        Coadministration of atazanavir sulfate, a CYP3A4 and UGT1A1 inhibitor has the potential to increase systemic exposure to SN-38, the active metabolite of Irinotecan. Physicians should take this into consideration when co-administering these drugs. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     7.5 Drug-Laboratory Test Interactions
                     
                        There are no known interactions between Irinotecan and laboratory tests.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         