
               
               
               
                  12
                   
                  CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        12.1 
                        Mechanism of Action
                     
                     
                        
                           Aliskiren
                        
                        Renin is secreted by the kidney in response to decreases in blood volume and renal perfusion. Renin cleaves angiotensinogen to form the inactive decapeptide angiotensin I (Ang I). Ang I is converted to the active octapeptide angiotensin II (Ang II) by angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) and non-ACE pathways. Ang II is a powerful vasoconstrictor and leads to the release of catecholamines from the adrenal medulla and prejunctional nerve endings. It also promotes aldosterone secretion and sodium reabsorption. Together, these effects increase blood pressure. Ang II also inhibits renin release, thus providing a negative feedback to the system. This cycle, from renin through angiotensin to aldosterone and its associated negative feedback loop, is known as the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system (RAAS). Aliskiren is a direct renin inhibitor, decreasing plasma renin activity (PRA) and inhibiting the conversion of angiotensinogen to Ang I. Whether aliskiren affects other RAAS components, e.g., ACE or non-ACE pathways, is not known.
                        All agents that inhibit the RAAS, including renin inhibitors, suppress the negative feedback loop, leading to a compensatory rise in plasma renin concentration. When this rise occurs during treatment with ACE inhibitors and ARBs, the result is increased levels of PRA. During treatment with aliskiren, however, the effect of increased renin levels is blocked, so that PRA, Ang I and Ang II are all reduced, whether aliskiren is used as monotherapy or in combination with other antihypertensive agents.
                        
                           H
                           ydrochlorothiazide
                        
                        Hydrochlorothiazide is a thiazide diuretic. Thiazides affect the renal tubular mechanisms of electrolyte reabsorption, directly increasing excretion of sodium and chloride in approximately equivalent amounts. Indirectly, the diuretic action of hydrochlorothiazide reduces plasma volume, with consequent increases in plasma renin activity, increases in aldosterone secretion, increases in urinary potassium loss, and decreases in serum potassium. The renin-aldosterone link is mediated by angiotensin II, so coadministration of agents that block the production or function of angiotensin II tends to reverse the potassium loss associated with these diuretics.
                        The mechanism of action of the antihypertensive effect of thiazides is unknown.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        12.2 
                        Pharmacodynamics
                     
                     
                        
                           Tekturna 
                           HCT
                        
                        In placebo-controlled clinical trials, PRA was decreased with aliskiren monotherapy (ranging from 54% to 65%) and increased with hydrochlorothiazide monotherapy (ranging from 4% to 72%). Treatment with Tekturna HCT resulted in PRA reductions ranging from approximately 46% to 63% in various doses despite the increase in PRA with hydrochlorothiazide treatment. The clinical implications of the differences in effect on PRA are not known.
                        
                           Aliskiren
                        
                        PRA reductions in clinical trials ranged from approximately 50% to 80%, were not dose-related and did not correlate with blood pressure reductions. The clinical implications of the differences in effect on PRA are not known.
                        
                           Hydrochlorothiazide
                        
                        After oral administration of hydrochlorothiazide, diuresis begins within 2 hours, peaks in about 4 hours, and lasts about 6 to 12 hours.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        12.3 
                        Pharmacokinetics
                     
                     
                        
                           Absorption
                            and Distribution
                        
                        
                           Tekturna 
                           HCT
                        
                        Following oral administration of Tekturna HCT combination tablets, the median peak plasma concentration time are within 1 hour for aliskiren and 2.5 hours for hydrochlorothiazide. When taken with food, mean AUC and Cmax of aliskiren are decreased by 60% and 82%, respectively; mean AUC and Cmax of hydrochlorothiazide increased by 13% and 10%, respectively. As a result, patients should establish a routine pattern for taking Tekturna HCT with regard to meals and should be advised that high-fat meals decrease absorption of aliskiren substantially.
                        
                           H
                           ydrochlorothiazide
                        
                        Hydrochlorothiazide crosses the placental but not the blood-brain barrier and is excreted in breast milk.
                        
                           Metabolism and Elimination
                        
                        
                           Aliskiren
                        
                        About one-fourth of the absorbed dose appears in the urine as parent drug. How much of the absorbed dose is metabolized is unknown. Based on the in vitro studies, the major enzyme responsible for aliskiren metabolism appears to be CYP 3A4.
                        
                           Hydrochlorothiazide
                        
                        Hydrochlorothiazide is not metabolized but is eliminated rapidly by the kidney. At least 61% of the oral dose is eliminated as unchanged drug within 24 hours. The elimination half-life is between 5.8 and 18.9 hours.
                        
                           Special Populations
                        
                        
                           P
                           ediatri
                           c Patients
                        
                        The pharmacokinetics of aliskiren have not been investigated in patients <18 years of age.
                        
                           Geriatri
                           c Patients
                        
                        The pharmacokinetics of aliskiren were studied in the elderly (≥65 years). Exposure (measured by AUC) is increased in elderly patients. Adjustment of the starting dose is not required in these patients [see Dosage and Administration (2)].
                        
                           Race
                        
                        Too few non-Caucasians have been studied with Tekturna HCT to assess pharmacokinetic differences among races. The pharmacokinetic differences among Blacks, Caucasians, and Japanese are minimal with aliskiren therapy.
                        
                           Renal I
                           mpairment
                        
                        The pharmacokinetics of aliskiren were evaluated in patients with varying degrees of renal impairment. Rate and extent of exposure (AUC and Cmax) of aliskiren in subjects with renal impairment did not show a consistent correlation with the severity of renal impairment. Adjustment of the starting dose is not required in patients with mild or moderate renal impairment, but Tekturna HCT is not recommended in patients with severe renal impairment [
                           s
                           ee Dosage and 
                           Administration (2)
                            and Warnings and Precautions (5.4)
                           ]
                           .
                        
                        
                           Hepatic 
                           Impairment
                        
                        The pharmacokinetics of aliskiren were not significantly affected in patients with mild-to-severe liver disease. Consequently, adjustment of the starting dose is not required in these patients [s
                           ee Dosage and Administration (2)].
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         