
               
               
               7	DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           Oral contraceptives: Altered exposure may cause irregular bleeding but not increased risk of pregnancy. Advise patients not to discontinue oral contraceptives if spotting occurs (7.2).
                           CNS depressants including alcohol: Potentiate CNS depressant effects. Avoid concomitant use of alcohol (7.3).
                           Non-potassium sparing diuretics: May potentiate hypokalemia. Measure potassium before/during treatment (7.4).
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1       Monoamine Oxidase Inhibitors
                     
                        Use of phentermine is contraindicated during or within 14 days following the administration of monoamine oxidase inhibitors because of the risk of hypertensive crisis.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2       Oral Contraceptives
                     
                        Co-administration of multiple-dose Qsymia 15 mg/92 mg once daily with a single dose of oral contraceptive containing 35 µg ethinyl estradiol (estrogen component) and 1 mg norethindrone (progestin component), in obese otherwise healthy volunteers, decreased the exposure of ethinyl estradiol by 16% and increased the exposure of norethindrone by 22% [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                        Although this study did not specifically address the impact of the interaction on contraceptive efficacy, an increased risk of pregnancy is not anticipated. The primary determinant of contraceptive efficacy is the progestin component of the combination oral contraceptive, so higher exposure to the progestin would not be expected to be deleterious.
                        However, irregular bleeding (spotting) may occur more frequently due to both the increased exposure to the progestin and lower exposure to the estrogen, which tends to stabilize the endometrium. Patients should be informed not to discontinue their combination oral contraceptive if spotting occurs, but to notify their health care provider if the spotting is troubling to them.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3       CNS Depressants Including Alcohol
                     
                        Specific drug interaction studies of Qsymia and alcohol or other CNS depressant drugs have not been performed. The concomitant use of alcohol or CNS depressant drugs (e.g., barbiturates, benzodiazepines, and sleep medications) with phentermine or topiramate may potentiate CNS depression such as dizziness or cognitive adverse reactions, or other centrally mediated effects of these agents. Therefore, if Qsymia is used with alcohol or other CNS depressants, the patient should be counseled regarding possible increased risk of CNS depression or side effects.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4       Non-Potassium Sparing Diuretics
                     
                        Concurrent use of Qsymia with non-potassium sparing diuretics may potentiate the potassium-wasting action of these diuretics. Concomitant administration of hydrochlorothiazide alone with topiramate alone has been shown to increase the Cmax and AUC of topiramate by 27% and 29%, respectively. When prescribing Qsymia in the presence of non-potassium-sparing medicinal products, patients should be monitored for hypokalemia [see Warnings and Precautions (5.17) and Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.5       Antiepileptic Drugs
                     
                        Concomitant administration of phenytoin or carbamazepine with topiramate in patients with epilepsy, decreased plasma concentrations of topiramate by 48% and 40%, respectively, when compared to topiramate given alone [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                        Concomitant administration of valproic acid and topiramate has been associated with hyperammonemia with and without encephalopathy. Concomitant administration of topiramate with valproic acid in patients has also been associated with hypothermia (with and without hyperammonemia). It may be prudent to examine blood ammonia in patients in whom the onset of hypothermia or encephalopathy has been reported [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.6       Carbonic Anhydrase Inhibitors
                     
                        Concomitant use of topiramate, a component of Qsymia, with any other carbonic anhydrase inhibitor (e.g., zonisamide, acetazolamide, or dichlorphenamide) may increase the severity of metabolic acidosis and may also increase the risk of kidney stone formation. Avoid the use of Qsymia with other drugs that inhibit carbonic anhydrase [see Warnings and Precautions (5.7)].
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         