
                     
                     
                     Drug Interactions
                     
                        

                        As with other drugs, the potential for interaction by a variety of mechanisms (e.g., pharmacodynamic, pharmacokinetic inhibition or enhancement, etc.) is a possibility (see ). Monoamine Oxidase Inhibitors (See , , and .) (See and .) The metabolism and pharmacokinetics of mirtazapine tablets may be affected by the induction or inhibition of drug-metabolizing enzymes. Drugs that are Metabolized by and/or Inhibit Cytochrome P450 Enzymes In healthy male patients (n=18), phenytoin (200 mg daily) increased mirtazapine (30 mg daily) clearance about 2-fold, resulting in a decrease in average plasma mirtazapine concentrations of 45%. Mirtazapine did not significantly affect the pharmacokinetics of phenytoin. In healthy male patients (n=24), carbamazepine (400 mg b.i.d.) increased mirtazapine (15 mg b.i.d.) clearance about 2-fold, resulting in a decrease in average plasma mirtazapine concentrations of 60%. When phenytoin, carbamazepine, or another inducer of hepatic metabolism (such as rifampicin) is added to mirtazapine therapy, the mirtazapine dose may have to be increased. If treatment with such a medicinal product is discontinued, it may be necessary to reduce the mirtazapine dose. In healthy male patients (n=12), when cimetidine,  a weak inhibitor of CYP1A2, CYP2D6, and CYP3A4, given at 800 mg b.i.d. at steady state was coadministered with mirtazapine (30 mg daily) at steady state, the Area Under the Curve (AUC) of mirtazapine increased more than 50%. Mirtazapine did not cause relevant changes in the pharmacokinetics of cimetidine. The mirtazapine dose may have to be decreased when concomitant treatment with cimetidine is started, or increased when cimetidine treatment is discontinued. In healthy, male, Caucasian patients (n=24), coadministration of the potent CYP3A4 inhibitor ketoconazole (200 mg b.i.d. for 6.5 days) increased the peak plasma levels and the AUC of a single 30 mg dose of mirtazapine by approximately 40% and 50%, respectively. Caution should be exercised when coadministering mirtazapine with potent CYP3A4 inhibitors, HIV protease inhibitors, azole antifungals, erythromycin, or nefazodone. In an interaction study in healthy, CYP2D6 extensive metabolizer patients (n=24), mirtazapine (30 mg/day), at steady state, did not cause relevant changes in the pharmacokinetics of steady state paroxetine (40 mg/day), a CYP2D6 inhibitor. 
                                    CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
                           

                           

                           

                           

                           CONTRAINDICATIONS
                           WARNINGS
                           DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION
                           

                           

                           Serotonergic Drugs
                                        

                              

                           
                           CONTRAINDICATIONS
                           WARNINGS
                           

                           

                           Drugs Affecting Hepatic Metabolism
                           

                           

                           

                           

                           

                           

                           (these studies used both drugs at steady state)
                                        CYP Enzyme Inducers
                           
                           

                           

                           Phenytoin
                           

                           

                           

                           

                           Carbamazepine
                           

                           

                           

                           

                           

                           

                           
                              CYP Enzyme Inhibitors
                           
                           

                           

                           Cimetidine
                           

                           

                           

                           

                           Ketoconazole
                           

                           

                           

                           

                           

                           

                           Paroxetine
                           

                           

                           in vivo
                        
                     
                     
                  
               