
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  
                     

                  
               
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Metformin is an antihyperglycemic agent which improves glucose tolerance in patients with type 2 diabetes, lowering both basal and postprandial plasma glucose. Its pharmacologic mechanisms of action are different from other classes of oral antihyperglycemic agents. Metformin decreases hepatic glucose production, decreases intestinal absorption of glucose, and improves insulin sensitivity by increasing peripheral glucose uptake and utilization.  Unlike sulfonylureas, metformin does not produce hypoglycemia in either patients with type 2 diabetes or normal subjects (except in special circumstances, see 
                              PRECAUTIONS
                           ) and does not cause hyperinsulinemia. With metformin therapy, insulin secretion remains unchanged while fasting insulin levels and day-long plasma insulin response may actually decrease.

                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        

                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Absorption and Bioavailability
                     
                        Following a single oral dose of metformin hydrochloride extended - release tablet, Cmax is achieved with a median value of 7 hours and a range of 4 hours to 8 hours.

                           
At steady state, the AUC and Cmax are less than dose proportional for metformin hydrochloride extended - release tablets within the range of 500 mg to 2000 mg administered once daily. Peak plasma levels are approximately 0.6, 1.1, 1.4, and 1.8 mcg/mL for 500 mg, 1000 mg, 1500 mg, and 2000 mg once-daily doses, respectively. The extent of metformin absorption (as measured by AUC) from metformin hydrochloride extended - release tablets at a 2000 mg once-daily dose is similar to the same total daily dose administered as metformin hydrochloride tablets 1000 mg twice daily. After repeated administration of metformin hydrochloride extended - release tablets, metformin did not accumulate in plasma.

                           
Within-subject variability in Cmax and AUC of metformin from metformin hydrochloride extended - release tablets is comparable to that with metformin hydrochloride tablets.

                           
Although the extent of metformin absorption (as measured by AUC) from the metformin hydrochloride extended - release tablet increased by approximately 50% when given with food, there was no effect of food on Cmax and Tmax of metformin. Both high and low fat meals had the same effect on the pharmacokinetics of metformin hydrochloride extended - release tablets.

                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Distribution
                     
                        The apparent volume of distribution (V/F) of metformin following single oral doses of metformin hydrochloride tablets 850 mg averaged 654 ± 358 L. Metformin is negligibly bound to plasma proteins, in contrast to sulfonylureas, which are more than 90% protein bound. Metformin partitions into erythrocytes, most likely as a function of time. At usual clinical doses and dosing schedules of metformin hydrochloride tablets, steady state plasma concentrations of metformin are reached within 24 to 48 hours and are generally <1 mcg/mL. During controlled clinical trials of metformin hydrochloride tablets, maximum metformin plasma levels did not exceed 5 mcg/mL, even at maximum doses.

                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Metabolism and Elimination
                     
                        Intravenous single-dose studies in normal subjects demonstrate that metformin is excreted unchanged in the urine and does not undergo hepatic metabolism (no metabolites have been identified in humans) nor biliary excretion. Renal clearance (see 
                              Table 1
                           ) is approximately 3.5 times greater than creatinine clearance, which indicates that tubular secretion is the major route of metformin elimination. Following oral administration, approximately 90% of the absorbed drug is eliminated via the renal route within the first 24 hours, with a plasma elimination half-life of approximately 6.2 hours. In blood, the elimination half-life is approximately 17.6 hours, suggesting that the erythrocyte mass may be a compartment of distribution.

                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Special Populations
                     
                        
                           

                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Patients with Type 2 Diabetes
                     
                        In the presence of normal renal function, there are no differences between single- or multiple-dose pharmacokinetics of metformin between patients with type 2 diabetes and normal subjects (see 
                              Table 1
                           ), nor is there any accumulation of metformin in either group at usual clinical doses.
                        The pharmacokinetics of metformin hydrochloride extended-release tablets in patients with type 2 diabetes are comparable to those in healthy normal adults.

                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Renal Insufficiency
                     
                        In patients with decreased renal function (based on measured creatinine clearance), the plasma and blood half-life of metformin is prolonged and the renal clearance is decreased in proportion to the decrease in creatinine clearance (see 
                              Table 1
                           ; also see 
                              WARNINGS
                           ).

                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Hepatic Insufficiency
                     
                        No pharmacokinetic studies of metformin have been conducted in patients with hepatic insufficiency.

                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Geriatrics
                     
                        Limited data from controlled pharmacokinetic studies of metformin hydrochloride tablets in healthy elderly subjects suggest that total plasma clearance of metformin is decreased, the half-life is prolonged, and Cmax is increased, compared to healthy young subjects. From these data, it appears that the change in metformin pharmacokinetics with aging is primarily accounted for by a change in renal function (see 
                              Table 1
                           ). Metformin hydrochloride extended - release tablets treatment should not be initiated in patients ≥80 years of age unless measurement of creatinine clearance demonstrates that renal function is not reduced (see 
                              WARNINGS
                            and 
                              DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION
                           ).
                        


                     



                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Pediatrics
                     
                        No pharmacokinetic data from studies of pediatric patients are currently available

                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Gender
                     
                        Metformin pharmacokinetic parameters did not differ significantly between normal subjects and patients with type 2 diabetes when analyzed according to gender (males = 19, females = 16). Similarly, in controlled clinical studies in patients with type 2 diabetes, the antihyperglycemic effect of metformin hydrochloride tablets was comparable in males and females.

                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Race
                     
                        No studies of metformin pharmacokinetic parameters according to race have been performed. In controlled clinical studies of metformin hydrochloride tablets in patients with type 2 diabetes, the antihyperglycemic effect was comparable in whites (n=249), blacks (n=51), and Hispanics (n=24).

                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Clinical Studies
                     
                        
                           METFORMIN HYDROCHLORIDE EXTENDED - RELEASE TABLETS
                        
                        A 24-week, double-blind, placebo-controlled study of metformin hydrochloride extended - release tablets, taken once daily with the evening meal, was conducted in patients with type 2 diabetes who had failed to achieve glycemic control with diet and exercise (HbA1c 7 to 10%, FPG 126 to 270 mg/dL). Patients entering the study had a mean baseline HbA1c of 8% and a mean baseline FPG of 176 mg/dL. After 12 weeks treatment, mean HbA1c had increased from baseline by 0.1% and mean FPG decreased from baseline by 2 mg/dL in the placebo group, compared with a decrease in mean HbA1c of 0.6% and a decrease in mean FPG of 23 mg/dL in patients treated with metformin hydrochloride extended - release tablets 1000 mg once daily. Subsequently, the treatment dose was increased to 1500 mg once daily if HbA1c was ≥7% but <8% (patients with HbA1c ≥8% were discontinued from the study). At the final visit (24-week), mean HbA1c had increased 0.2% from baseline in placebo patients and decreased 0.6% with metformin hydrochloride extended - release tablets.
                        A 16-week, double-blind, placebo-controlled, dose-response study of metformin hydrochloride extended - release tablets, taken once daily with the evening meal or twice daily with meals, was conducted in patients with type 2 diabetes who had failed to achieve glycemic control with diet and exercise (HbA1c 7 to 11%, FPG 126 to 280 mg/dL). Changes in glycemic control and body weight are shown in 
                              Table 2
                           .
                        


                        


Compared with placebo, improvement in glycemic control was seen at all dose levels of metformin hydrochloride extended - release tablets and treatment was not associated with any significant change in weight (see 
                              DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION
                            for dosing recommendations for metformin hydrochloride extended - release tablets).
                        A 24-week, double-blind, randomized study of metformin hydrochloride extended - release tablets, taken once daily with the evening meal, and metformin hydrochloride tablets, taken twice daily (with breakfast and evening meal), was conducted in patients with type 2 diabetes who had been treated with metformin hydrochloride tablets, 500 mg twice daily for at least 8 weeks prior to study entry.
                        The metformin hydrochloride tablets dose had not necessarily been titrated to achieve a specific level of glycemic control prior to study entry. Patients qualified for the study if HbA1c was ≤8.5% and FPG was ≤200 mg/dL. Changes in glycemic control and body weight are shown in 
                              Table 3
                           .
                        

                        


                        


After 12 weeks of treatment, there was an increase in mean HbA1c in all groups; in the metformin hydrochloride extended-release tablets 1000 mg group, the increase from baseline of 0.23% was statistically significant (see 
                              DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION
                           ).
                        Changes in lipid parameters in the previously described placebo-controlled dose-response study of metformin hydrochloride extended - release tablets are shown in 
                              Table 4
                           .
                        

                        


                        


Changes in lipid parameters in the previously described study of metformin hydrochloride extended-release tablets are shown in 
                              Table 5
                           .
                        


