


Drug interactions
In vitro studies of cytochrome P450 isoenzymes using human liver microsomes indicate that neither tizanidine nor the major metabolites are likely to affect the metabolism of other drugs metabolized by cytochrome P450 isoenzymes.In vitro studies of cytochrome P450 isoenzymes using human liver microsomes indicate that neither tizanidine nor the major metabolites are likely to affect the metabolism of other drugs metabolized by cytochrome P450 isoenzymes.





Acetaminophen
Tizanidine delayed the Tmax of acetaminophen by 16 minutes. Acetaminophen did not affect the pharmacokinetics of tizanidine.max of acetaminophen by 16 minutes. Acetaminophen did not affect the pharmacokinetics of tizanidine.







Alcohol
Alcohol increased the AUC of tizanidine by approximately 20%, while also increasing its Cmax by approximately 15%.  This was associated with an increase in side effects of tizanidine. The CNS depressant effects of tizanidine and alcohol are additive.max by approximately 15%.  This was associated with an increase in side effects of tizanidine. The CNS depressant effects of tizanidine and alcohol are additive.







Oral Contraceptives
No specific pharmacokinetic study was conducted to investigate interaction between oral contraceptives and tizanidine, but retrospective analysis of population pharmacokinetic data following single and multiple dose administration of 4 mg tizanidine showed that women concurrently taking oral contraceptives had 50% lower clearance of tizanidine than women not on oral contraceptives.







Rofecoxib
Rofecoxib may potentiate the adverse effects of tizanidine.  Eight case reports of a potential rofecoxib-tizanidine drug interaction have been identified in postmarketing safety reports.  Most of the adverse events reported involved the nervous system (e.g., hallucinations, psychosis, somnolence, hypotonia, etc.) and the cardiovascular system (e.g., hypotension, tachycardia, bradycardia).  In all cases, adverse events resolved following discontinuation of tizanidine, rofecoxib, or both. Rechallenges with both drugs were not performed.  The possible mechanism and the potential for a drug interaction between tizanidine and rofecoxib remain unclear.




