
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY

               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action

                     
                        KGF is an endogenous protein in the fibroblast growth factor (FGF) family that binds to the KGF receptor.  Binding of KGF to its receptor has been reported to result in proliferation, differentiation, and migration of epithelial cells.  The KGF receptor, one of four receptors in the FGF family, has been reported to be present on epithelial cells in many tissues examined including the tongue, buccal mucosa, esophagus, stomach, intestine, salivary gland, lung, liver, pancreas, kidney, bladder, mammary gland, skin (hair follicles and sebaceous gland), and the lens of the eye. The KGF receptor has been reported to not be present on cells of the hematopoietic lineage.  Endogenous KGF is produced by mesenchymal cells and is upregulated in response to epithelial tissue injury.

                        In mice and rats, Kepivance enhanced proliferation of epithelial cells (as measured by Ki67 immunohistochemical staining and BrDU uptake) and demonstrated an increase in tissue thickness of the tongue, buccal mucosa, and gastrointestinal tract.  Kepivance has been studied in murine models of chemotherapy and radiation-induced gastrointestinal injury.  In such models, administration of Kepivance prior to and/or after the cytotoxic insult improved survival and reduced weight loss compared to control animals.

                        Kepivance has been shown to enhance the growth of human epithelial tumor cell lines in vitro at concentrations ≥ 10 mcg/mL (> 15-fold higher than average therapeutic concentrations in humans).  In nude mouse xenograft models, three consecutive daily treatments of Kepivance at doses of 1,500 and 4,000 mcg/kg (25- and 67-fold higher than the recommended human dose, respectively) repeated weekly for 4 to 6 weeks were associated with a dose-dependent increase in the growth rate of 1 of 7 KGF receptor-expressing human tumor cell lines.

                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics

                     
                        Epithelial cell proliferation was assessed by Ki67 immunohistochemical staining in healthy subjects.  A 3-fold or greater increase in Ki67 staining was observed in buccal biopsies from 3 of 6 healthy subjects given Kepivance at 40 mcg/kg/day intravenously for 3 days, when measured 24 hours after the third dose.  Dose-dependent epithelial cell proliferation was observed in healthy subjects given single intravenous doses of 120 to 250 mcg/kg 48 hours post-dosing.

                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics

                     
                        
                           The pharmacokinetics of Kepivance were studied in healthy subjects and patients with hematologic malignancies.  After single intravenous doses of 20 to 250 mcg/kg in healthy subjects and 60 mcg/kg in cancer patients, Kepivance concentrations declined over 95% in the first 30 minutes post-dose.  A slight increase or plateau in concentration occurred at approximately 1 to 4 hours, followed by a terminal decline phase.  Kepivance exhibited linear pharmacokinetics with extravascular distribution.  In cancer patients compared with healthy subjects, after a 60 mcg/kg single dose of Kepivance  the average total body clearance (CL) was 2- to 4-fold higher, and volume of distribution at steady state (Vss) was 2-fold higher.  The elimination half-life was similar between healthy subjects and cancer patients (average 4.5 hours with a range of 3.3 to 5.7 hours).  No accumulation of Kepivance occurred after 3 consecutive daily doses of 20 and 40 mcg/kg in healthy subjects or 60 mcg/kg in cancer patients. Age (1 to 16 years) did not affect the pharmacokinetics of palifermin over the  dose range of 40 to 80 mcg/kg [see Use in Specific  Populations (8.4)].
                        
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 Drug Interactions
                              
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                       Co-administration with Heparin
                                    
                                    The potential pharmacokinetic interaction between palifermin and heparin was evaluated in a single-dose study in 27 healthy subjects receiving palifermin (60 mcg/kg) co-administered with and without therapeutic levels of unfractionated heparin.  This co-administration resulted in a 5-fold increase in palifermin AUC and an 80% decrease in the mean CL.  There was no significant effect of palifermin on heparin activity with respect to activated partial thromboplastin time (aPTT). The clinical relevance of this observed increase in palifermin systemic exposure is unclear [see Drug Interactions (7)].

                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                       Pharmacokinetics in Specific Populations
                                    
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                       Renal Impairment
                                    
                                    Results from a pharmacokinetics study in 24 subjects with varying degrees of renal impairment demonstrated that renal impairment has little or no influence on Kepivance pharmacokinetics [see Use in Specific Populations (8.6)].
                                    
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                       Elderly
                                    
                                    In a single-dose study, subjects received a 180-mcg/kg or 90-mcg/kg dose of palifermin administered by intravenous bolus injection.  Subjects over the age of 65 (n=8) had an approximately 30% lower rate of CL on average than those 65 and younger (n=19). No dose adjustment is recommended for the geriatric population [see Use in Specific Populations (8.5)].
                                    
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         