
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  

                  

                  
                  General 
                  Propranolol is a nonselective beta-adrenergic receptor blocking 
agent possessing no other autonomic nervous system activity. It specifically 
competes with beta-adrenergic receptor agonist agents for available receptor 
sites. When access to beta-receptor sites is blocked by propranolol, the 
chronotropic, inotropic, and vasodilator responses to beta-adrenergic 
stimulation are decreased proportionately. At dosages greater than required for 
beta blockade, propranolol also exerts a quinidine-like or anesthetic-like 
membrane action, which affects the cardiac action potential. The significance of 
the membrane action in the treatment of arrhythmias is uncertain.
                  
                  
                  
                  Mechanism of Action 
                  The mechanism of the antihypertensive effect of propranolol has 
not been established. Factors that may contribute to the antihypertensive action 
include: (1) decreased cardiac output, (2) inhibition of renin release by the 
kidneys, and (3) diminution of tonic sympathetic nerve outflow from vasomotor 
centers in the brain. Although total peripheral resistance may increase 
initially, it readjusts to or below the pretreatment level with chronic use of 
propranolol. Effects of propranolol on plasma volume appear to be minor and 
somewhat variable.
                  In angina pectoris, propranolol generally reduces the oxygen requirement of 
the heart at any given level of effort by blocking the catecholamine-induced 
increases in the heart rate, systolic blood pressure, and the velocity and 
extent of myocardial contraction. Propranolol may increase oxygen requirements 
by increasing left ventricular fiber length, end diastolic pressure, and 
systolic ejection period. The net physiologic effect of betaadrenergic blockade 
is usually advantageous and is manifested during exercise by delayed onset of 
pain and increased work capacity.
                  Propranolol exerts its antiarrhythmic effects in concentrations associated 
with beta-adrenergic blockade, and this appears to be its principal 
antiarrhythmic mechanism of action. In dosages greater than required for beta 
blockade, propranolol also exerts a quinidine-like or anesthetic-like membrane 
action, which affects the cardiac action potential. The significance of the 
membrane action in the treatment of arrhythmias is uncertain.
                  The mechanism of the antimigraine effect of propranolol has not been 
established. Beta-adrenergic receptors have been demonstrated in the pial 
vessels of the brain.
                  The specific mechanism of propranolol’s antitremor effects has not been 
established, but beta-2 (noncardiac) receptors may be involved. A central effect 
is also possible. Clinical studies have demonstrated that propranolol is of 
benefit in exaggerated physiological and essential (familial) tremor.
                  
                  
                  
                  PHARMACOKINETICS AND DRUG METABOLISM 

                  
                  
                  
                  Absorption 
                  Propranolol is highly lipophilic and almost completely absorbed 
after oral administration. However, it undergoes high first-pass metabolism by 
the liver and on average, only about 25% of propranolol reaches the systemic 
circulation. Peak plasma concentrations occur about 1 to 4 hours after an oral 
dose.
                  Administration of protein-rich foods increase the bioavailability of 
propranolol by about 50% with no change in time to peak concentration, plasma 
binding, half-life, or the amount of unchanged drug in the urine.
                  
                  
                  
                  Distribution 
                  Approximately 90% of circulating propranolol is bound to plasma 
proteins (albumin and alpha1 acid glycoprotein). The 
binding is enantiomer-selective. The S(-)-enantiomer is preferentially bound to 
alpha1 glycoprotein and the R(+)-enantiomer 
preferentially bound to albumin. The volume of distribution of propranolol is 
approximately 4 liters/kg.
                  Propranolol crosses the blood-brain barrier and the placenta, and is 
distributed into breast milk.
                  
                  
                  
                  Metabolism and Elimination 

                  Propranolol is extensively metabolized with most metabolites 
appearing in the urine. Propranolol is metabolized through three primary routes: 
aromatic hydroxylation (mainly 4-hydroxylation), N-dealkylation followed by 
further side-chain oxidation, and direct glucuronidation. It has been estimated 
that the percentage contributions of these routes to total metabolism are 42%, 
41% and 17%, respectively, but with considerable variability between 
individuals. The four major metabolites are propranolol glucuronide, 
naphthyloxylactic acid and glucuronic acid, and sulfate conjugates of 4-hydroxy 
propranolol.
                  
                     In vitro studies have indicated that the aromatic 
hydroxylation of propranolol is catalyzed mainly by polymorphic CYP2D6. 
Side-chain oxidation is mediated mainly by CYP1A2 and to some extent by CYP2D6. 
4-hydroxy propranolol is a weak inhibitor of CYP2D6.
                  Propranolol is also a substrate of CYP2C19 and a substrate for the intestinal 
efflux transporter, p-glycoprotein (p-gp). Studies suggest however that p-gp is 
not dose-limiting for intestinal absorption of propranolol in the usual 
therapeutic dose range.
                  In healthy subjects, no difference was observed between CYP2D6 extensive 
metabolizers (EMs) and poor metabolizers (PMs) with respect to oral clearance or 
elimination half-life. Partial clearance of 4-hydroxy propranolol was 
significantly higher and of naphthyloxyactic acid significantly lower in EMs 
than PMs.
                  The plasma half-life of propranolol is from 3 to 6 hours.
                  
                  
                  
                  Enantiomers 
                  Propranolol is a racemic mixture of two enantiomers, R(+) and 
S(-). The S(-)-enantiomer is approximately 100 times as potent as the R(+)- 
enantiomer in blocking beta adrenergic receptors. In normal subjects receiving 
oral doses of racemic propranolol, S(-)-enantiomer concentrations exceeded those 
of the R(+)-enantiomer by 40-90% as a result of stereoselective hepatic 
metabolism. Clearance of the pharmacologically active S(-)-propranolol is lower 
than R(+)-propranolol after intravenous and oral doses.
                  
                  
                  
                  Special Populations 
                  
                     Geriatric
                  
                  In a study of 12 elderly (62-79 years old) and 12 young (25-33 years old) 
healthy subjects, the clearance of S(-)-enantiomer of propranolol was decreased 
in the elderly. Additionally, the half-life of both the R(+)- and S(-)- 
propranolol were prolonged in the elderly compared with the young (11 hours vs. 
5 hours).
                  Clearance of propranolol is reduced with aging due to decline in oxidation 
capacity (ring oxidation and side-chain oxidation). Conjugation capacity remains 
unchanged. In a study of 32 patients age 30 to 84 years given a single 20-mg 
dose of propranolol, an inverse correlation was found between age and the 
partial metabolic clearances to 4-hydroxypropranolol (40HP-ring oxidation) and 
to naphthoxylactic acid (NLA-side chain oxidation). No correlation was found 
between age and the partial metabolic clearance to propranolol glucuronide 
(PPLG-conjugation).
                  
                     Gender
                  
                  In a study of 9 healthy women and 12 healthy men, neither the administration 
of testosterone nor the regular course of the menstrual cycle affected the 
plasma binding of the propranolol enantiomers. In contrast, there was a 
significant, although non-enantioselective diminution of the binding of 
propranolol after treatment with ethinyl estradiol. These findings are 
inconsistent with another study, in which administration of testosterone 
cypionate confirmed the stimulatory role of this hormone on propranolol 
metabolism and concluded that the clearance of propranolol in men is dependent 
on circulating concentrations of testosterone. In women, none of the metabolic 
clearances for propranolol showed any significant association with either 
estradiol or testosterone.
                  
                     Race
                  
                  A study conducted in 12 Caucasian and 13 African-American male subjects 
taking propranolol, showed that at steady state, the clearance of R(+)- and 
S(-)-propranolol were about 76% and 53% higher in African-Americans than in 
Caucasians, respectively.
                  Chinese subjects had a greater proportion (18% to 45% higher) of unbound 
propranolol in plasma compared to Caucasians, which was associated with a lower 
plasma concentration of alpha1 acid glycoprotein.
                  
                     Renal Insufficiency
                  
                  In a study conducted in 5 patients with chronic renal failure, 6 patients on 
regular dialysis, and 5 healthy subjects, who received a single oral dose of 40 
mg of propranolol, the peak plasma concentrations (Cmax) 
of propranolol in the chronic renal failure group were 2 to 3-fold higher 
(161±41 ng/mL) than those observed in the dialysis patients (47±9 ng/mL) and in 
the healthy subjects (26±1 ng/mL). Propranolol plasma clearance was also reduced 
in the patients with chronic renal failure.
                  Studies have reported a delayed absorption rate and a reduced half-life of 
propranolol in patients with renal failure of varying severity. Despite this 
shorter plasma half-life, propranolol peak plasma levels were 3-4 times higher 
and total plasma levels of metabolites were up to 3 times higher in these 
patients than in subjects with normal renal function.
                  Chronic renal failure has been associated with a decrease in drug metabolism 
via down regulation of hepatic cytochrome P450 activity resulting in a lower 
“first-pass” clearance.
                  Propranolol is not significantly dialyzable.
                  
                     Hepatic Insufficiency
                  
                  Propranolol is extensively metabolized by the liver. In a study conducted in 
7 patients with cirrhosis and 9 healthy subjects receiving 80-mg oral 
propranolol every 8 hours for 7 doses, the steady-state unbound propranolol 
concentration in patients with cirrhosis was increased 3-fold in comparison to 
controls. In cirrhosis, the half-life increased to 11 hours compared to 4 hours 
(see 
                        PRECAUTIONS
                     ).
                  

               
               
            
         