


CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
Following oral administration of minocycline hydrochloride capsules, absorption from the gastrointestinal tract is rapid. Maximum serum concentrations following a single dose of minocycline hydrochloride to normal fasting adult volunteers were attained in 1 to 4 hours. The serum half-life in normal volunteers ranges from approximately 11 hours to 22 hours. When minocycline hydrochloride capsules were given concomitantly with a meal which included dairy products, the extent of absorption of minocycline hydrochloride capsules was not noticeably influenced. The peak plasma concentrations were slightly decreased and delayed by one hour when administered with food, compared to dosing under fasting conditions. In previous studies with other minocycline dosage forms, the minocycline serum half-life ranged from 11 to 16 hours in 7 patients with hepatic dysfunction, and from 18 to 69 hours in 5 patients with renal dysfunction. The urinary and fecal recovery of minocycline when administered to 12 normal volunteers is one-half to one-third that of other tetracyclines.





Microbiology
The tetracyclines are primarily bacteriostatic and are thought to exert their antimicrobial effect by the inhibition of protein synthesis. The tetracyclines, including minocycline, have a similar antimicrobial spectrum of activity against a wide range of gram-positive and gram-negative organisms. Cross-resistance of these organisms to tetracyclines is common. Minocycline has been shown to be active against most strains of the following microorganisms, both in vitro and in clinical infections as described in the INDICATIONS AND USAGE section:in vitro and in clinical infections as described in the AEROBIC GRAM-POSITIVE MICROORGANISMSBecause many strains of the following gram-positive microorganisms have been shown to be resistant to tetracyclines, culture and susceptibility testing are especially recommended. Tetracycline antibiotics should not be used for streptococcal diseases unless the organism has been demonstrated to be susceptible. Tetracyclines are not the drug of choice in the treatment of any type of staphylococcal infection. Bacillus anthracis† Bacillus anthracis† Listeria monocytogenes† Listeria monocytogenes† Staphylococcus aureus Staphylococcus aureus Streptococcus pneumoniae Streptococcus pneumoniae Bacillus anthracis† Bacillus anthracis† Listeria monocytogenes† Listeria monocytogenes† Staphylococcus aureus Staphylococcus aureus Streptococcus pneumoniae Streptococcus pneumoniaeAEROBIC GRAM-NEGATIVE MICROORGANISMS Bartonella bacilliformis Bartonella bacilliformis Brucella species Brucella species Calymmatobacterium granulomatis Calymmatobacterium granulomatis Campylobacter fetus Campylobacter fetus Francisella tularensis Francisella tularensis Haemophilus ducreyi Haemophilus ducreyi Vibrio cholerae Vibrio cholerae Yersinia pestis Yersinia pestis Bartonella bacilliformis Bartonella bacilliformis Brucella species Brucella speciesBecause many strains of the following groups of gram-negative microorganisms have been shown to be resistant to tetracyclines, culture and susceptibility tests are especially recommended: Acinetobacter species Acinetobacter species Enterobacter aerogenes Enterobacter aerogenes Escherichia coli Escherichia coli Haemophilus influenzae Haemophilus influenzae Klebsiella species Klebsiella species Neisseria gonorrhoeae† Neisseria gonorrhoeae† Neisseria meningitidis† Neisseria meningitidis† Shigella species Shigella species Acinetobacter species Acinetobacter species"OTHER" MICROORGANISMS Actinomyces species† Actinomyces species Borrelia recurrentis  Borrelia recurrentis  Chlamydia psittaci Chlamydia psittaci Chlamydia trachomatis Chlamydia trachomatis Clostridium species† Clostridium species Entamoeba species Entamoeba species Fusobacterium nucletum ssp. fusiforme† Fusobacterium nucletum ssp. Mycobacterium marinum Mycobacterium marinum Mycoplasma pneumonia Mycoplasma pneumonia Propionibacterium acnes Propionibacterium acnes Rickettsiae Rickettsiae Treponema pallidum subspecies pallidum† Treponema pallidum subspecies  Treponema pallidum subspecies pertenue† Treponema pallidum subspecies Ureaplasma urealyticum Ureaplasma urealyticum Actinomyces species† Actinomyces species†When penicillin is contraindicated, tetracyclines are alternative drugs in the treatment of infections caused by the cited microorganisms.†When penicillin is contraindicated, tetracyclines are alternative drugs in the treatment of infections caused by the cited microorganisms.







Susceptibility tests
Susceptibility testing should be performed with tetracycline since it predicts susceptibility to minocycline. However, certain organisms (e.g., some staphylococci, and Acinetobacter ssp.) may be more susceptible to minocycline and doxycycline than to tetracycline.Acinetobacter ssp.) may be more susceptible to minocycline and doxycycline than to tetracycline.






Dilution techniquesQuantitative methods are used to determine antimicrobial minimal inhibitory concentrations (MICs). These MICs provide estimates of the susceptibility of bacteria to antimicrobial compounds. The MICs should be determined using a standardized procedure. Standardized procedures are based on a dilution method1,3  (broth or agar) or equivalent with standardized inoculum concentrations and standardized concentrations of tetracycline powder. The MIC values should be interpreted according to the following criteria: 1,3  (broth or agar) or equivalent with standardized inoculum concentrations and standardized concentrations of tetracycline powder. The MIC values should be interpreted according to the following criteria: 






For testing aerobic gram-negative microorganisms (Enterobacteriaceae), Acinetobacter ssp. and Staphylococcus aureus.Acinetobacter ssp. and 




For testing Haemophilus influenzaea and Streptococcus pneumoniaeb:Haemophilus influenzaea and 




a These interpretative standards are applicable only to broth microdilution susceptibility testing with Haemophilus influenzae using Haemophilus Test Medium. 1a These interpretative standards are applicable only to broth microdilution susceptibility testing with b These interpretative standards are applicable only to broth microdilution susceptibility testing using cation-adjusted Muller-Hinton broth with 2 – 5% lysed horse blood. 1b These interpretative standards are applicable only to broth microdilution susceptibility testing using cation-adjusted Muller-Hinton broth with 2 – 5% lysed horse blood. 








For testing Neisseria gonorrhoeaec.Neisseria gonorrhoeaec.




c These interpretative standards are applicable only to agar dilution susceptibility testing using GC agar base and 1% defined growth supplements. 1c These interpretative standards are applicable only to agar dilution susceptibility testing using GC agar base and 1% defined growth supplements. 








A report of "Susceptible" indicates that the pathogen is likely to be inhibited if the antimicrobial compound in the blood reaches the concentrations usually achievable. A report of "Intermediate" indicates that the result should be considered equivocal, and, if the microorganism is not fully susceptible to alternative, clinically feasible drugs, the test should be repeated. This category implies possible clinical applicability in body sites where the drug is physiologically concentrated or in situations where high dosage of drug can be used. This category also provides a buffer zone which prevents small uncontrolled technical factors from causing major discrepancies in interpretation. A report of "Resistant" indicates that the pathogen is not likely to be inhibited if the antimicrobial compound in the blood reaches the concentrations usually achievable; other therapy should be selected.Standardized susceptibility test procedures require the use of laboratory control microorganisms to control the technical aspects of the laboratory procedures. Standard tetracycline powder should provide the following MIC values:















Diffusion techniquesQuantitative methods that require measurement of zone diameters also provide reproducible estimates of the susceptibility of bacteria to antimicrobial compounds. One such standardized procedure2,3 requires the use of standardized inoculum concentrations. This procedure uses paper disks impregnated with 30µg tetracycline (class disk) or 30µg minocycline to test the susceptibility of microorganisms to minocycline. Reports from the laboratory providing results of the standard single-disk susceptibility test with a 30µg tetracycline or minocycline disk should be interpreted according to the following criteria:2,3 requires the use of standardized inoculum concentrations. This procedure uses paper disks impregnated with 30µg tetracycline (class disk) For testing aerobic gram-negative microorganisms (Enterobacteriaceae) Acinetobacter ssp. and Staphylococcus aureus:Acinetobacter ssp. and 




For testing Haemophilus influenzaed:Haemophilus influenzaed:




d These zone diameter standards are applicable only to susceptibility testing with Haemophilus influenzae using Haemophilus Test Medium and a 30µg tetracycline disk.2d These zone diameter standards are applicable only to susceptibility testing with 








For testing Neisseria gonorrhoeaee:Neisseria gonorrhoeaee:




e These interpretative standards are applicable only to disk diffusion testing using GC agar and 1% growth supplements, and a 30µg tetracycline disk.2e These interpretative standards are applicable only to disk diffusion testing using GC agar and 1% growth supplements, and a 30µg tetracycline disk.








For testing Streptococcus pneumoniaef:Streptococcus pneumoniaef:




f These interpretative standards are applicable only to disk diffusion testing using Muller-Hinton agar adjusted with 5% sheep blood and a 30µg tetracycline disk.2f These interpretative standards are applicable only to disk diffusion testing using Muller-Hinton agar adjusted with 5% sheep blood and a 30µg tetracycline disk.








For testing Vibrio choleraeg:Vibrio choleraeg:




g These interpretative standards are applicable only to disk diffusion testing performed with a 30µg tetracycline disk.2g These interpretative standards are applicable only to disk diffusion testing performed with a 30µg tetracycline disk.








Interpretation should be as stated above for results using dilution techniques. Interpretation involves correlation of the diameter obtained in the disk test with the MIC for tetracycline.As with standardized dilution techniques, diffusion methods require the use of laboratory control microorganisms that are used to control the technical aspects of the laboratory procedures. For the diffusion technique, the 30µg tetracycline or minocycline disk should provide the following zone diameters in these laboratory test quality control strains:


