
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              •Strong CYP2C8 inhibitors (e.g., gemfibrozil) increase pioglitazone concentrations. Limit ACTOPLUS MET dose to 15 mg/850 mg daily. (2.3, 7.1)
                           
                              •CYP2C8 inducers (e.g., rifampin) may decrease pioglitazone concentrations. (7.2)
                           
                              •Cationic drugs: May reduce metformin elimination. Use with caution in patients who are taking cationic medications eliminated by renal tubular secretion. (7.4)
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 Strong CYP2C8 Inhibitors
                     
                        An inhibitor of CYP2C8 (e.g., gemfibrozil) significantly increases the exposure (area under the serum concentration-time curve or AUC) and half-life (t½) of pioglitazone. Therefore, the maximum recommended dose of pioglitazone is 15 mg daily if used in combination with gemfibrozil or other strong CYP2C8 inhibitors [see Dosage and Administration (2.3) and Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 CYP2C8 Inducers
                     
                        An inducer of CYP2C8 (e.g., rifampin) may significantly decrease the exposure (AUC) of pioglitazone. Therefore, if an inducer of CYP2C8 is started or stopped during treatment with pioglitazone, changes in diabetes treatment may be needed based on clinical response without exceeding the maximum recommended daily dose of 45 mg for pioglitazone [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3 Carbonic Anhydrase Inhibitors
                     
                        Topiramate or other carbonic anhydrase inhibitors (e.g., zonisamide, acetazolamide or dichlorphenamide) frequently decrease serum bicarbonate and induce non-anion gap, hyperchloremic metabolic acidosis. Concomitant use of these drugs may induce metabolic acidosis. Use these drugs with caution in patients treated with metformin, as the risk of lactic acidosis may increase.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4 Cationic Drugs
                     
                        Cationic drugs (e.g., amiloride, digoxin, morphine, procainamide, quinidine, quinine, ranitidine, triamterene, trimethoprim, or vancomycin) that are eliminated by renal tubular secretion theoretically have the potential for interaction with metformin by competing for common renal tubular transport systems. Although such interactions remain theoretical (except for cimetidine), careful patient monitoring and dose adjustment of ACTOPLUS MET and/or the interfering drug is recommended in patients who are taking cationic medications that are excreted via the proximal renal tubular secretory system [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.5 Drugs Affecting Glycemic Control
                     
                        Certain drugs tend to produce hyperglycemia and may lead to loss of glycemic control. These drugs include the thiazides and other diuretics, corticosteroids, phenothiazines, thyroid products, estrogens, oral contraceptives, phenytoin, nicotinic acid, sympathomimetics, calcium channel blockers, and isoniazid. When such drugs are administered to a patient receiving ACTOPLUS MET, the patient should be closely observed for loss of blood glucose control. When such drugs are withdrawn from a patient receiving ACTOPLUS MET, the patient should be observed closely for hypoglycemia.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         