
               
               
               
12. CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY

               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
12.1 Mechanism of Action

                     
                        Metformin is a biguanide that improves glucose tolerance in patients with type 2 diabetes, lowering both basal and postprandial plasma glucose. Metformin decreases hepatic glucose production, decreases intestinal absorption of glucose, and improves insulin sensitivity by increasing peripheral glucose uptake and utilization. Metformin does not produce hypoglycemia in patients with type 2 diabetes or in healthy subjects except in special circumstances, (see WARNINGS AND PRECAUTIONS (5)) and does not cause hyperinsulinemia. With metformin therapy, insulin secretion remains unchanged while fasting insulin levels and daylong plasma insulin response may actually decrease.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
12.3 Pharmacokinetics

                     
                        
                           Absorption and Bioavailability
                        
                        Following a single oral dose of 1000 mg (2 x 500 mg tablets) GLUMETZA after a meal, the time to reach maximum plasma metformin concentration (Tmax) is achieved at approximately 7-8 hours. In both single and multiple-dose studies in healthy subjects, once daily 1000 mg (2 x 500 mg tablets) dosing provides equivalent systemic exposure, as measured by area-under-the-curve (AUC), and up to 35% higher Cmax, of metformin relative to the immediate release given as 500 mg twice daily. GLUMETZA tablets must be administered immediately after a meal to maximize therapeutic benefit.
                        Single oral doses of GLUMETZA from 500 mg to 2500 mg resulted in less than proportional increase in both AUC and Cmax. Low-fat and high-fat meals increased the systemic exposure (as measured by AUC) from GLUMETZA tablets by about 38% and 73%, respectively, relative to fasting. Both meals prolonged metformin Tmax by approximately 3 hours but Cmax was not affected.
                        In a two-way, single-dose crossover study in healthy volunteers, the 1000 mg tablet was found to be bioequivalent to two 500 mg tablets under fed conditions based on equivalent Cmax and AUCs for the two formulations.
                        
                           Distribution
                        
                        The apparent volume of distribution (V/F) of metformin following single oral doses of 850 mg immediate release metformin hydrochloride averaged 654 ± 358 L. Metformin is negligibly bound to plasma proteins. Metformin partitions into erythrocytes, most likely as a function of time. At usual clinical doses and dosing schedules of metformin, steady state plasma concentrations of metformin are reached within 24-48 hours and are generally < 1 μg/mL. During controlled clinical trials, which served as the basis of approval for metformin, maximum metformin plasma levels did not exceed 5 μg/mL, even at maximum doses.
                        
                           Metabolism
                        
                        Intravenous single-dose studies in healthy subjects demonstrate that metformin is excreted unchanged in the urine and does not undergo hepatic metabolism (no metabolites have been identified in humans), nor biliary excretion. Metabolism studies with extended-release metformin tablets have not been conducted.
                        
                           Excretion
                        
                        Renal clearance is approximately 3.5 times greater than creatinine clearance, which indicates that tubular secretion is the major route of metformin elimination. Following oral administration, approximately 90% of the absorbed drug is eliminated via the renal route within the first 24 hours, with a plasma elimination half-life of approximately 6.2 hours. In blood, the elimination half-life is approximately 17.6 hours, suggesting that the erythrocyte mass may be a compartment of distribution.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
12.4 Specific Populations

                     
                        
                           Renal Impairment: Following a single dose administration of GLUMETZA 500 mg in patients with mild and moderate renal failure (based on measured creatinine clearance), the oral and renal clearance of metformin were decreased by 33% and 50% and 16% and 53%, respectively (see WARNINGS AND PRECAUTIONS (5)). Metformin peak and systemic exposure was 27% and 61% greater, respectively in mild renal impaired and 74% and 2.36-fold greater in moderate renal impaired patients as compared to healthy subjects. Use of metformin in patients with renal impairment increases the risk for lactic acidosis. GLUMETZA is contraindicated in patients with renal impairment. (See CONTRAINDICATIONS (4) and WARNINGS AND PRECAUTIONS (5.2))
                        
                           Hepatic Impairment: No pharmacokinetic studies of GLUMETZA have been conducted in subjects with hepatic impairment. Use of metformin in patients with hepatic impairment has been associated with some cases of lactic acidosis. GLUMETZA is not recommended in patients with hepatic impairment. (See WARNINGS AND PRECAUTIONS (5.5))
                        
                           Geriatrics: Limited data from controlled pharmacokinetic studies of metformin hydrochloride in healthy elderly subjects suggest that total plasma clearance of metformin is decreased by 35%, the half-life is prolonged by 64% and Cmax is increased by 76%, compared to healthy young subjects. From these data, it appears that the change in metformin pharmacokinetics with aging is primarily accounted for by a change in renal function. Metformin treatment should not be initiated in patients of any age unless measurement of creatinine clearance demonstrates that renal function is normal. (See WARNINGS AND PRECAUTIONS (5) and DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION (2))
                        
                           Gender: In the pharmacokinetic studies in healthy volunteers, there were no important differences between male and female subjects with respect to metformin AUC and t1/2. However, Cmax for metformin was 40% higher in female subjects as compared to males. The gender differences for Cmax are unlikely to be clinically important. Similarly, in controlled clinical studies in patients with type 2 diabetes, the antihyperglycemic effect of metformin hydrochloride tablets was comparable in males and females.
                        
                           Race: There were no definitive conclusions on the differences between the races with respect to the pharmacokinetics of metformin because of the imbalance in the respective sizes of the racial groups. However, the data suggest a trend towards higher metformin Cmax and AUC values for metformin are obtained in Asian subjects when compared to Caucasian, Hispanic and Black subjects. The differences between the Asian and Caucasian groups are unlikely to be clinically important. In controlled clinical studies of metformin hydrochloride in patients with type 2 diabetes, the antihyperglycemic effect was comparable in whites (n = 249), blacks (n = 51) and Hispanics (n = 24).
                        
                           Pediatrics: No pharmacokinetic data from studies of GLUMETZA in pediatric subjects are available.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
12.5 Drug Interactions

                     
                        Specific pharmacokinetic drug interaction studies with GLUMETZA have not been performed except for one with glyburide. However, such studies have been performed on metformin.
                        



