
               
               
               
7. DRUG INTERACTIONS

               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           Cationic drugs: May reduce metformin elimination. Use with caution in patients who are taking cationic medications eliminated by renal tubular secretion. (7.2)
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
7.1 Carbonic Anhydrase Inhibitors

                     
                        Topiramate or other carbonic anhydrase inhibitors (e.g., zonisamide, acetazolamide or dichlorphenamide) frequently decrease serum bicarbonate and induce non-anion gap, hyperchloremic metabolic acidosis. Concomitant use of these drugs may induce metabolic acidosis. Use these drugs with caution in patients treated with metformin, as the risk of lactic acidosis may increase.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
7.2 Cationic Drugs

                     
                        Cationic drugs (e.g., amiloride, digoxin, morphine, procainamide, quinidine, quinine, ranitidine, triamterene, trimethoprim, or vancomycin) that are eliminated by renal tubular secretion theoretically have the potential for interaction with metformin by competing for common renal tubular transport systems. Although such interactions remain theoretical (except for cimetidine), careful patient monitoring and dose adjustment of GLUMETZA and/or the interfering drug is recommended in patients who are taking cationic medications that are excreted via the proximal renal tubular secretory system.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
7.3 Drugs Affecting Glycemic Control

                     
                        Certain drugs tend to produce hyperglycemia and may lead to loss of glycemic control. These drugs include the thiazides and other diuretics, corticosteroids, phenothiazines, thyroid products, estrogens, oral contraceptives, phenytoin, nicotinic acid, sympathomimetics, calcium channel blockers, and isoniazid. When such drugs are administered to a patient receiving GLUMETZA, the patient should be closely observed for loss of blood glucose control. When such drugs are withdrawn from a patient receiving GLUMETZA, the patient should be observed closely for hypoglycemia.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         