
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                            CYP3A4 Inhibitors:  Consider dose reduction of SUTENT when administered with strong CYP3A4 inhibitors. (7.1)
                            CYP3A4 Inducers:  Consider dose increase of SUTENT when administered with CYP3A4 inducers. (7.2)
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1  CYP3A4 Inhibitors
                     
                        Strong CYP3A4 inhibitors such as ketoconazole may increase sunitinib plasma concentrations.  Selection of an alternate concomitant medication with no or minimal enzyme inhibition potential is recommended. Concurrent administration of SUTENT with the strong CYP3A4 inhibitor, ketoconazole, resulted in 49% and 51% increases in the combined (sunitinib + primary active metabolite) Cmax and AUC0–
                           ∞ values, respectively, after a single dose of SUTENT in healthy volunteers. Co-administration of SUTENT with strong inhibitors of the CYP3A4 family (e.g., ketoconazole, itraconazole, clarithromycin, atazanavir, indinavir, nefazodone, nelfinavir, ritonavir, saquinavir, telithromycin, voriconazole) may increase sunitinib concentrations. Grapefruit may also increase plasma concentrations of sunitinib. A dose reduction for SUTENT should be considered when it must be co-administered with strong CYP3A4 inhibitors [see Dosage and Administration (2.2)].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2	CYP3A4 Inducers
                     
                        CYP3A4 inducers such as rifampin may decrease sunitinib plasma concentrations. Selection of an alternate concomitant medication with no or minimal enzyme induction potential is recommended. Concurrent administration of SUTENT with the strong CYP3A4 inducer, rifampin, resulted in a 23% and 46% reduction in the combined (sunitinib + primary active metabolite) Cmax and AUC0–
                           ∞ values, respectively, after a single dose of SUTENT in healthy volunteers. Co-administration of SUTENT with inducers of the CYP3A4 family (e.g., dexamethasone, phenytoin, carbamazepine, rifampin, rifabutin, rifapentin, phenobarbital, St. John's Wort) may decrease sunitinib concentrations. St. John's Wort may decrease sunitinib plasma concentrations unpredictably. Patients receiving SUTENT should not take St. John's Wort concomitantly. A dose increase for SUTENT should be considered when it must be co-administered with CYP3A4 inducers [see Dosage and Administration (2.2)].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3  In Vitro Studies of CYP Inhibition and Induction
                     
                        
                           In vitro studies indicated that sunitinib does not induce or inhibit major CYP enzymes. The in vitro studies in human liver microsomes and hepatocytes of the activity of CYP isoforms CYP1A2, CYP2A6, CYP2B6, CYP2C8, CYP2C9, CYP2C19, CYP2D6, CYP2E1, CYP3A4/5, and CYP4A9/11 indicated that sunitinib and its primary active metabolite are unlikely to have any clinically relevant drug-drug interactions with drugs that may be metabolized by these enzymes.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         