
               
               
               
                  12
		     
	CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1
		     
	Mechanism of Action
                     
                        SIGNIFOR is an injectable cyclohexapeptide somatostatin analogue. Pasireotide exerts its pharmacological activity via binding to somatostatin receptors (SSTRs). Five human somatostatin receptor subtypes are known: SSTR 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5. These receptor subtypes are expressed in different tissues under normal physiological conditions. Corticotroph tumor cells from Cushing’s disease patients frequently over-express SSTR5 whereas the other receptor subtypes are often not expressed or are expressed at lower levels. Pasireotide binds and activates the SSTRs resulting in inhibition of ACTH secretion, which leads to decreased cortisol secretion.
                        The binding affinities of endogenous somatostatin and pasireotide are shown in Table 2. 
                        


                     



                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2
		     
	Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        
                           Glucose Metabolism
                        
                        In a randomized, double-blind mechanism study conducted in healthy volunteers, the development of hyperglycemia with pasireotide at doses of 0.6 mg b.i.d. and 0.9 mg b.i.d. was related to significant decreases in insulin secretion as well as incretin hormones (i.e., glucagon-like peptide-1 [GLP-1] and glucose-dependent insulinotropic polypeptide [GIP]) [see Warnings and Precautions (5.2) and Adverse Reactions (6.1)].
                        
                           Cardiac Electrophysiology
                        
                        QTcI interval was evaluated in a randomized, blinded, crossover study in healthy subjects investigating pasireotide doses of 0.6 mg b.i.d. and 1.95 mg b.i.d. The maximum mean (95% upper confidence bound) placebo-subtracted QTcI change from baseline was 12.7 (14.7) ms and 16.6 (18.6) ms, respectively. Both pasireotide doses decreased heart rate, with a maximum mean (95% lower confidence bound) placebo-subtracted change from baseline of -10.9 (-11.9) beats per minute (bpm) observed at 1.5 hours for pasireotide 0.6 mg bid, and -15.2 (-16.5) bpm at 0.5 hours for pasireotide 1.95 mg b.i.d. The supra-therapeutic dose (1.95 mg b.i.d) produced mean steady-state Cmax values 3.3-fold the mean Cmax for the 0.6 mg b.i.d dose in the study.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3
		     
	Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        In healthy volunteers, pasireotide demonstrates approximately linear pharmacokinetics (PK) for a dose range from 0.0025 to 1.5 mg. In Cushing’s disease patients, pasireotide demonstrates linear dose-exposure relationship in a dose range from 0.3 to 1.2 mg.
                        
                           Absorption and Distribution
                        
                        In healthy volunteers, pasireotide peak plasma concentration is reached within Tmax 0.25-0.5 hour. Cmax and AUC are dose-proportional following administration of single and multiple doses.
                        No studies have been conducted to evaluate the absolute bioavailability of pasireotide in humans. Food effect is unlikely to occur since SIGNIFOR is administered via a parenteral route.
                        In healthy volunteers, pasireotide is widely distributed with large apparent volume of distribution (Vz/F >100 L). Distribution between blood and plasma is concentration independent and shows that pasireotide is primarily located in the plasma (91%). Plasma protein binding is moderate (88%) and independent of concentration.
                        Pasireotide has low passive permeability and is likely to be a substrate of P-gp (P-glycoprotein), but the impact of P-gp on ADME (absorption, distribution, metabolism, excretion) of pasireotide is expected to be low. In clinical testing in healthy volunteers, P-gp inhibition (e.g., verapamil) did not affect the rate or extent of pasireotide availability. Pasireotide is not a substrate of efflux transporter BCRP (breast cancer resistance protein), influx transporter OCT1 (organic cation transporter 1), or influx transporters OATP (organic anion-transporting polypeptide) 1B1, 1B3, or 2B1.
                        
                           Metabolism and Excretion
                        
                        Pasireotide was shown to be metabolically stable in human liver and kidney microsomes systems. In healthy volunteers, pasireotide in its unchanged form is the predominant form found in plasma, urine, and feces. Somatropin may increase CYP450 enzymes and, therefore, suppression of growth hormone secretion by somatostatin analogs including pasireotide may decrease the metabolic clearance of compounds metabolized by CYP450 enzymes.
                        Pasireotide is eliminated mainly via hepatic clearance (biliary excretion) with a small contribution of the renal route. In a human ADME study 55.9 ± 6.63% of the radioactivity dose was recovered over the first 10 days post dosing, including 48.3 ± 8.16% of the radioactivity in feces and 7.63 ± 2.03% in urine. 
                        The clearance (CL/F) of pasireotide in healthy volunteers and Cushing’s disease patients is ~7.6 L/h and ~3.8 L/h, respectively.
                        
                           Steady-state Pharmacokinetics:
                        
                        Following multiple subcutaneous doses, pasireotide demonstrates linear pharmacokinetics in the dose range of 0.05 to 0.6 mg once a day in healthy volunteers, and 0.3 mg to 1.2 mg twice a day in Cushing’s disease patients. Based on the accumulation ratios of AUC, the calculated effective half-life (t1/2,eff) in healthy volunteers was approximately 12 hours (on average between 10 and 13 hours for 0.05, 0.2 and 0.6 mg once a day doses).
                        
                           Specific Populations:
                        
                        Population PK analyses of SIGNIFOR indicate that race, body weight, age, and gender do not have a clinically relevant influence on PK parameters.  No dose adjustment is required for demographics. 
                        
                           Hepatic Impairment
                        
                        In a clinical study in subjects with impaired hepatic function (Child-Pugh A, B and C), subjects with moderate and severe hepatic impairment (Child-Pugh B and C) showed significantly higher exposures than subjects with normal hepatic function. Upon comparison with the control group, AUCinf was increased by 12%, 56% and 42% and Cmax increased by 3%, 46% and 33%, respectively, in the mild, moderate and severe hepatic impairment groups [see Use in Specific Populations (8.6) and Dosage and Administration (2.3)].
                        
                           Pediatric Patients
                        
                        No studies have been performed in pediatric patients [see Use in Specific Populations (8.4)].
                        
                           Geriatric Patients
                        
                        No clinical pharmacology studies have been performed in geriatric patients.
                        
                           Renal Impairment
                        
                        Clinical pharmacology studies have not been performed in patients with impaired renal function. However, renal clearance has a minor contribution to the elimination of pasireotide in humans. Renal function is not expected to significantly impact the circulating levels of pasireotide [see Use in Specific Populations (8.7)].
                        
                           Drug Interaction Studies
                        
                        There was no significant drug interaction between pasireotide and metformin, nateglinide or liraglutide.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         