
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Telithromycin is a ketolide antibacterial drug. [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.4)]
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        The pharmacokinetics of telithromycin after administration of single and multiple (7 days) once daily 800-mg doses to healthy adult subjects are shown in Table 4.
                        


                        


In patients, mean peak and trough plasma concentrations were 2.9 µg/mL (±1.55), (n=219) and 0.2 µg/mL (±0.22), (n=204), respectively, after 3 to 5 days of KETEK 800 mg once daily. Steady-state plasma concentrations are reached within 2 to 3 days of once daily dosing with KETEK 800 mg.
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Absorption
                              
                              Following oral administration, telithromycin reached maximal concentration at about 1 hour (0.5 – 4 hours). KETEK has an absolute bioavailability of 57% in both young and elderly subjects.
                              The rate and extent of absorption are unaffected by food intake, thus KETEK tablets can be given without regard to food.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Distribution
                              
                              Total in vitro protein binding is approximately 60% to 70% and is primarily due to human serum albumin.
                              Protein binding is not modified in elderly subjects or in patients with hepatic impairment.
                              The volume of distribution of telithromycin after intravenous infusion is 2.9 L/kg.
                              Telithromycin concentrations in bronchial mucosa, epithelial lining fluid, and alveolar macrophages after 800 mg once daily dosing for 5 days in patients are displayed in Table 5. 
                              


                           



                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Metabolism
                              
                              In total, approximately 70% of the telithromycin dose is metabolized. In plasma, the main circulating compound after administration of an 800-mg radio-labeled dose was parent compound, representing 56.7% of the total radioactivity. The main metabolite represented 12.6% of the AUC of telithromycin. Three other plasma metabolites were quantified, each representing 3% or less of the AUC of telithromycin.
                              It is estimated that approximately 50% of its metabolism is mediated by CYP 3A4 and the remaining 50% is CYP -independent.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Excretion
                              
                              The systemically available telithromycin is eliminated by multiple pathways as follows: 7% of the dose is excreted unchanged in feces by biliary and/or intestinal secretion; 13% of the dose is excreted unchanged in urine by renal excretion; and 37% of the dose is metabolized by the liver. Following oral dosing, the mean terminal elimination half-life of telithromycin is 10 hours.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Specific Populations
                              
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                          Gender:
                                        There was no significant difference between males and females in mean AUC, Cmax, and elimination half-life in two studies; one in 18 healthy young volunteers (18 to 40 years of age) and the other in 14 healthy elderly volunteers (65 to 92 years of age), given single and multiple once daily doses of 800 mg of KETEK.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Hepatic impairment
                                       : Telithromycin is excreted via the liver and kidney. [see Dosage and Administration (2.2)] 
                                    
                                    In a single-dose study (800 mg) in 12 patients and a multiple-dose study (800 mg) in 13 patients with mild to severe hepatic insufficiency (Child Pugh Class A, B and C), the Cmax, AUC and t1/2 of telithromycin were similar to those obtained in age- and sex-matched healthy subjects. In both studies, an increase in renal elimination was observed in hepatically impaired patients indicating that this pathway may compensate for some of the decrease in metabolic clearance.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Renal impairment
                                       : Telithromycin is excreted via the liver and kidney. [see Dosage and Administration (2.2)] 
                                    
                                    In a multiple-dose study, 36 subjects with varying degrees of renal impairment received 400 mg, 600 mg, or 800 mg KETEK once daily for 5 days.  There was a 1.4-fold increase in Cmax,ss, and a 1.9-fold increase in AUC (0–24)ss at 800 mg multiple doses in the severely renally impaired group (CLCR less than 30 mL/min) compared to healthy volunteers. Renal excretion may serve as a compensatory elimination pathway for telithromycin in situations where metabolic clearance is impaired. Patients with severe renal impairment are prone to conditions that may impair their metabolic clearance.
                                    In a single-dose study in patients with end-stage renal failure on hemodialysis (n=10), the mean Cmax and AUC values were similar to normal healthy subjects when KETEK was administered 2 hours post-dialysis. However, the effect of dialysis on removing telithromycin from the body has not been studied.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Combined Renal and Hepatic Impairment
                                       : The effects of co-administration of ketoconazole in 12 subjects (age 60 years and older), with impaired renal function were studied (CLCR= 24 to 80 mL/min). In this study, when severe renal insufficiency (CLCR less than 30 mL/min, n=2) and concomitant impairment of CYP 3A4 metabolism pathway were present, telithromycin exposure (AUC0–24) was increased by approximately 4- to 5-fold compared with the exposure in healthy subjects with normal renal function receiving telithromycin alone. In the presence of severe renal impairment (CLCR less than 30 mL/min), with coexisting hepatic impairment, a reduced dosage of KETEK is recommended. [see Dosage and Administration (2.2)]
                                    
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Geriatric: Pharmacokinetic data show that there is an increase of 1.4-fold in exposure (AUC) in 20 patients 65 years and older with community acquired pneumonia in a Phase 3 study, and a 2.0-fold increase in exposure (AUC) in 14 subjects 65 years and older as compared with subjects less than 65 years of age in a Phase I study.  No dosage adjustment is required based on age alone. [see Use in Specific Populations (8.5)]
                                    
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Drug Interactions
                              
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       CYP 3A4 inducers
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                       
                                       
                                          
                                             
                                                Rifampin
                                             
                                          
                                          During concomitant administration of rifampin and KETEK in repeated doses, Cmax and AUC of telithromycin were decreased by 79%, and 86%, respectively. [see Drug Interactions (7)]
                                          
                                       
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       CYP 3A4 inhibitors
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                       
                                       
                                          
                                             
                                                Itraconazole:
                                              A multiple-dose interaction study with itraconazole showed that Cmax of telithromycin was increased by 22% and AUC by 54%. [see Drug Interactions (7)]
                                          
                                       
                                       
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                       
                                       
                                          
                                             
                                                Ketoconazole:
                                              A multiple-dose interaction study with ketoconazole showed that Cmax of telithromycin was increased by 51% and AUC by 95%. [see Drug Interactions (7)]
                                          
                                       
                                       
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                       
                                       
                                          
                                             
                                                Grapefruit juice:
                                              When telithromycin was given with 240 mL of grapefruit juice after an overnight fast to healthy subjects, the pharmacokinetics of telithromycin were not affected.
                                       
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       CYP3A4 substrates
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                       
                                       
                                          
                                             Simvastatin: When simvastatin was co-administered with telithromycin, there was a 5.3-fold increase in simvastatin Cmax, an 8.9-fold increase in simvastatin AUC, a 15-fold increase in the simvastatin active metabolite Cmax, and a 12-fold increase in the simvastatin active metabolite AUC.  In another study, when simvastatin and telithromycin were administered 12 hours apart, there was a 3.4-fold increase in simvastatin Cmax, a 4.0-fold increase in simvastatin AUC, a 3.2-fold increase in the active metabolite Cmax, and a 4.3-fold increase in the active metabolite AUC. [see Warnings and Precautions (5.4); Drug Interactions (7)]  
                                          
                                       
                                       
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                       
                                       
                                          
                                             Midazolam: Concomitant administration of telithromycin with intravenous or oral midazolam resulted in 2- and 6-fold increases, respectively, in the AUC of midazolam due to inhibition of CYP 3A4-dependent metabolism of midazolam. [see Drug Interactions (7)]
                                          
                                       
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Other Drugs 
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                       
                                       
                                          
                                             Digoxin
                                          
                                          The plasma peak and trough levels of digoxin were increased by 73% and 21%, respectively, in healthy volunteers when co-administered with KETEK. However, trough plasma concentrations of digoxin (when equilibrium between plasma and tissue concentrations has been achieved) ranged from 0.74 to 2.17 ng/mL. There were no significant changes in ECG parameters and no signs of digoxin toxicity. [see Drug Interactions (7)]
                                          
                                       
                                       
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                       
                                       
                                          
                                             Theophylline
                                          
                                          When theophylline was co-administered with repeated doses of KETEK, there was an increase of approximately 16% and 17% on the steady-state Cmax and AUC of theophylline. [see Drug Interactions (7)]
                                          
                                       
                                       
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                       
                                       
                                          
                                             Sotalol
                                          
                                          KETEK has been shown to decrease the Cmax and AUC of sotalol by 34% and 20%, respectively, due to decreased absorption.
                                       
                                       
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                       
                                       
                                          
                                             Oral Contraceptives
                                          
                                          When oral contraceptives containing ethinyl estradiol and levonorgestrel were co-administered with KETEK, the steady-state AUC of ethinyl estradiol did not change and the steady-state AUC of levonorgestrel was increased by 50%. The pharmacokinetic/pharmacodynamic study showed that telithromycin did not interfere with the antiovulatory effect of oral contraceptives containing ethinyl estradiol and levonorgestrel.
                                       
                                       
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                       
                                       
                                          
                                             Metoprolol
                                          
                                          When metoprolol was co-administered with KETEK, there was an increase of approximately 38% on the Cmax and AUC of metoprolol; however, there was no effect on the elimination half-life of metoprolol. Telithromycin exposure is not modified with concomitant single-dose administration of metoprolol. [see Drug Interactions (7)]
                                          
                                       
                                       
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                       
                                       
                                          
                                             Ranitidine/Antacid
                                          
                                          There was no clinically relevant pharmacokinetic interaction of ranitidine or antacids containing aluminum and magnesium hydroxide on telithromycin.
                                       
                                       
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                       
                                       
                                          
                                             Paroxetine
                                          
                                          There was no pharmacokinetic effect on paroxetine when KETEK was co-administered.
                                       
                                       
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                       
                                       
                                          
                                             Cisapride
                                          
                                          Steady state peak plasma concentrations of cisapride (an agent with the potential to increase QT interval) were increased by 95% when c0-administered with repeated doses of telithromycin, resulting in significant increases in QTc. [see Contraindications (4.4)]
                                          
                                       
                                       
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                       
                                       
                                          
                                             OATP1B1 and OATP1B3
                                          
                                          In vitro studies using a model compound have shown that telithromycin may act as an inhibitor for the hepatic uptake transporters OATP1B1 and OATP1B3. Although the clinical relevance of this finding is unknown, it is possible that concomitant administration of KETEK with drugs that are substrates of OATP family members could result in increased plasma concentrations of the co-administered drug.
                                       
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.4    Microbiology
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Mechanism of Action
                              
                              Telithromycin belongs to the ketolide class of antibacterials and is structurally related to the macrolides. Telithromycin blocks protein synthesis by binding to domains II and V of 23S rRNA of the 50S ribosomal subunit. Telithromycin may also inhibit the assembly of nascent ribosomal units.
                              Telithromycin concentrates in phagocytes where it exhibits activity against intracellular respiratory pathogens. In vitro, telithromycin has been shown to demonstrate concentration-dependent bactericidal activity against isolates of Streptococcus pneumoniae (including multi-drug resistant isolates [MDRSPMDRSP=Multi-drug resistant Streptococcus pneumoniae includes isolates known as PRSP (penicillin-resistant Streptococcus pneumoniae), and are isolates resistant to two or more of the following antimicrobials: penicillin, 2nd generation cephalosporins (e.g., cefuroxime), macrolides, tetracyclines, and trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole.]).
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Mechanism of Resistance
                              
                              Production of Erm dimethyltransferases may cause telithromycin resistance in some Gram-positive bacteria.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 List of Microorganisms
                              
                              Telithromycin has been shown to be active against most strains of the following microorganisms, both in vitro and in clinical settings [see Indications and Usage (1)].
                              
                              
                                 
                                     
                                    Gram-positive bacteria
                                    

                                    Streptococcus pneumoniae (including MDRSP)
                              
                              
                                 
                                     
                                    Gram-negative bacteria
                                    

                                    Haemophilus influenzae
Moraxella catarrhalis
                                 
                              
                              
                                 
                                     
                                    Other microorganisms
                                    

                                    Chlamydophila pneumoniae
Mycoplasma pneumoniae
                                 
                              
                              The following in vitro data are available, but their clinical significance is unknown.
                              At least 90% of the following microorganisms exhibit in vitro minimum inhibitory concentrations (MICs) less than or equal to the susceptible breakpoint for telithromycin. However, the safety and efficacy of KETEK in treating clinical infections due to these microorganisms have not been established in adequate and well-controlled clinical trials.
                              
                                 
                                     
                                    Gram-positive bacteria
                                    

                                    Staphylococcus aureus (methicillin and erythromycin susceptible isolates only)

                                    Streptococcus pyogenes (erythromycin susceptible isolates only)
Beta-hemolytic streptococci (Lancefield groups C and G)
                              
                              
                                 
                                     
                                    Other microorganisms
                                    

                                    Legionella pneumophila
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Susceptibility Test Methods
                              
                              When available, the clinical microbiology laboratory should provide cumulative results of in vitro susceptibility test results for antimicrobial drugs used in local hospitals and practice areas to the physician as periodic reports that describe the susceptibility profile of nosocomial and community-acquired pathogens.  These reports should aid the physician in selecting the most effective antimicrobial.
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Dilution techniques
                                    
                                    Quantitative methods are used to determine antimicrobial minimum inhibitory concentrations (MICs). These MICs provide estimates of the susceptibility of bacteria to antibacterial compounds. The MICs should be determined using a standardized procedure. Standardized procedures are based on dilution methods (broth or agar dilution)1,3 or equivalent with standardized inoculum and  concentrations of telithromycin powder. The MIC values should be interpreted according to criteria provided in Table 6.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Diffusion techniques
                                    
                                    Quantitative methods that require measurement of zone diameters also provide reproducible estimates of the susceptibility of bacteria to antibacterials. One such standardized procedure2,3 requires the use of standardized inoculum concentrations. This procedure uses paper disks impregnated with 15 µg telithromycin to test the susceptibility of microorganisms to telithromycin. Disc diffusion zone sizes should be interpreted according to criteria in Table 6.
                                    


                                    


A report of "Susceptible" indicates that the antimicrobial is likely to inhibit growth of the pathogen if the antibacterial compound in the blood reaches the concentrations usually achievable. A report of "Intermediate" indicates that the result should be considered equivocal, and, if the microorganism is not fully susceptible to alternative, clinically feasible drugs, the test should be repeated. This category implies possible clinical applicability in body sites where the drug is physiologically concentrated or in situations where high dosage of drug can be used. This category also provides a buffer zone that prevents small uncontrolled technical factors from causing major discrepancies in interpretation. A report of "Resistant" indicates that the antimicrobial is not likely to inhibit growth of the pathogen if the antimicrobial compound in the blood reaches the concentrations usually achievable; other therapy should be selected.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Quality control
                                    
                                    Standardized susceptibility test procedures require the use of quality control microorganisms to determine the performance of the test procedures1,2,3. Standard telithromycin powder should provide the MIC ranges for the quality control organisms in Table 7. For the disk diffusion technique, the 15-μg telithromycin disk should provide the zone diameter ranges for the quality control organisms in Table 7.
                                    


