
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Human BNP (hBNP) is secreted by the ventricular myocardium in response to stretch and exists in several isoforms in the human body. Elevated levels of BNP have been associated with advanced heart failure and are considered to be a compensatory mechanism in this disease. Human BNP binds to the particulate guanylate cyclase receptor of vascular smooth muscle and endothelial cells, leading to increased intracellular concentrations of guanosine 3'5'-cyclic monophosphate (cGMP) and smooth muscle cell relaxation. Cyclic GMP serves as a second messenger to dilate veins and arteries. Nesiritide has been shown to relax isolated human arterial and venous tissue preparations that were precontracted with either endothelin-1 or the alpha-adrenergic agonist, phenylephrine.
                        In animals, nesiritide had no effects on cardiac contractility or on measures of cardiac electrophysiology such as atrial and ventricular effective refractory times or atrioventricular node conduction.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        With a dosing regimen of NATRECOR® of 2 mcg/kg IV bolus followed by an intravenous infusion dose of 0.01 mcg/kg/min, Table 4 and Figure 3 summarize the changes in the VMAC trial in PCWP and other measures during the first 3 hours.
                        


                        



                           Figure 3:	PCWP through 3 Hours in VMAC
                        
                        
                        With this dosing regimen, 60% of the 3-hour effect on PCWP reduction is achieved within 15 minutes after the bolus, reaching 95% of the 3-hour effect within 1 hour. Approximately 70% of the 3-hour effect on SBP reduction is reached within 15 minutes. The pharmacodynamic (PD) half-life of the onset and offset of the hemodynamic effect of NATRECOR® is longer than what the PK half-life of 18 minutes would predict. Longer infusions may exaggerate the discrepancy from onset and offset effects. For example, in patients who developed symptomatic hypotension in the VMAC (Vasodilation in the Management of Acute Congestive Heart Failure) trial, half of the recovery of SBP toward the baseline value after discontinuation or reduction of the dose of NATRECOR® was observed in about 60 minutes. When higher doses of NATRECOR® were infused, the duration of hypotension was sometimes several hours.
                        No rebound increase to levels above baseline state was observed. There was also no evidence of tachyphylaxis to the hemodynamic effects of NATRECOR® in the clinical trials.
                        In the VMAC trial, in which the use of diuretics was not restricted, the mean change in volume status (output minus input) during the first 24 hours in the nitroglycerin and NATRECOR® groups was similar: 1279 ± 1455 mL and 1257 ± 1657 mL, respectively.
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           Figure 3
                           
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Distribution
                              In patients with heart failure (HF), NATRECOR® administered intravenously by infusion or bolus exhibits biphasic disposition from the plasma. The mean terminal elimination half-life (t1/2) of nesiritide is approximately 18 minutes and was associated with approximately 2/3 of the area-under-the-curve (AUC). The mean initial elimination phase was estimated to be approximately 2 minutes. In these patients, the mean volume of distribution of the central compartment (Vc) of nesiritide was estimated to be 0.073 L/kg, the mean steady-state volume of distribution (Vss) was 0.19 L/kg, and the mean clearance (CL) was approximately 9.2 mL/min/kg. At steady state, plasma BNP levels increase from baseline endogenous levels by approximately 3-fold to 6-fold with NATRECOR® infusion doses ranging from 0.01 to 0.03 mcg/kg/min.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Metabolism and Excretion
                              The mechanism of elimination of nesiritide has not been studied specifically in humans.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Special Populations
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Renal Impairment
                                    
                                    Clinical data suggest that dose adjustment is not required in patients with renal impairment. The effects of nesiritide on PCWP, cardiac index (CI), and systolic blood pressure (SBP) were not significantly different in patients with chronic renal impairment (baseline serum creatinine ranging from 2 mg/dL to 4.3 mg/dL), and patients with normal renal function.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Body Weight
                                    
                                    The population pharmacokinetic (PK) analyses carried out to determine the effects of demographics and clinical variables on PK parameters showed that clearance of nesiritide is proportional to body weight, supporting the administration of weight-adjusted dosing of nesiritide (i.e., administration on a mcg/kg/min basis).
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Age, Gender, Race/Ethnicity
                                    
                                    Nesiritide clearance was not influenced significantly by age, gender, or race/ethnicity.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Severity of HF
                                    
                                    Nesiritide clearance was not influenced significantly by baseline endogenous hBNP concentration, severity of HF (as indicated by baseline PCWP, baseline CI, or New York Heart Association [NYHA] classification).
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Effects of Concomitant Medications
                              The co-administration of NATRECOR® with enalapril did not have significant effects on the PK of NATRECOR®. The PK effect of co-administration of NATRECOR® with other IV vasodilators such as nitroglycerin, nitroprusside, milrinone, or IV ACE inhibitors has not been evaluated. During clinical studies, NATRECOR® was administered concomitantly with other medications, including: diuretics, digoxin, oral ACE inhibitors, anticoagulants, oral nitrates, statins, class III antiarrhythmic agents, beta-blockers, dobutamine, calcium channel blockers, angiotensin II receptor antagonists, and dopamine. Although no PK interactions were specifically assessed, there did not appear to be evidence suggesting any clinically significant PK interaction.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         