
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS

               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              Erythromycin: Combination increases pitavastatin exposure. Limit LIVALO to 1 mg once daily (2.3, 7.2)

                           
                              Rifampin: Combination increases pitavastatin exposure. Limit LIVALO to 2 mg once daily (2.4, 7.3)

                           
                              Concomitant lipid-lowering therapies: Use with fibrates or lipid-modifying doses (≥1 g/day) of niacin increases the risk of adverse skeletal muscle effects. Caution should be used when prescribing with LIVALO.  (5.1, 7.4, 7.5)

                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 Cyclosporine

                     
                        Cyclosporine significantly increased pitavastatin exposure. Co-administration of cyclosporine with LIVALO is contraindicated [see Contraindications (4) and Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 Erythromycin

                     
                        Erythromycin significantly increased pitavastatin exposure. In patients taking erythromycin, a dose of LIVALO 1 mg once daily should not be exceeded [see Dosage and Administration (2.3) and Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].

                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3 Rifampin

                     
                        Rifampin significantly increased pitavastatin exposure.  In patients taking rifampin, a dose of LIVALO 2 mg once daily should not be exceeded [see Dosage and Administration (2.4) and Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4 Gemfibrozil

                     
                        Due to an increased risk of myopathy/rhabdomyolysis when HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors are coadministered with gemfibrozil, concomitant administration of LIVALO with gemfibrozil should be avoided.

                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.5 Other Fibrates

                     
                        Because it is known that the risk of myopathy during treatment with HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors is increased with concurrent administration of other fibrates, LIVALO should be administered with caution when used concomitantly with  other fibrates [see Warnings and Precautions (5.1), and Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].

                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.6 Niacin

                     
                        The risk of skeletal muscle effects may be enhanced when LIVALO is used in combination with niacin; a reduction in LIVALO dosage should be considered in this setting [see Warnings and Precautions (5.1)].
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.7 Colchicine

                     
                        Cases of myopathy, including rhabdomyolysis, have been reported with HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors coadministered with colchicine, and caution should be exercised when prescribing LIVALO with colchicine.

                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.8 Warfarin

                     
                        LIVALO had no significant pharmacokinetic interaction with R- and S- warfarin. LIVALO had no significant effect on prothrombin time (PT) and international normalized ratio (INR) when administered to patients receiving chronic warfarin treatment [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].  However, patients receiving warfarin should have their PT and INR monitored when pitavastatin is added to their therapy.

                     
                     
                  
               
            
         