
               
               
               
                  CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           Pharmacokinetics
                        
                     
                     
                        The pharmacokinetics of gemifloxacin are approximately linear over the dose range from 40 mg to 640 mg. There was minimal accumulation of gemifloxacin following multiple oral doses up to 640 mg a day for 7 days (mean accumulation <20%). Following repeat oral administration of 320 mg gemifloxacin once daily, steady-state is achieved by the third day of dosing.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           Absorption and Bioavailability
                        
                     
                     
                        Gemifloxacin, given as an oral tablet, is rapidly absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract. Peak plasma concentrations of gemifloxacin were observed between 0.5 and 2 hours following oral tablet administration and the absolute bioavailability of the 320 mg tablet averaged approximately 71% (95% CI 60%-84%). Following repeat oral doses of 320 mg to healthy subjects, the mean ± SD maximal gemifloxacin plasma concentrations (Cmax) and systemic drug exposure (AUC (0-24)) were 1.61 ± 0.51 μg/mL (range 0.70-2.62 μg/mL) and 9.93 ± 3.07 μg•hr/mL (range 4.71-20.1 μg•hr/mL), respectively. In patients with respiratory and urinary tract infections (n=1423), similar estimates of systemic drug exposure were determined using a population pharmacokinetics analysis (geometric mean AUC (0-24), 8.36 μg•hr/mL; range 3.2 – 47.7 μg•hr/mL).
                        The pharmacokinetics of gemifloxacin were not significantly altered when a 320 mg dose was administered with a high-fat meal. Therefore FACTIVE tablets may be administered without regard to meals.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           Distribution
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           In vitro binding of gemifloxacin to plasma proteins in healthy subjects is approximately 60 to 70% and is concentration independent. After repeated doses, the in vivo plasma protein binding in healthy elderly and young subjects ranged from 55% to 73% and was unaffected by age. Renal impairment does not significantly affect the protein binding of gemifloxacin. The blood-to-plasma concentration ratio of gemifloxacin was 1.2:1. The geometric mean for Vdss/F is 4.18 L/kg (range, 1.66 – 12.12 L/kg).
                        Gemifloxacin is widely distributed throughout the body after oral administration. Concentrations of gemifloxacin in bronchoalveolar lavage fluid exceed those in the plasma. Gemifloxacin penetrates well into lung tissue and fluids. After five daily doses of 320 mg gemifloxacin, concentrations in plasma, bronchoalveolar macrophages, epithelial lining fluid and bronchial mucosa at approximately 2 hours were as in Table 1.

                           

                           Table 1.  Gemifloxacin Concentrations in Plasma and Tissues (320 mg Oral Dosing)
                        
                        


                        



                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           Metabolism
                        
                     
                     
                        Gemifloxacin is metabolized to a limited extent by the liver. The unchanged compound is the predominant drug-related component detected in plasma (approximately 65%) up to 4 hours after dosing. All metabolites formed are minor (<10% of the administered oral dose); the principal ones are N-acetyl gemifloxacin, the E-isomer of gemifloxacin and the carbamyl glucuronide of gemifloxacin. Cytochrome P450 enzymes do not play an important role in gemifloxacin metabolism, and the metabolic activity of these enzymes is not significantly inhibited by gemifloxacin.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           Excretion
                        
                     
                     
                        Gemifloxacin and its metabolites are excreted via dual routes of excretion. Following oral administration of gemifloxacin to healthy subjects, a mean (± SD) of 61 ± 9.5% of the dose was excreted in the feces and 36 ± 9.3% in the urine as unchanged drug and metabolites. The mean (± SD) renal clearance following repeat doses of 320 mg was approximately 11.6 ± 3.9 L/hr (range 4.6-17.6 L/hr), which indicates active secretion is involved in the renal excretion of gemifloxacin. The mean (± SD) plasma elimination half-life at steady state following 320 mg to healthy subjects was approximately 7 ± 2 hours (range 4-12 hours).
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           Special Populations
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           Pediatric: The pharmacokinetics of gemifloxacin in pediatric subjects have not been studied.
                        
                           Geriatric: In adult subjects, the pharmacokinetics of gemifloxacin are not affected by age.
                        
                           Gender: There are no significant differences between gemifloxacin pharmacokinetics in males and females when differences in body weight are taken into account. Population pharmacokinetic studies indicated that following administration of 320 mg gemifloxacin, AUC values were approximately 10% higher in healthy female patients compared to males. Males and females had mean AUC values of 7.98 μg•hr/mL (range, 3.21 – 42.71 μg•hr/mL) and 8.80 μg•hr/mL (range, 3.33 – 47.73 μg•hr/mL), respectively. No gemifloxacin dosage adjustment based on gender is necessary.
                        
                           Hepatic Insufficiency: The pharmacokinetics following a single 320 mg dose of gemifloxacin were studied in patients with mild (Child-Pugh Class A) to moderate (Child-Pugh Class B) liver disease. There was a mean increase in AUC (0-inf) of 34% and a mean increase in Cmax of 25% in these patients with hepatic impairment compared to healthy volunteers.
                        The pharmacokinetics of a single 320 mg dose of gemifloxacin were also studied in patients with severe hepatic impairment (Child-Pugh Class C). There was a mean increase in AUC (0-inf) of 45% and a mean increase in Cmax of 41% in these subjects with hepatic impairment compared to healthy volunteers.
                        These average pharmacokinetic increases are not considered to be clinically significant. There was no significant change in plasma elimination half-life in the mild, moderate or severe hepatic impairment patients. No dosage adjustment is recommended in patients with mild (Child-Pugh Class A), moderate (Child-Pugh Class B) or severe (Child-Pugh Class C) hepatic impairment. (See 
                              DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION
                           .)
                        
                           Renal Insufficiency: Results from population pharmacokinetic and clinical pharmacology studies with repeated 320 mg doses indicate the clearance of gemifloxacin is reduced and the plasma elimination is prolonged, leading to an average increase in AUC values of approximately 70% in patients with renal insufficiency. In the pharmacokinetic studies, gemifloxacin Cmax was not significantly altered in subjects with renal insufficiency. Dose adjustment in patients with creatinine clearance >40 mL/min is not required. Modification of the dosage is recommended for patients with creatinine clearance ≤40 mL/min. (See 
                              DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION
                           
                           .)
                        Hemodialysis removes approximately 20 to 30% of an oral dose of gemifloxacin from plasma.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           Photosensitivity Potential
                        
                     
                     
                        In a study of the skin response to ultraviolet and visible radiation conducted in 40 healthy volunteers, the minimum erythematous dose (MED) was assessed following administration of either gemifloxacin 160 mg once daily, gemifloxacin 320 mg once daily, ciprofloxacin 500 mg BID, or placebo for 7 days. At 5 of the 6 wavelengths tested (295-430 nm), the photosensitivity potential of gemifloxacin was not statistically different from placebo. At 365 nm (UVA region), gemifloxacin showed a photosensitivity potential similar to that of ciprofloxacin 500 mg BID and the photosensitivity potential for both drugs were statistically greater than that of placebo. Photosensitivity reactions were reported rarely in clinical trials with gemifloxacin (0.039%). (See 
                              ADVERSE REACTIONS
                           
                           .)
                        It is difficult to ascribe relative photosensitivity/phototoxicity among various fluoroquinolones during actual patient use because other factors play a role in determining a subject’s susceptibility to this adverse event such as: a patient’s skin pigmentation, frequency and duration of sun and artificial ultraviolet light (UV) exposure, wearing of sun screen and protective clothing, the use of other concomitant drugs and the dosage and duration of fluoroquinolone therapy. (See 
                              ADVERSE REACTIONS
                            and 
                              ADVERSE REACTIONS/Post-Marketing Adverse Reactions
                           
                           .)
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           Drug-Drug Interactions
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           Antacids/Di- and Trivalent Cations: The systemic availability of gemifloxacin is significantly reduced when an aluminum- and magnesium- containing antacid is concomitantly administered (AUC decreased 85%; Cmax decreased 87%). Administration of an aluminum- and magnesium- containing antacid or ferrous sulfate (325 mg) at 3 hours before or at 2 hours after gemifloxacin did not significantly alter the systemic availability of gemifloxacin. Therefore, aluminum- and/or magnesium- containing antacids, ferrous sulfate (iron), multivitamin preparations containing zinc or other metal cations, or Videx® (didanosine) chewable/buffered tablets or the pediatric powder for oral solution should not be taken within 3 hours before or 2 hours after taking FACTIVE tablets.
                        Calcium carbonate (1000 mg) given either 2 hr before or 2 hr after gemifloxacin administration showed no notable reduction in gemifloxacin systemic availability. Calcium carbonate administered simultaneously with gemifloxacin resulted in a small, not clinically significant, decrease in gemifloxacin exposure [AUC (0-inf) decreased 21% and Cmax decreased].
                        
                           Sucralfate: When sucralfate (2 g) was administered 3 hours prior to gemifloxacin, the oral bioavailability of gemifloxacin was significantly reduced (53% decrease in AUC; 69% decrease in Cmax). When sucralfate (2 g) was administered 2 hours after gemifloxacin, the oral bioavailability of gemifloxacin was not significantly affected; therefore FACTIVE should be taken at least 2 hours before sucralfate. (See 
                              PRECAUTIONS
                           
                           .)
                        
                           
                              In Vitro 
                           
                           Metabolism: Results of in vitro inhibition studies indicate that hepatic cytochrome P450 (CYP450) enzymes do not play an important role in gemifloxacin metabolism. Therefore gemifloxacin should not cause significant in vivo pharmacokinetic interactions with other drugs that are metabolized by CYP450 enzymes.
                        
                           Theophylline: Gemifloxacin 320 mg at steady-state did not affect the repeat dose pharmacokinetics of theophylline (300 to 400 mg BID to healthy male subjects).
                        
                           Digoxin: Gemifloxacin 320 mg at steady-state did not affect the repeat dose pharmacokinetics of digoxin (0.25 mg once daily to healthy elderly subjects).
                        
                           Oral Contraceptives: The effect of an oral estrogen/progesterone contraceptive product (once daily for 21 days) on the pharmacokinetics of gemifloxacin (320 mg once daily for 6 days) in healthy female subjects indicates that concomitant administration caused an average reduction in gemifloxacin AUC and Cmax of 19% and 12%. These changes are not considered clinically significant. Gemifloxacin 320 mg at steady-state did not affect the repeat dose pharmacokinetics of an ethinylestradiol/levonorgestrol oral contraceptive product (30 μg/150 μg once daily for 21 days to healthy female subjects).
                        
                           Cimetidine: Co-administration of a single dose of 320 mg gemifloxacin with cimetidine 400 mg four times daily for 7 days resulted in slight average increases in gemifloxacin AUC(0-inf) and Cmax of 10% and 6%, respectively. These increases are not considered clinically significant.
                        
                           Omeprazole: Co-administration of a single dose of 320 mg gemifloxacin with omeprazole 40 mg once daily for 4 days resulted in slight average increases in gemifloxacin AUC(0-inf) and Cmax of 10% and 11%, respectively. These increases are not considered clinically significant.
                        
                           Warfarin: Administration of repeated doses of gemifloxacin (320 mg once daily for 7 days) to healthy subjects on stable warfarin therapy had no significant effect on warfarin-induced anticoagulant activity (i.e., International Normalized Ratios for Prothrombin Time). (See 
                              PRECAUTIONS: Drug Interactions
                           
                           .)
                        
                           Probenecid: Administration of a single dose of 320 mg gemifloxacin to healthy subjects who also received repeat doses of probenecid (total dose = 4.5 g) reduced the mean renal clearance of gemifloxacin by approximately 50%, resulting in a mean increase of 45% in gemifloxacin AUC (0-inf) and a prolongation of mean half-life by 1.6 hours. Mean gemifloxacin Cmax increased 8%.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         