
               
               
               
                  12  CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY

               
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        12.1  Mechanism of Action
                     
                     
                        Doxycycline is an antimicrobial drug [see Microbiology (12.4)].
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        12.3  Pharmacokinetics
                     
                     
                        Doxycycline is virtually completely absorbed after oral administration. Following single and multiple-dose administration of doxycycline hyclate delayed-release tablets, 200 mg to adult volunteers, average peak plasma doxycycline concentration (Cmax) was 4.6 mcg/mL and 6.3 mcg/mL, respectively with median tmax of 3 hours; the corresponding mean plasma concentration values 24 hours after single and multiple doses were 1.5 mcg/mL and 2.3 mcg/mL, respectively. The mean Cmax and AUC 0-∞ of doxycycline are 24% and 13% lower, respectively, following single dose administration of doxycycline hyclate delayed-release tablets, 100 mg with a high fat meal (including milk) compared to fasted conditions. The mean Cmax of doxycycline is 19% lower and the AUC 0-∞ is unchanged following single dose administration of doxycycline hyclate delayed-release tablets, 150 mg with a high fat meal (including milk) compared to fasted conditions. The clinical significance of these decreases is unknown. Doxycycline bioavailability from doxycycline hyclate delayed-release tablets, 200 mg was not affected by food, but the incidence of nausea was higher in fasted subjects. The 200 mg dose may be administered without regard to meals.
                        When doxycycline hyclate delayed-release tablets are sprinkled over applesauce and taken with or without water, the extent of doxycycline absorption is unchanged, but the rate of absorption is increased slightly.
                        Tetracyclines are concentrated in bile by the liver and excreted in the urine and feces at high concentrations and in a biologically active form. Excretion of doxycycline by the kidney is about 40%/72 hours in individuals with a creatinine clearance of about 75 mL/min. This percentage may fall as low as 1 to 5%/72 hours in individuals with a creatinine clearance below 10 mL/min.
                        Studies have shown no significant difference in the serum half-life of doxycycline (range 18 to 22 hours) in individuals with normal and severely impaired renal function. Hemodialysis does not alter the serum half-life.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        12.4  Microbiology 
                     
                     
                        Mechanism of Action 
Doxycycline inhibits bacterial protein synthesis by binding to the 30S ribosomal subunit. Doxycycline has bacteriostatic activity against a broad range of Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria. Cross-resistance between tetracyclines is common. 
                        Doxycycline has been shown to be active against most isolates of the following bacteria, both in vitro and in clinical infections as described in the INDICATIONS AND USAGE section of the prescribing information for doxycycline hyclate delayed-release tablets. 
                        
                           Gram-Negative Bacteria

                           
                           Acinetobacter species

                           Bartonella bacilliformis

                           
                           Brucella species

                           Calymmatobacterium granulomatis

                           
                           Campylobacter fetus 

                           
                           Enterobacter aerogenes

                           
                           Escherichia coli

                           
                           Francisella tularensis

                           
                           Haemophilus ducreyi

                           
                           Haemophilus influenzae

                           
                           Klebsiella species

                           Neisseria gonorrhoeae

                           
                           Shigella species

                           Vibrio Cholerae

                           
                           Yersinia pestis
                        
                        
                           Gram-Positive Bacteria

                           
                           Bacillus anthracis

                           
                           Streptococcus pneumoniae
                        
                        
                           Anerobic Bacteria

                           
                           Clostridium species

                           Fusobacterium fusiforme

                           
                           Propionibacterium acnes
                        
                        
                           Other Bacteria
                              

                           
                           Actinomyces species

                           Borrelia recurrentis

                           
                           Chlamydophila psittaci

                           
                           Chlamydia trachomatis

                           
                           Mycoplasma pneumoniae

                           Rickettsiae

                           Treponema pallidum

                           
                           Treponema pertenue

                           
                           Ureaplasma urealyticum
                        
                        
                           Parasites

                           
                           Balantidium coli

                           
                           Entamoeba species

                           Plasmodium falciparum*
                        
                        *Doxycycline has been found to be active against the asexual erythrocytic forms of Plasmodium falciparum but not against the gametocytes of P. falciparum. The precise mechanism of action of the drug is not known. 
                        
                           Susceptibility Test Methods 

                           When available, the clinical microbiology laboratory should provide the results of in vitro susceptibility test results for antimicrobial drugs used in resident hospitals to the physician as periodic reports that describe the susceptibility profile of nosocomial and community-acquired pathogens. These reports should aid the physician in selecting the most effective antimicrobial.
                        
                           Dilution Techniques 

                           Quantitative methods are used to determine antimicrobial minimum inhibitory concentrations (MICs). These MICs provide estimates of the susceptibility of bacteria to antimicrobial compounds. The MICs should be determined using a standardized test method (broth and/or agar)5,6,8 .The MIC values should be interpreted according to the criteria provided in Table 2. 
                        
                           Diffusion Techniques 

                           Quantitative methods that require measurement of zone diameters can also provide reproducible estimates of the susceptibility of bacteria to antimicrobial compounds. Zone size provides an estimate of the susceptibility of bacteria to antimicrobial compounds. The zone size should be determined using a standard test method5,7,8. This procedure uses paper disks impregnated with 30 mcg doxycycline to test the susceptibility of bacteria to doxycycline. The disk diffusion interpretive criteria are provided in Table 2. 
                        
                           Anaerobic Techniques 

                           For anaerobic bacteria, the susceptibility to doxycycline can be determined by a standardized test method9. The MIC values obtained should be interpreted according to the criteria provided in Table 2.
                        


                        


A report of Susceptible (S) indicates that the antimicrobial is likely to inhibit growth of the pathogen if the antimicrobial compound reaches the concentrations at the infection site necessary to inhibit growth of the pathogen. A report of Intermediate (I) indicates that the result should be considered equivocal, and, if the bacteria is not fully susceptible to alternative, clinically feasible drugs, the test should be repeated. This category implies possible clinical applicability in body sites where the drug is physiologically concentrated or in situations where high dosage of drug can be used. This category also provides a buffer zone that prevents small uncontrolled technical factors from causing major discrepancies in interpretation. A report of Resistant (R) indicates that the antimicrobial is not likely to be inhibited growth of the pathogen if the antimicrobial compound reaches the concentrations usually achievable at the infection site; other therapy should be selected. 
                        
                           Quality Control 

                           Standardized susceptibility test procedures require the use of laboratory controls to monitor and ensure the accuracy and precision of the supplies and reagents used in the assay, and the techniques of the individuals performing the test.5,6,7,8,9,10,11 Standard doxycycline and tetracycline powders should provide the following range of MIC values noted in Table 3 . For the diffusion technique using the 30 mcg doxycycline disk the criteria noted in Table 3 should be achieved.
                        


                        




                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                              To reduce the development of drug-resistant bacteria and maintain the effectiveness of doxycycline hyclate and other antibacterial drugs, doxycycline hyclate delayed-release tablets, USP should be used only to treat or prevent infections that are proven or strongly suspected to be caused by bacteria. (1)
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         