
               
               
               
                  7  DRUG INTERACTIONS

               
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                            Patients who are on anticoagulant therapy may require downward adjustment of their anticoagulant dosage. (7.1)
                            Avoid coadministration of tetracyclines with penicillin. (7.2)
                            Absorption of tetracyclines is impaired by antacids containing aluminum, calcium, or magnesium, bismuth subsalicylate and iron-containing preparations. (7.3)
                            Concurrent use of tetracycline may render oral contraceptives less effective. (7.4)
                            Barbiturates, carbamazepine and phenytoin decrease the half-life of doxycycline. (7.5)
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        7.1 Anticoagulant Drugs 

                     
                     
                        Because tetracyclines have been shown to depress plasma prothrombin activity, patients who are on anticoagulant therapy may require downward adjustment of their anticoagulant dosage.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        7.2 Penicillin

                     
                     
                        Since bacteriostatic drugs may interfere with the bactericidal action of penicillin, it is advisable to avoid giving tetracyclines in conjunction with penicillin.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        7.3 Antacids and Iron Preparations

                     
                     
                        Absorption of tetracyclines is impaired by antacids containing aluminum, calcium, or magnesium, bismuth subsalicylate, and iron-containing preparations.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        7.4 Oral Contraceptives

                     
                     
                        Concurrent use of tetracycline may render oral contraceptives less effective.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        7.5 Barbiturates and Anti-epileptics 
                     
                     
                        Barbiturates, carbamazepine, and phenytoin decrease the half-life of doxycycline.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        7.6 Penthrane 

                     
                     
                        The concurrent use of tetracycline and Penthrane®* (methoxyflurane) has been reported to result in fatal renal toxicity.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        7.7 Drug/Laboratory Test Interactions 

                     
                     
                        False elevations of urinary catecholamines may occur due to interference with the fluorescence test.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         