
               
               
               12	CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1	Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Siltuximab binds human IL-6 and prevents the binding of IL-6 to both soluble and membrane-bound IL-6 receptors. IL-6 has been shown to be involved in diverse normal physiologic processes such as induction of immunoglobulin secretion. Overproduction of IL-6 has been linked to systemic manifestations in patients with MCD.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2	Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        Cardiac Electrophysiology: The effect of multiple doses of SYLVANT (15 mg/kg every 3 weeks for 4 cycles) on the QTc interval was evaluated in an open label, single arm study in 30 patients with Monoclonal Gammopathy of Undetermined Significance, Smoldering Multiple Myeloma, or Indolent Multiple Myeloma. No large changes in the mean QTc interval (i.e., > 20 ms) were detected in the study.
                        Measurement of IL-6 concentrations in serum or plasma during treatment should not be used as pharmacodynamic marker, as siltuximab-neutralized antibody-IL-6 complexes interfere with current immunological-based IL-6 quantification methods.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3	Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        The pharmacokinetics of siltuximab were evaluated in patients with multicentric Castleman's disease and hematological and non-hematological malignancies. The serum siltuximab pharmacokinetics are adequately described by a linear two-compartment intravenous model with first-order elimination.
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Distribution
                              
                              Following SYLVANT administration (11 mg/kg, once every 3 weeks as 1-hour intravenous infusion) in patients with multicentric Castleman's disease, the maximum serum siltuximab concentration (Cmax) occurred close to the end of infusion. At steady state, the serum mean Cmax value for siltuximab is 332 mcg/mL (42% CV), and the serum mean predose trough value is 84 mcg/mL (78% CV).
                              With the once every 3 week dosing regimen, siltuximab steady state is achieved by the sixth infusion, and siltuximab accumulates approximately 1.7-fold relative to a single dose. Following multiple dosing, siltuximab showed approximately dose proportional pharmacokinetics over the dose range of 2.8 to 11 mg/kg.
                              Based on population pharmacokinetic analysis, the central volume of distribution in a male subject with body weight of 70 kg is 4.5 L (20% CV).
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Elimination
                              
                              Based on the population pharmacokinetic analysis, the clearance of siltuximab in patients is 0.23 L/day (51% CV). Based on population pharmacokinetic analysis (n=378), body weight was identified as the only statistically significant covariate for siltuximab clearance. Therefore, the body weight based dosing is appropriate.
                              The mean terminal half-life (t1/2) for siltuximab in patients after the first intravenous infusion of 11 mg/kg is 20.6 days (range: 14.2 to 29.7 days).
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Specific Populations
                              
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Age and Gender
                                    
                                    Based on population pharmacokinetic analysis, age [range: 18 to 85 years (n=378)] and gender [female (n=175), male (n=203)] do not affect exposure of siltuximab.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Renal Impairment
                                    
                                    A population pharmacokinetic analysis (based on pre-existing renal function) was carried out with data from 377 patients enrolled in clinical trials, including 176 with normal renal function (CLCr ≥ 90 mL/min), 122 with mild renal impairment (CLCr 60 to <90 mL/min), 75 with moderate renal impairment (CLCr 30 to <60 mL/min), and 3 with severe renal impairment (CLCr 15 to 29 mL/min). The apparent clearance of siltuximab was similar in patients with pre-existing mild, moderate and severe renal impairment (CLCr 15 to <90 mL/min) compared to patients with normal renal function. The potential effect of end stage renal disease on siltuximab pharmacokinetics cannot be determined as clinical and pharmacokinetic data are available from only one patient.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Hepatic Impairment
                                    
                                    A population pharmacokinetic analysis (based on pre-existing hepatic function) was carried out with data from 377 patients enrolled in clinical trials, including 302 with normal hepatic function, 72 with mild hepatic impairment (Child-Pugh A), and 3 with moderate hepatic impairment (Child-Pugh B). The apparent clearance of siltuximab was similar in patients with pre-existing mild and moderate hepatic impairment (Child-Pugh Class A and B) compared to patients with normal hepatic function. The potential effect of severe hepatic impairment on siltuximab pharmacokinetics cannot be determined as clinical and pharmacokinetic data are not available.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         