
               
               
               7. DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           Coumarin anticoagulants: (7.1).
                           Immunosuppressants: (7.2).
                           Bile acid resins: (7.3).
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     7.1 Coumarin Anticoagulants
                     
                        Potentiation of coumarin-type anticoagulant effects has been observed with prolongation of the PT/INR. 
                        Caution should be exercised when coumarin anticoagulants are given in conjunction with fenofibrate. The dosage of the anticoagulants should be reduced to maintain the PT/INR at the desired level to prevent bleeding complications. Frequent PT/INR determinations are advisable until it has been definitely determined that the PT/INR has stabilized [see WARNINGS AND PRECAUTIONS (5.6)]. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     7.2 Immunosuppressants
                     
                        Immunosuppressants such as cyclosporine and tacrolimus can produce nephrotoxicity with decreases in creatinine clearance and rises in serum creatinine, and because renal excretion is the primary elimination route of fibrate drugs including fenofibrate, there is a risk that an interaction will lead to deterioration of renal function. The benefits and risks of using fenofibrate tablets with immunosuppressants and other potentially nephrotoxic agents should be carefully considered, and the lowest effective dose employed and renal function monitored. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     7.3 Bile Acid Binding Resins
                     
                        Since bile acid binding resins may bind other drugs given concurrently, patients should take fenofibrate at least 1 hour before or 4 to 6 hours after a bile acid binding resin to avoid impeding its absorption.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     7.4 Colchicine
                     
                        Cases of myopathy, including rhabdomyolysis, have been reported with fenofibrates co-administered with colchicine, and caution should be exercised when prescribing fenofibrate with colchicine.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         