
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  Morphine is a natural product that is the prototype for the class 
of natural and synthetic opioid analgesics. Opioids produce a wide spectrum of 
pharmacologic effects including analgesia, dysphoria, euphoria, somnolence, 
respiratory depression, diminished gastrointestinal motility, altered 
circulatory dynamics, histamine release and physical dependence.
                  Morphine produces both its therapeutic and its adverse effects by interaction 
with one or more classes of specific opioid receptors located throughout the 
body.  Morphine acts as a pure agonist, binding with and activating opioid 
receptors at sites in the peri-aqueductal and peri-ventricular grey matter, the 
ventro-medial medulla and the spinal cord to produce analgesia.
               
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Effects on the Central Nervous System
                     
                        The principal actions of therapeutic value of morphine are analgesia and 
sedation (i.e., sleepiness and anxiolysis). The precise mechanism of the 
analgesic action is unknown.  However, specific CNS opiate receptors and 
endogenous compounds with morphine-like activity have been identified throughout 
the brain and spinal cord and are likely to play a role in the expression of 
analgesic effects.  Morphine produces respiratory depression by direct action on 
brainstem respiratory centers.  The mechanism of respiratory depression involves 
a reduction in the responsiveness of the brainstem respiratory centers to 
increases in carbon dioxide tension, and to electrical stimulation.  Morphine 
depresses the cough reflex by direct effect on the cough center in the medulla.  
Antitussive effects may occur with doses lower than those usually required for 
analgesia.  Morphine causes miosis, even in total darkness, and little tolerance 
develops to this effect.  Pinpoint pupils are a sign of opioid overdose but are 
not pathognomonic (e.g., pontine lesions of hemorrhagic or ischemic origins may 
produce similar findings).  Marked mydriasis rather than miosis may be seen with 
worsening hypoxia in the setting of KADIAN® overdose (See 
OVERDOSAGE).
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Effects on the Gastrointestinal Tract and Other Smooth Muscle 

                     
                        Gastric, biliary and pancreatic secretions are decreased by 
morphine.  Morphine causes a reduction in motility associated with an increase 
in tone in the antrum of the stomach and duodenum.  Digestion of food in the 
small intestine is delayed and propulsive contractions are decreased.  
Propulsive peristaltic waves in the colon are decreased, while tone is increased 
to the point of spasm. The end result is constipation.  Morphine can cause a 
marked increase in biliary tract pressure as a result of spasm of the sphincter 
of Oddi.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Effects on the Cardiovascular System
                     
                        Morphine produces peripheral vasodilation which may result in 
orthostatic hypotension or syncope.  Release of histamine may be induced by 
morphine and can contribute to opioid-induced hypotension. Manifestations of 
histamine release and/or peripheral vasodilation may include pruritus, flushing, 
red eyes and sweating.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Pharmacodynamics 
                     
                        Plasma Level-Analgesia Relationships
                        In any particular patient, both analgesic effects and plasma morphine 
concentrations are related to the morphine dose.
                        While plasma morphine-efficacy relationships can be demonstrated in 
non-tolerant individuals, they are influenced by a wide variety of factors and 
are not generally useful as a guide to the clinical use of morphine. The 
effective dose in opioid-tolerant patients may be 10-50 times as great (or 
greater) than the appropriate dose for opioid-naive individuals.  Dosages of 
morphine should be chosen and must be titrated on the basis of clinical 
evaluation of the patient and the balance between therapeutic and adverse 
effects.
                        For any fixed dose and dosing interval, KADIAN® will 
have, at steady-state, a lower Cmax and a higher Cmin than conventional morphine.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        KADIAN® capsules contain polymer coated 
extended-release pellets of morphine sulfate that release morphine significantly 
more slowly than from conventional oral preparations. KADIAN® activity is primarily due to morphine. One metabolite, 
morphine-6-glucuronide, has been shown to have analgesic activity, but does not 
readily cross the blood-brain barrier.
                        Following oral administration of morphine, the extent of absorption is 
essentially the same for immediate or extended-release formulations, although 
the time to peak blood level (Tmax) will be longer and 
the Cmax will be lower for formulations that delay the 
release of morphine in the gastrointestinal tract.
                        Elimination of morphine is primarily via hepatic metabolism to glucuronide 
metabolites (55 to 65%) which are then renally excreted. The terminal half-life 
of morphine is 2 to 4 hours, however, a longer term half-life of about 15 hours 
has been reported in studies where blood has been sampled up to 48 hours.
                        The single-dose pharmacokinetics of KADIAN® are linear 
over the dosage range of 30 to 100 mg. The single dose and multiple dose 
pharmacokinetic parameters of KADIAN® in normal 
volunteers are summarized in Table 1.
                        
                           Table 1: Mean pharmacokinetic parameters (% coefficient variation) resulting 
from a fasting single dose study in normal volunteers and a multiple dose study 
in patients with cancer pain.
                        
                        

                        

                        

# For single dose AUC = AUC 0-48h, for multiple dose AUC = AUC 0-24h at steady state



+ For single dose parameter normalized to 100 mg, for multiple dose parameter normalized to 100 mg per 24 hours
*  Steady-state fluctuation in plasma concentrations = C max- Cmin/ Cmin
^  Not applicable

                        

                     
                  
               
            
         