
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Vorapaxar is a reversible antagonist of the protease-activated receptor-1 (PAR-1) expressed on platelets, but its long half-life makes it effectively irreversible. Vorapaxar inhibits thrombin-induced and thrombin receptor agonist peptide (TRAP)-induced platelet aggregation in in vitro studies. Vorapaxar does not inhibit platelet aggregation induced by adenosine diphosphate (ADP), collagen or a thromboxane mimetic and does not affect coagulation parameters ex vivo. PAR-1 receptors are also expressed in a wide variety of cell types, including endothelial cells, neurons, and smooth muscle cells, but the pharmacodynamic effects of vorapaxar in these cell types have not been assessed.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        At the recommended dose, ZONTIVITY achieves ≥80% inhibition of TRAP-induced platelet aggregation within one week of initiation of treatment. The duration of platelet inhibition is dose- and concentration-dependent. Inhibition of TRAP-induced platelet aggregation at a level of 50% can be expected at 4 weeks after discontinuation of daily doses of ZONTIVITY 2.08 mg, consistent with the terminal elimination half-life of vorapaxar [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                        In healthy volunteer studies, no changes in platelet P-selectin and soluble CD40 ligand (sCD40L) expression or coagulation test parameters (TT, PT, aPTT, ACT, ECT) occurred after single- or multiple- dose (28 days) administration of vorapaxar. No meaningful changes in P-selectin, sCD40L, or hs-CRP concentrations were observed in patients treated with vorapaxar in the phase 2/3 clinical trials.
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Evaluation of Vorapaxar on QTc Interval
                              
                              The effect of vorapaxar on the QTc interval was evaluated in a thorough QT study and in other studies. Vorapaxar had no effect on the QTc interval at single doses up to 48 times the recommended dose.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        Vorapaxar exposure increases in an approximately dose-proportional manner following single doses up to 16 times the recommended dose. Vorapaxar pharmacokinetics are similar in healthy subjects and patients.
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Absorption
                              
                              After oral administration of a single ZONTIVITY 2.08 mg dose under fasted conditions, peak concentrations (Cmax) occur at 1 hour post-dose (range: 1 to 2 h). The mean absolute bioavailability as determined from a microdosing study is approximately 100%.
                              Ingestion of vorapaxar with a high-fat meal resulted in no meaningful change in AUC with a small (21%) decrease in Cmax and delayed time to peak concentration (45 minutes). ZONTIVITY may be taken with or without food.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Distribution
                              
                              The mean volume of distribution of vorapaxar is approximately 424 liters (95% CI: 351-512). Vorapaxar and the major circulating active metabolite, M20, are extensively bound (≥99%) to human plasma proteins. Vorapaxar is highly bound to human serum albumin and does not preferentially distribute into red blood cells.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Metabolism
                              
                              Vorapaxar is eliminated by metabolism via CYP3A4 and CYP2J2. The major active circulating metabolite is M20 (monohydroxy metabolite) and the predominant metabolite identified in excreta is M19 (amine metabolite). The systemic exposure of M20 is ~20% of the exposure to vorapaxar.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Excretion
                              
                              The primary route of elimination is through the feces. In a 6-week study, 84% of the administered radiolabeled dose was recovered as total radioactivity with 58% collected in feces and 25% in urine. Vorapaxar is eliminated primarily in the form of metabolites, with no unchanged vorapaxar detected in urine.
                              Vorapaxar exhibits multi-exponential disposition with an effective half-life of 3-4 days and an apparent terminal elimination half-life of 8 days. Steady-state is achieved by 21 days following once-daily dosing with an accumulation of 5- to 6-fold. The apparent terminal elimination half-life for vorapaxar is approximately 8 days (range 5-13 days) and is similar for the active metabolite. The terminal elimination half-life is important to determine the time to offset the pharmacodynamic effect [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.2)].
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Specific Populations
                              
                              The effects of intrinsic factors on the pharmacokinetics of vorapaxar are presented in Figure 2 [see Use in Specific Populations (8.5, 8.6, 8.7)].
                              In general, effects on the exposure of vorapaxar based on age, race, gender, weight, and moderate renal insufficiency were modest (20-40%; see Figure 2). No dose adjustments are necessary based upon these factors. Because of the inherent bleeding risks in patients with severe hepatic impairment, ZONTIVITY is not recommended in such patients [see Warnings and Precautions (5.1) and Use in Specific Populations (8.7)].
                              


                           



                           
                           
                              
                                 Figure 2
                                 
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Drug Interactions [see also Drug Interactions (7)]
                              
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Anticoagulants and Antiplatelet Agents
                                    
                                    An interaction study with vorapaxar and warfarin in healthy subjects did not demonstrate a clinically significant pharmacokinetic or pharmacodynamic interaction [see Warnings and Precautions (5.1) and Figure 4].
                                    Vorapaxar did not affect prasugrel pharmacokinetics and prasugrel did not affect vorapaxar pharmacokinetics following multiple-dose administration at steady-state [see Warnings and Precautions (5.1) and Figures 3 and 4]. The pharmacokinetic interaction between vorapaxar and clopidogrel has not been evaluated. However, the use of vorapaxar on a background of clopidogrel is supported by the clinical data from TRA 2°P and TRA•CER [see Adverse Reactions (6.1) and Clinical Studies (14)].
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Effects of Other Drugs on Vorapaxar
                                    
                                    The effects of other drugs on the pharmacokinetics of vorapaxar are presented in Figure 3 as change relative to vorapaxar administered alone (test/reference). Phase 3 data suggest that coadministration of a weak or moderate CYP3A inhibitor with vorapaxar does not increase bleeding risk or alter the efficacy of vorapaxar. No dose adjustment for ZONTIVITY is required in patients taking weak to moderate inhibitors of CYP3A.
                                    


                                 



                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Figure 3
                                       
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                          Effects of Vorapaxar on Other Drugs
                                       
                                    
                                    
                                       In vitro metabolism studies demonstrate that vorapaxar or M20 is unlikely to cause clinically significant inhibition or induction of major CYP isoforms or inhibition of OATP1B1, OATP1B3, BCRP, OAT1, OAT3, and OCT2 transporters.
                                    Specific in vivo effects on the pharmacokinetics of digoxin, warfarin, rosiglitazone and prasugrel are presented in Figure 4 as a change relative to the interacting drug administered alone (test/reference). Vorapaxar is a weak inhibitor of the intestinal P-glycoprotein (P-gp) transporter. No dosage adjustment of digoxin or ZONTIVITY is required.
                                    


                                 



                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Figure 4
                                       
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         