
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY

               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action

                     
                        TRULICITY contains dulaglutide, which is a human GLP-1 receptor agonist with 90% amino acid sequence homology to endogenous human GLP-1 (7-37). Dulaglutide activates the GLP-1 receptor, a membrane-bound cell-surface receptor coupled to adenylyl cyclase in pancreatic beta cells. Dulaglutide increases intracellular cyclic AMP (cAMP) in beta cells leading to glucose-dependent insulin release. Dulaglutide also decreases glucagon secretion and slows gastric emptying.

                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics

                     
                        TRULICITY lowers fasting glucose and reduces postprandial glucose (PPG) concentrations in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus. The reduction in fasting and postprandial glucose can be observed after a single dose.

                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Fasting and Postprandial Glucose
                              
                              In a clinical pharmacology study in adults with type 2 diabetes mellitus, treatment with once weekly TRULICITY resulted in a reduction of fasting and 2-hour PPG concentrations, and postprandial serum glucose incremental AUC, when compared to placebo (-25.6 mg/dL,-59.5 mg/dL, and -197 mg h/dL, respectively); these effects were sustained after 6 weeks of dosing with the 1.5 mg dose.

                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 First- and Second-Phase Insulin Secretion
                                  
                              
                              Both first-and second-phase insulin secretion were increased in patients with type 2 diabetes treated with TRULICITY compared with placebo.

                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Insulin and Glucagon Secretion
                              
                              TRULICITY stimulates glucose-dependent insulin secretion and reduces glucagon secretion. Treatment with TRULICITY 0.75 mg and 1.5 mg once weekly increased fasting insulin from baseline at Week 26 by 35.38 and 17.50 pmol/L, respectively, and C-peptide concentration by 0.09 and 0.07 nmol/L, respectively, in a Phase 3 monotherapy study. In the same study, fasting glucagon concentration was reduced by 1.71 and 2.05 pmol/L from baseline with TRULICITY 0.75 mg and 1.5 mg, respectively.

                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Gastric Motility
                              
                              Dulaglutide causes a delay of gastric emptying. The delay is largest after the first dose and diminishes with subsequent doses.

                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Cardiac Electrophysiology (QTc)
                              
                              The effect of dulaglutide on cardiac repolarization was tested in a thorough QTc study. Dulaglutide did not produce QTc prolongation at supratherapeutic doses of 4 and 7 mg.

                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics

                     
                        The pharmacokinetics of dulaglutide is similar between healthy subjects and patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus. Following subcutaneous administration, the time to maximum plasma concentration of dulaglutide at steady-state ranges from 24 to 72 hours, with a median of 48 hours. After multiple-dose administration of 1.5 mg to steady state, the mean peak plasma concentration (Cmax) and total systemic exposure (AUC) of dulaglutide were 114 ng/mL (range 56 to 231 ng/mL) and 14,000 ng*h/mL (range 6940 to 26,000 ng*h/mL), respectively; accumulation ratio was approximately 1.56. Steady-state plasma dulaglutide concentrations were achieved between 2 and 4 weeks following once weekly administration. Site of subcutaneous administration (abdomen, upper arm, and thigh) had no statistically significant effect on the exposure to dulaglutide.

                        
                           Absorption – The mean absolute bioavailability of dulaglutide following subcutaneous administration of single 0.75 mg and 1.5 mg doses was 65% and 47%, respectively.

                        
                           Distribution – The mean volumes of distribution after subcutaneous administration of TRULICITY 0.75 mg and 1.5 mg to steady state were approximately 19.2 L (range 14.3 to 26.4 L) and 17.4 L (range 9.3 to 33 L), respectively.

                        
                           Metabolism – Dulaglutide is presumed to be degraded into its component amino acids by general protein catabolism pathways.

                        
                           Elimination – The mean apparent clearance at steady state of dulaglutide is approximately 0.111 L/h for the 0.75 mg dose, and 0.107 L/h for the 1.5 mg dose. The elimination half-life of dulaglutide for both doses is approximately 5 days.

                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Specific Populations
                              
                              No dose adjustment of dulaglutide is needed based on age, gender, race, ethnicity, body weight, or renal or hepatic impairment. The effects of intrinsic factors on the PK of dulaglutide are shown in Figure 1.

                              
                                 Figure 1: Impact of intrinsic factors on dulaglutide pharmacokinetics.

                              
                              Renal – Dulaglutide systemic exposure was increased by 20, 28, 14 and 12% for mild, moderate, severe, and ESRD renal impairment sub-groups, respectively, compared to subjects with normal renal function. The corresponding values for increase in Cmax were 13, 23, 20 and 11%, respectively (Figure 1). [see Dosage and Administration (2.3), Warning and Precautions (5.5), Use in Specific Population (8.7)].
                              
                              Hepatic - Dulaglutide systemic exposure decreased by 23, 33 and 21% for mild, moderate and severe hepatic impairment groups, respectively, compared to subjects with normal hepatic function, and Cmax was decreased by a similar magnitude (Figure 1). [see Use in Specific Population (8.6)].
                              
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           Figure 1: Impact of intrinsic factors on dulaglutide pharmacokinetics.

                           
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Drug Interactions
                              
                              The potential effect of co-administered medications on the PK of dulaglutide and vice-versa was studied in several single- and multiple-dose studies in healthy subjects, patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus, and patients with hypertension.

                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Potential for Dulaglutide to Influence the Pharmacokinetics of Other Drugs
                              
                              Dulaglutide slows gastric emptying and, as a result, may reduce the extent and rate of absorption of orally co-administered medications. In clinical pharmacology studies, dulaglutide did not affect the absorption of the tested orally administered medications to any clinically relevant degree.

                              Pharmacokinetic (PK) measures indicating the magnitude of these interactions are presented in Figure 2. No dose adjustment is recommended for any of the evaluated co-administered medications.

                              
                                 Figure 2: Impact of dulaglutide on the pharmacokinetics of co-administered medications.

                              
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           Figure 2: Impact of dulaglutide on the pharmacokinetics of co-administered medications.

                           
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Potential for Co-administered Drugs to Influence the Pharmacokinetics of Dulaglutide
                              
                              In a clinical pharmacology study, the coadministration of a single dose of dulaglutide (1.5 mg) with steady-state sitagliptin (100 mg) caused an increase in dulaglutide AUC and Cmax of approximately 38% and 27%, which is not considered clinically relevant.

                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         