
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                            Drugs metabolized by CYP2C8 and OAT3 transporters: Monitor patients because teriflunomide may increase exposure of these drugs (7)
                            Teriflunomide may increase exposure of ethinylestradiol and levonorgestrel. Choose an appropriate oral contraceptive (7)
                            Drugs metabolized by CYP1A2: Monitor patients because teriflunomide may decrease exposure of these drugs (7)
                            Warfarin: Monitor INR as teriflunomide may decrease INR (7)
                            Drugs metabolized by BCRP and OATP1B1/B3 transporters: Monitor patients because teriflunomide may increase exposure of these drugs (7)
                            Rosuvastatin: The dose of rosuvastatin should not exceed 10 mg once daily in patients taking AUBAGIO (7)
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           Effect of AUBAGIO on CYP2C8 substrates
                        
                        Teriflunomide is an inhibitor of CYP2C8 in vivo.  In patients taking AUBAGIO, exposure of drugs metabolized by CYP2C8 (e.g., paclitaxel, pioglitazone, repaglinide, rosiglitazone) may be increased. Monitor these patients and adjust the dose of the concomitant drug(s) metabolized by CYP2C8 as required [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           Effect of AUBAGIO on warfarin
                        
                        Coadministration of AUBAGIO with warfarin requires close monitoring of the international normalized ratio (INR) because AUBAGIO may decrease peak INR by approximately 25%.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           Effect of AUBAGIO on oral contraceptives
                        
                        AUBAGIO may increase the systemic exposures of ethinylestradiol and levonorgestrel. Consideration should be given to the type or dose of contraceptives used in combination with AUBAGIO [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           Effect of AUBAGIO on CYP1A2 substrates
                        
                        Teriflunomide may be a weak inducer of CYP1A2 in vivo. In patients taking AUBAGIO, exposure of drugs metabolized by CYP1A2 (e.g., alosetron, duloxetine, theophylline, tizanidine) may be reduced. Monitor these patients and adjust the dose of the concomitant drug(s) metabolized by CYP1A2 as required [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           Effect of AUBAGIO on organic anion transporter 3 (OAT3) substrates 
                        
                        Teriflunomide inhibits the activity of OAT3 in vivo. In patients taking AUBAGIO, exposure of drugs which are OAT3 substrates (e.g., cefaclor, cimetidine, ciprofloxacin, penicillin G, ketoprofen, furosemide, methotrexate, zidovudine) may be increased. Monitor these patients and adjust the dose of the concomitant drug(s) which are OAT3 substrates as required [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           Effect of AUBAGIO on BCRP and organic anion transporting polypeptide B1 and B3 (OATP1B1/1B3) substrates
                        
                        Teriflunomide inhibits the activity of BCRP and OATP1B1/1B3 in vivo. For a patient taking AUBAGIO, the dose of rosuvastatin should not exceed 10 mg once daily. For other substrates of BCRP (e.g., mitoxantrone) and drugs in the OATP family (e.g., methotrexate, rifampin), especially HMG-Co reductase inhibitors (e.g., atorvastatin, nateglinide, pravastatin, repaglinide, and simvastatin), consider reducing the dose of these drugs and monitor patients closely for signs and symptoms of increased exposures to the drugs while patients are taking AUBAGIO [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         