
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Teriflunomide, an immunomodulatory agent with anti-inflammatory properties, inhibits dihydroorotate dehydrogenase, a mitochondrial enzyme involved in de novo pyrimidine synthesis. The exact mechanism by which teriflunomide exerts its therapeutic effect in multiple sclerosis is unknown but may involve a reduction in the number of activated lymphocytes in CNS.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Potential to prolong the QT interval
                              
                              In a placebo controlled thorough QT study performed in healthy subjects, there was no evidence that teriflunomide caused QT interval prolongation of clinical significance (i.e., the upper bound of the 90% confidence interval for the largest placebo-adjusted, baseline-corrected QTc was below 10 ms).
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        Teriflunomide is the principal active metabolite of leflunomide and is responsible for leflunomide's activity in vivo. At recommended doses, teriflunomide and leflunomide result in a similar range of plasma concentrations of teriflunomide.
                        Based on a population analysis of teriflunomide in healthy volunteers and MS patients, median t1/2 was approximately 18 and 19 days after repeated doses of 7 mg and 14 mg respectively. It takes approximately 3 months respectively to reach steady-state concentrations. The estimated AUC accumulation ratio is approximately 30 after repeated doses of 7 or 14 mg.
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Absorption
                              
                              Median time to reach maximum plasma concentrations is between 1 to 4 hours post-dose following oral administration of teriflunomide.
                              Food does not have a clinically relevant effect on teriflunomide pharmacokinetics.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Distribution
                              
                              Teriflunomide is extensively bound to plasma protein (>99%) and is mainly distributed in plasma. The volume of distribution is 11 L after a single intravenous (IV) administration.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Metabolism
                              
                              Teriflunomide is the major circulating moiety detected in plasma. The primary biotransformation pathway to minor metabolites of teriflunomide is hydrolysis, with oxidation being a minor pathway. Secondary pathways involve oxidation, N-acetylation and sulfate conjugation.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Elimination
                              
                              Teriflunomide is eliminated mainly through direct biliary excretion of unchanged drug as well as renal excretion of metabolites. Over 21 days, 60.1% of the administered dose is excreted via feces (37.5%) and urine (22.6%). After an accelerated elimination procedure with cholestyramine, an additional 23.1% was recovered (mostly in feces). After a single IV administration, the total body clearance of teriflunomide is 30.5 mL/h.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Drug Interaction Studies
                              
                              Teriflunomide is not metabolized by Cytochrome P450 or flavin monoamine oxidase enzymes.
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    The Potential Effect of AUBAGIO on Other Drugs
                                    
                                       
                                          CYP2C8 Substrates
                                          
There was an increase in mean repaglinide Cmax and AUC (1.7- and 2.4-fold, respectively), following repeated doses of teriflunomide and a single dose of 0.25 mg repaglinide, suggesting that teriflunomide is an inhibitor of CYP2C8 in vivo. The magnitude of interaction could be higher at the recommended repaglinide dose [see Drug Interactions (7)].
                                       
                                          CYP1A2 Substrates
                                          
Repeated doses of teriflunomide decreased mean Cmax and AUC of caffeine by 18% and 55%, respectively, suggesting that teriflunomide may be a weak inducer of CYP1A2 in vivo.
                                       
                                          OAT3 Substrates
                                          
There was an increase in mean cefaclor Cmax and AUC (1.43- and 1.54-fold, respectively), following repeated doses of teriflunomide, suggesting that teriflunomide is an inhibitor of organic anion transporter 3 (OAT3) in vivo [see Drug Interactions (7)].
                                       
                                          BCRP and OATP1B1/1B3 Substrates
                                          
There was an increase in mean rosuvastatin Cmax and AUC (2.65- and 2.51-fold, respectively), following repeated doses of teriflunomide , suggesting that teriflunomide is an inhibitor of BCRP transporter and organic anion transporting polypeptide 1B1 and 1B3 (OATP1B1/1B3) [see Drug Interactions (7)].
                                       
                                          Oral Contraceptives
                                          
There was an increase in mean ethinylestradiol Cmax and AUC0–24 (1.58- and 1.54-fold, respectively) and levonorgestrel Cmax and AUC0–24 (1.33- and 1.41-fold, respectively) following repeated doses of teriflunomide [see Drug Interactions (7)].
                                       Teriflunomide did not affect the pharmacokinetics of   bupropion (a CYP2B6 substrate), midazolam (a CYP3A4 substrate), S-warfarin   (a CYP2C9 substrate), omeprazole (a CYP2C19 substrate), and metoprolol (a   CYP2D6 substrate).
                                    
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    The Potential Effect of Other Drugs on AUBAGIO
                                    
                                       Potent CYP and transporter inducers: Rifampin did not   affect the pharmacokinetics of teriflunomide.
                                    
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Specific populations
                              
                              
                                 
                                    Hepatic Impairment
                                    
Mild and moderate hepatic impairment had no impact on the pharmacokinetics of teriflunomide. The pharmacokinetics of teriflunomide in severe hepatic impairment have not been evaluated [see Contraindications (4.1), Warnings and Precautions (5.1), and Use in Specific Populations (8.6)].
                                 
                                    Renal Impairment
                                    
Severe renal impairment had no impact on the pharmacokinetics of teriflunomide [see Use in Specific Populations (8.7)].
                                 
                                    Gender
                                    
In a population analysis, the clearance rate for teriflunomide is 23% less in females than in males.
                                 
                                    Race
                                    
Effect of race on the pharmacokinetics of teriflunomide cannot be adequately assessed due to a low number of non-white patients in the clinical trials.
                              
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         