
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  Cefadroxil is rapidly absorbed after oral administration. Following single doses of 500 mg and 1000 mg, average peak serum concentrations were approximately 16 and 28 mcg/mL, respectively. Measurable levels were present 12 hours after administration. Over 90% of the drug is excreted unchanged in the urine within 24 hours. Peak urine concentrations are approximately 1800 mcg/mL during the period following a single 500 mg oral dose. Increases in dosage generally produce a proportionate increase in cefadroxil urinary concentration. The urine antibiotic concentration, following a 1 g dose, was maintained well above the MIC of susceptible urinary pathogens for 20 to 22 hours.
               
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Microbiology
                     
                        
                           In vitro tests demonstrate that the cephalosporins are bactericidal because of their inhibition of cell-wall synthesis. Cefadroxil has been shown to be active against the following organisms both in vitro and in clinical infections (see INDICATIONS AND USAGE):
                        
                           Beta-hemolytic streptococci
                        
                        
                           Staphylococci, including penicillinase-producing strains
                        
                           Streptococcus (Diplococcus) pneumoniae
                        
                        
                           Escherichia coli
                        
                        
                           Proteus mirabilis
                        
                        
                           Klebsiella species
                        
                           Moraxella (Branhamella) catarrhalis
                        
                        
                           Note: Most strains of Enterococcus faecalis (formerly Streptococcus faecalis) and Enterococcus faecium (formerly Streptococcus faecium) are resistant to cefadroxil. It is not active against most strains of Enterobacter species, Morganella morganii (formerly Proteus morganii), and P. vulgaris. It has no activity against Pseudomonas species and Acinetobacter calcoaceticus (formerly Mima and Herellea species).
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Susceptibility Tests
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Diffusion techniques
                                 
                                    The use of antibiotic disk susceptibility test methods which measure zone diameter give an accurate estimation of antibiotic susceptibility. One such standard procedure1,3 which has been recommended for use with disks to test susceptibility of organisms to cefadroxil uses the cephalosporin class (cephalothin) disk. Interpretation involves the correlation of the diameters obtained in the disk test with the minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) for cefadroxil.
                                    Reports from the laboratory giving results of the standard single-disk susceptibility test with a 30 mcg cephalothin disk should be interpreted according to the following criteria:
                                    


                                    


A report of “Susceptible” indicates that the pathogen is likely to be inhibited by generally achievable blood levels. A report of “Intermediate susceptibility” suggests that the organism would be susceptible if high dosage is used or if the infection is confined to tissue and fluids (e.g., urine) in which high antibiotic levels are attained. A report of “Resistant” indicates that achievable concentrations of the antibiotic are unlikely to be inhibitory and other therapy should be selected.
                                    Standardized procedures require the use of laboratory control organisms. The 30 mcg cephalothin disk should give the following zone diameters:
                                    


                                 



                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Dilution techniques
                                 
                                    When using the CLSI agar dilution or broth dilution (including microdilution) method2,3 or equivalent, the MIC values should be interpreted according to the following criteria:
                                    


                                    


As with standard diffusion methods, dilution procedures require the use of laboratory control organisms. Standard cephalothin powder should provide the following MIC values: 
                                    


