
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     General
                     
                        The OPTISON microspheres create an echogenic contrast effect in the blood.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        Studies in humans have evaluated the pharmacokinetics of the perflutren component of the OPTISON microspheres. After injection of OPTISON, diffusion of the perflutren gas out of the microspheres is limited by the low partition coefficient of the gas in blood that contributes to the persistence of the microspheres. The diffusion rate has not been studied.
                        In an anesthetized dog model, the acoustic properties of OPTISON were established at 0.6 mechanical index and 2.5 MHz frequency.
                        Neither the pharmacokinetics of the intact microspheres or of the human albumin component have been evaluated in humans.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Metabolism
                     
                        Perflutren is a stable gas that is not metabolized. The human albumin component of the microsphere is expected to be handled by the normal metabolic routes for human albumin.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Perflutren Elimination
                     
                        Following a single intravenous dose of 20 mL OPTISON to 10 healthy volunteers (5 men and 5 women), most of the perflutren was eliminated through the lungs within 10 minutes. The recovery was 96% ± 23% (mean ± SD), and the pulmonary elimination half-life was 1.3 ± 0.69 minutes (mean ± SD). The perflutren concentration in expired air peaked approximately 30-40 seconds after administration.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Perflutren Protein Binding
                     
                        The binding of perflutren to plasma proteins or its partitioning into blood cells have not been studied. However, perflutren protein binding is expected to be minimal due to the low partition coefficient of the gas in blood.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Special Populations
                     
                        The pharmacokinetics of OPTISON have not been studied in patients with hepatic or respiratory diseases.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Gender, Age, Race
                     
                        The effects of gender, age, or race on the pharmacokinetics of OPTISON have not been studied.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Drug-Drug Interactions
                     
                        Drug-drug interactions for OPTISON have not been studied.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Pediatrics
                     
                        The pharmacokinetics of OPTISON in pediatric patients have not been studied.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Pharmocodynamics
                     
                        The general acoustic properties of OPTISON are similar to those of ALBUNEX®. The acoustic impedance of the OPTISON microspheres is much lower than that of the blood. Therefore, impinging ultrasound waves are scattered and reflected at the microsphere-blood interface and ultimately may be visualized in the ultrasound image. At the frequencies used in adult echocardiography (2-5 MHz), the microspheres resonate which further increases the extent of ultrasound scattering and reflection.
                        As assessed by the unblinded investigators in clinical studies, the median duration of OPTISON contrast enhancement for each of the four doses of OPTISON (0.2, 0.5, 3.0, and 5.0 mL) were approximately one, two, four, and five minutes, respectively (see CLINICAL TRIALS section).
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         