
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           Oral contraceptives: Decreased contraceptive efficacy and increased breakthrough bleeding, especially at doses greater than 200 mg per day (7.1)
                           Phenytoin or carbamazepine: Concomitant administration with topiramate decreased plasma concentrations of topiramate (7.2)
                           Other carbonic anhydrase inhibitors: Monitor for the appearance or worsening of metabolic acidosis (7.4)
                           Lithium: Monitor lithium levels when co-administered with high-dose topiramate (7.6)
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 Oral Contraceptives
                     
                        The possibility of decreased contraceptive efficacy and increased breakthrough bleeding should be considered in patients taking combination oral contraceptive products with QUDEXY XR. Patients taking estrogen-containing contraceptives should be asked to report any change in their bleeding patterns. Contraceptive efficacy can be decreased even in the absence of breakthrough bleeding [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 Antiepileptic Drugs
                     
                        Concomitant administration of phenytoin or carbamazepine with topiramate decreased plasma concentrations of topiramate [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                        Concomitant administration of valproic acid and topiramate has been associated with hyperammonemia with and without encephalopathy. Concomitant administration of topiramate with valproic acid has also been associated with hypothermia (with and without hyperammonemia) in patients who have tolerated either drug alone. It may be prudent to examine blood ammonia levels in patients in whom the onset of hypothermia has been reported [see Warnings and Precautions (5.9) and Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                        Numerous AEDs are substrates of the CYP enzyme system. In vitro studies indicate that topiramate does not inhibit enzyme activity for CYP1A2, CYP2A6, CYP2B6, CYP2C9, CYP2D6, CYP2E1, and CYP3A4/5 isozymes. In vitro studies indicate that immediate-release topiramate is a mild inhibitor of CYP2C19 and a mild inducer of CYP3A4. The same drug interactions can be expected with the use of QUDEXY XR.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3 CNS Depressants and Alcohol
                     
                        Topiramate is a CNS depressant. Concomitant administration of topiramate with other CNS depressant drugs or alcohol can result in significant CNS depression. Concomitant use of alcohol should be avoided [see Warnings and Precautions (5.13) and Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4 Other Carbonic Anhydrase Inhibitors
                     
                        Concomitant use of topiramate, a carbonic anhydrase inhibitor, with any other carbonic anhydrase inhibitor (e.g., zonisamide, acetazolamide or dichlorphenamide), may increase the severity of metabolic acidosis and may also increase the risk of kidney stone formation. Patients should be monitored for the appearance or worsening of metabolic acidosis when QUDEXY XR is given concomitantly with another carbonic anhydrase inhibitor [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.5 Metformin
                     
                        Topiramate treatment can frequently cause metabolic acidosis, a condition for which the use of metformin is contraindicated. The concomitant use of QUDEXY XR and metformin is contraindicated in patients with metabolic acidosis [see Contraindications (4), Warnings and Precautions (5.4) and Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.6 Lithium
                     
                        In patients, there was an observed increase in systemic exposure of lithium following topiramate doses of up to 600 mg per day. Lithium levels should be monitored when co-administered with high-dose QUDEXY XR [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         