
               
               
               
                  7  DRUG INTERACTIONS

               
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                            CNS depressants: Enhanced CNS-depressant effects with combination use.  Use with alcohol causes additive psychomotor impairment (7.1)
                            Imipramine: Decreased alertness observed with combination use. (7.1)
                            Chlorpromazine: Impaired alertness and psychomotor performance observed with combination use (7.1)
                            Rifampin: Combination use decreases exposure to and effects of zolpidem (7.2)
                            Ketoconazole: Combination use increases exposure to and effect of zolpidem (7.2)
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                        7.1 CNS-active drugs

                     
                     
                        Since the systematic evaluations of zolpidem in combination with other CNS-active drugs have been limited, careful consideration should be given to the pharmacology of any CNS-active drug to be used with zolpidem.  Any drug with CNS-depressant effects could potentially enhance the CNS-depressant effects of zolpidem.
                        An immediate-release formulation of zolpidem tartrate was evaluated in healthy subjects in single-dose interaction studies for several CNS drugs. Imipramine in combination with zolpidem produced no pharmacokinetic interaction other than a 20% decrease in peak levels of imipramine, but there was an additive effect of decreased alertness. Similarly, chlorpromazine in combination with zolpidem produced no pharmacokinetic interaction, but there was an additive effect of decreased alertness and psychomotor performance. A study involving haloperidol and zolpidem revealed no effect of haloperidol on the pharmacokinetics or pharmacodynamics of zolpidem. The lack of a drug interaction following single-dose administration does not predict a lack following chronic administration.
                        An additive effect on psychomotor performance between alcohol and zolpidem was demonstrated [see Warnings and Precautions (5.5)].
                        A single-dose interaction study with zolpidem 10 mg and fluoxetine 20 mg at steady-state levels in male volunteers did not demonstrate any clinically significant pharmacokinetic or pharmacodynamic interactions. When multiple doses of zolpidem and fluoxetine at steady-state concentrations were evaluated in healthy females, the only significant change was a 17% increase in the zolpidem half-life. There was no evidence of an additive effect in psychomotor performance.
                        Following five consecutive nightly doses of zolpidem 10 mg in the presence of sertraline 50 mg (17 consecutive daily doses, at 7:00 am, in healthy female volunteers), zolpidem Cmax was significantly higher (43%) and Tmax was significantly decreased (53%). Pharmacokinetics of sertraline and N-desmethylsertraline were unaffected by zolpidem.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                        7.2 Drugs that affect drug metabolism via cytochrome P450 

                     
                     
                        Some compounds known to inhibit CYP3A may increase exposure to zolpidem.  The effect of inhibitors of other P450 enzymes has not been carefully evaluated.
                        A randomized, double-blind, crossover interaction study in ten healthy volunteers between itraconazole (200 mg once daily for 4 days) and a single dose of zolpidem (10 mg) given 5 hours after the last dose of itraconazole resulted in a 34% increase in AUC0-∞ of zolpidem. There were no significant pharmacodynamic effects of zolpidem on subjective drowsiness, postural sway, or psychomotor performance.
                        A randomized, placebo-controlled, crossover interaction study in eight healthy female subjects between five consecutive daily doses of rifampin (600 mg) and a single dose of an immediate-release formulation of zolpidem tartrate (20 mg) given 17 hours after the last dose of rifampin showed significant reductions of the AUC (–73%), Cmax (–58%), and T1/2 (–36%) of zolpidem together with significant reductions in the pharmacodynamic effects of zolpidem.
                        A randomized double-blind crossover interaction study in twelve healthy subjects showed that co-administration of a single 5 mg dose of immediate-release zolpidem tartrate with ketoconazole, a potent CYP3A4 inhibitor, given as 200 mg twice daily for 2 days increased Cmax of zolpidem by a factor of 1.3 and increased the total AUC of zolpidem by a factor of 1.7 compared to zolpidem alone and prolonged the elimination half-life by approximately 30% along with an increase in the pharmacodynamic effects of zolpidem.  Caution should be used when ketoconazole is given with zolpidem and consideration should be given to using a lower dose of zolpidem when ketoconazole and zolpidem are given together.  Patients should be advised that use of zolpidem tartrate extended-release tablets with ketoconazole may enhance the sedative effects.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                        7.3 Other drugs with no interaction with zolpidem

                     
                     
                        A study involving cimetidine/zolpidem and ranitidine/zolpidem combinations revealed no effect of either drug on the pharmacokinetics or pharmacodynamics of zolpidem.
                        Zolpidem had no effect on digoxin pharmacokinetics and did not affect prothrombin time when given with warfarin in normal subjects.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                        7.4 Drug-laboratory test interactions 

                     
                     
                        Zolpidem is not known to interfere with commonly employed clinical laboratory tests. In addition, clinical data indicate that zolpidem does not cross-react with benzodiazepines, opiates, barbiturates, cocaine, cannabinoids, or amphetamines in two standard urine drug screens.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         