
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        The mechanism of action of SEROQUEL XR in the treatment of schizophrenia, bipolar disorder and major depressive disorder (MDD), is unknown. However, its efficacy in schizophrenia could be mediated through a combination of dopamine type 2 (D2) and serotonin type 2A (5HT2A) antagonism. The active metabolite, N-desalkyl quetiapine (norquetiapine), has similar activity at D2, but greater activity at 5HT2A receptors, than the parent drug (quetiapine).  Quetiapine’s efficacy in bipolar depression and MDD may partly be explained by the high affinity and potent inhibitory effects that norquetiapine exhibits for the norepinephrine transporter.
                        Antagonism at receptors other than dopamine and serotonin with similar or greater affinities may explain some of the other effects of quetiapine and norquetiapine: antagonism at histamine H1 receptors may explain the somnolence, antagonism at adrenergic α1b receptors may explain the orthostatic hypotension, and antagonism at muscarinic M1 receptors may explain the anticholinergic effects.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        Quetiapine and norquetiapine have affinity for multiple neurotransmitter receptors including dopamine D1 and D2, serotonin 5HT1A and 5HT2A, histamine H1, muscarinic M1, and adrenergic α1b and α2 receptors.  Quetiapine differs from norquetiapine in having no appreciable affinity for muscarinic M1 receptors whereas norquetiapine has high affinity. Quetiapine and norquetiapine lack appreciable affinity for benzodiazepine receptors.
                        


                        


Effect on QT Interval 
                        In clinical trials quetiapine was not associated with a persistent increase in QT intervals. However, the QT effect was not systematically evaluated in a thorough QT study. In post marketing experience there were cases reported of QT prolongation in patients who overdosed on quetiapine [see Overdosage (10.1)], in patients with concomitant illness, and in patients taking medicines known to cause electrolyte imbalance or increase QT interval.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        Adults
                        Following multiple dosing of quetiapine up to a total daily dose of 800 mg, administered in divided doses, the plasma concentration of quetiapine and norquetiapine, the major active metabolite of quetiapine, were proportional to the total daily dose. Accumulation is predictable upon multiple dosing. Steady-state mean Cmax and AUC of norquetiapine are about 21-27% and 46-56%, respectively of that observed for quetiapine. Elimination of quetiapine is mainly via hepatic metabolism. The mean-terminal half-life is approximately 7 hours for quetiapine and approximately 12 hours for norquetiapine within the clinical dose range. Steady-state concentrations are expected to be achieved within two days of dosing.  SEROQUEL XR is unlikely to interfere with the metabolism of drugs metabolized by cytochrome P450 enzymes.
                        Children and Adolescents
                        At steady-state the pharmacokinetics of the parent compound, in children and adolescents (10-17 years of age), were similar to adults.  However, when adjusted for dose and weight, AUC and Cmax of the parent compound were 41% and 39% lower, respectively, in children and adolescents than in adults.  For the active metabolite, norquetiapine, AUC and Cmax were 45% and 31% higher, respectively, in children and adolescents than in adults.  When adjusted for dose and weight, the pharmacokinetics of the metabolite, norquetiapine, was similar between children and adolescents and adults [see Use in Specific Populations (8.4)].
                        
                        Absorption
                        Quetiapine fumarate reaches peak plasma concentrations approximately 6 hours following administration. SEROQUEL XR dosed once daily at steady-state has comparable bioavailability to an equivalent total daily dose of SEROQUEL administered in divided doses, twice daily. A high-fat meal (approximately 800 to 1000 calories) was found to produce statistically significant increases in the SEROQUEL XR Cmax and AUC of 44% to 52% and 20% to 22%, respectively, for the 50 mg and 300 mg tablets. In comparison, a light meal (approximately 300 calories) had no significant effect on the Cmax or AUC of quetiapine. It is recommended that SEROQUEL XR be taken without food or with a light meal [see Dosage and Administration (2.1)].
                        
                        Distribution
                        Quetiapine is widely distributed throughout the body with an apparent volume of distribution of 10±4 L/kg. It is 83% bound to plasma proteins at therapeutic concentrations. In vitro, quetiapine did not affect the binding of warfarin or diazepam to human serum albumin. In turn, neither warfarin nor diazepam altered the binding of quetiapine.
                        Metabolism and Elimination
                        Following a single oral dose of 14C-quetiapine, less than 1% of the administered dose was excreted as unchanged drug, indicating that quetiapine is highly metabolized. Approximately 73% and 20% of the dose was recovered in the urine and feces, respectively. The average dose fraction of free quetiapine and its major active metabolite is <5% excreted in the urine.
                        Quetiapine is extensively metabolized by the liver. The major metabolic pathways are sulfoxidation to the sulfoxide metabolite and oxidation to the parent acid metabolite; both metabolites are pharmacologically inactive. In vitro studies using human liver microsomes revealed that the cytochrome P450 3A4 isoenzyme is involved in the metabolism of quetiapine to its major, but inactive, sulfoxide metabolite and in the metabolism of its active metabolite norquetiapine.
                        Age 
                        Oral clearance of quetiapine was reduced by 40% in elderly patients (≥ 65 years, n = 9) compared to young patients (n = 12), and dosing adjustment may be necessary [see Dosage and Administration (2.3)].
                        
                        Gender
                        There is no gender effect on the pharmacokinetics of quetiapine.
                        Race
                        There is no race effect on the pharmacokinetics of quetiapine.
                        Smoking
                        Smoking has no effect on the oral clearance of quetiapine.
                        Renal Insufficiency
                        Patients with severe renal impairment (CLcr=10-30 mL/min/1.73m2, n=8) had a 25% lower mean oral clearance than normal subjects (CLcr>80 mL/min/1.73m2, n=8), but plasma quetiapine concentrations in the subjects with renal insufficiency were within the range of concentrations seen in normal subjects receiving the same dose. Dosage adjustment is therefore not needed in these patients [see Use in Specific Populations (8.6)].
                        
                        Hepatic Insufficiency
                        Hepatically impaired patients (n=8) had a 30% lower mean oral clearance of quetiapine than normal subjects.  In 2 of the 8 hepatically impaired patients, AUC and Cmax were 3 times higher than those observed typically in healthy subjects. Since quetiapine is extensively metabolized by the liver, higher plasma levels are expected in the hepatically impaired population, and dosage adjustment may be needed [see Dosage and Administration (2.4) and Use in Specific Populations (8.7)].
                        
                        Drug-Drug Interaction Studies
                        The in vivo assessments of effect of other drugs on the pharmacokinetics of quetiapine are summarized in Table 25 [see Dosage and Administration (2.5 and 2.6) and Drug Interactions (7.1)].
                        
                        


                        



                           In vitro enzyme inhibition data suggest that quetiapine and 9 of its metabolites would have little inhibitory effect on in vivo metabolism mediated by cytochromes CYP 1A2, 2C9, 2C19, 2D6 and 3A4. Quetiapine at doses of 750 mg/day did not affect the single dose pharmacokinetics of antipyrine, lithium or lorazepam (Table 26) [see Drug Interactions (7.2)].
                        
                        


