
                     
                     
                     Drug Interactions 
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 ACE Inhibitors and Angiotensin II Antagonists
                              
                              
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              Reports suggest that NSAIDs may diminish the antihypertensive effect of ACE inhibitors and angiotensin II antagonists. These interactions should be given consideration in patients taking NSAIDs concomitantly with ACE inhibitors or angiotensin II antagonists. In some patients with compromised renal function (e.g., elderly patients or patients who are volume-depleted, including those on diuretic therapy) who are being treated with non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, the coadministration of an NSAID and an ACE inhibitor or an angiotensin II antagonist may result in further deterioration of renal function, including possible acute renal failure, which is usually reversible. Therefore, monitor renal function periodically in patients receiving ACEIs or AIIAs and NSAIDs in combination therapy. 
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Acetaminophen
                              
                              
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              Acetaminophen had no effect on the plasma levels of sulindac or its sulfide metabolite.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Aspirin
                              
                              
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              The concomitant administration of aspirin with sulindac significantly depressed the plasma levels of the active sulfide metabolite. A double-blind study compared the safety and efficacy of sulindac 300 mg or 400 mg daily given alone or with aspirin 2.4 g/day for the treatment of osteoarthritis. The addition of aspirin did not alter the types of clinical or laboratory adverse experiences for sulindac; however, the combination showed an increase in the incidence of gastrointestinal adverse experiences. Since the addition of aspirin did not have a favorable effect on the therapeutic response to sulindac, the combination is not recommended.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Cyclosporine
                              
                              
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              Administration of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs concomitantly with cyclosporine has been associated with an increase in cyclosporine-induced toxicity, possibly due to decreased synthesis of renal prostacyclin. NSAIDs should be used with caution in patients taking cyclosporine, and renal function should be carefully monitored.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Diflunisal
                              
                              
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              The concomitant administration of sulindac and diflunisal in normal volunteers resulted in lowering of the plasma levels of the active sulindac sulfide metabolite by approximately one-third.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Diuretics
                              
                              
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              Clinical studies, as well as post-marketing observations, have shown that sulindac can reduce the natriuretic effect of furosemide and thiazides in some patients. This response has been attributed to inhibition of renal prostaglandin synthesis. During concomitant therapy with NSAIDs, the patient should be observed closely for signs of renal failure (see WARNINGS: Renal Effects), as well as to assure diuretic efficacy.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 DMSO
                              
                              
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              DMSO should not be used with sulindac. Concomitant administration has been reported to reduce the plasma levels of the active sulfide metabolite and potentially reduce efficacy. In addition, this combination has been reported to cause peripheral neuropathy.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Lithium
                              
                              
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              NSAIDs have produced an elevation of plasma lithium levels and a reduction in renal lithium clearance. The mean minimum lithium concentration increased 15% and the renal clearance was decreased by approximately 20%. These effects have been attributed to inhibition of renal prostaglandin synthesis by the NSAID. Thus, when NSAIDs and lithium are administered concurrently, subjects should be observed carefully for signs of lithium toxicity.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Methotrexate
                              
                              
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              NSAIDs have been reported to competitively inhibit methotrexate accumulation in rabbit kidney slices. This may indicate that they could enhance the toxicity of methotrexate. Caution should be used when NSAIDs are administered concomitantly with methotrexate.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 NSAIDs
                              
                              
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              The concomitant use of sulindac with other NSAIDs is not recommended due to the increased possibility of gastrointestinal toxicity, with little or no increase in efficacy.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Oral Anticoagulants
                              
                              
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              Although sulindac and its sulfide metabolite are highly bound to protein, studies in which sulindac was given at a dose of 400 mg daily have shown no clinically significant interaction with oral anticoagulants. However, patients should be monitored carefully until it is certain that no change in their anticoagulant dosage is required. Special attention should be paid to patients taking higher doses than those recommended and to patients with renal impairment or other metabolic defects that might increase sulindac blood levels. The effects of warfarin and NSAIDs on GI bleeding are synergistic, such that users of both drugs together have a risk of serious GI bleeding higher than users of either drug alone.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Oral Hypoglycemic Agents
                              
                              
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              Although sulindac and its sulfide metabolite are highly bound to protein, studies in which sulindac was given at a dose of 400 mg daily, have shown no clinically significant interaction with oral hypoglycemic agents. However, patients should be monitored carefully until it is certain that no change in their hypoglycemic dosage is required. Special attention should be paid to patients taking higher doses than those recommended and to patients with renal impairment or other metabolic defects that might increase sulindac blood levels.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Probenecid
                              
                              
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              Probenecid given concomitantly with sulindac had only a slight effect on plasma sulfide levels, while plasma levels of sulindac and sulfone were increased. Sulindac was shown to produce a modest reduction in the uricosuric action of probenecid, which probably is not significant under most circumstances.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Propoxyphene Hydrochloride
                              
                              
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              Propoxyphene hydrochloride had no effect on the plasma levels of sulindac or its sulfide metabolite.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               