
                     
                     
                     Drug Interactions
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           ACE-Inhibitors and Angiotensin II Antagonists
                           
                              Reports suggest that NSAIDs may diminish the antihypertensive effect of ACE-inhibitors and angiotensin II antagonists. Indomethacin can reduce the antihypertensive effects of captopril and losartan. These interactions should be given consideration in patients taking NSAIDs concomitantly with ACE-inhibitors or angiotensin II antagonists. In some patients with compromised renal function, the coadministration of an NSAID and an ACE-inhibitor or an angiotensin II antagonist may result in further deterioration of renal function, including possible acute renal failure, which is usually reversible.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Aspirin
                           
                              When Indomethacin is administered with aspirin, its protein binding is reduced, although the clearance of free Indomethacin is not altered. The clinical significance of this interaction is not known.
                              The use of Indomethacin in conjunction with aspirin or other salicylates is not recommended. Controlled clinical studies have shown that the combined use of Indomethacin and aspirin does not produce any greater therapeutic effect than the use of Indomethacin alone. In a clinical study of the combined use of Indomethacin and aspirin, the incidence of gastrointestinal side effects was significantly increased with combined therapy.
                              In a study in normal volunteers, it was found that chronic concurrent administration of 3.6 g of aspirin per day decreases Indomethacin blood levels approximately 20%.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Beta-Adrenoceptor Blocking Agents
                           
                              Blunting of the antihypertensive effect of beta-adrenoceptor blocking agents by non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs including Indomethacin has been reported. Therefore, when using these blocking agents to treat hypertension, patients should be observed carefully in order to confirm that the desired therapeutic effect has been obtained.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Cyclosporine
                           
                              Administration of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs concomitantly with cyclosporine has been associated with an increase in cyclosporine-induced toxicity, possibly due to decreased synthesis of renal prostacyclin. NSAIDs should be used with caution in patients taking cyclosporine, and renal function should be carefully monitored.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Diflunisal
                           
                              In normal volunteers receiving Indomethacin, the administration of diflunisal decreased the renal clearance and significantly increased the plasma levels of Indomethacin. In some patients, combined use of Indomethacin and diflunisal has been associated with fatal gastrointestinal hemorrhage. Therefore, diflunisal and Indomethacin should not be used concomitantly.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Digoxin
                           
                              Indomethacin given concomitantly with digoxin has been reported to increase the serum concentration and prolong the half-life of digoxin. Therefore, when Indomethacin and digoxin are used concomitantly, serum digoxin levels should be closely monitored.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Diuretics
                           
                              In some patients, the administration of Indomethacin can reduce the diuretic, natriuretic, and antihypertensive effects of loop, potassium-sparing, and thiazide diuretics. This response has been attributed to inhibition of renal prostaglandin synthesis.
                              Indomethacin reduces basal plasma renin activity (PRA), as well as those elevations of PRA induced by furosemide administration, or salt or volume depletion. These facts should be considered when evaluating plasma renin activity in hypertensive patients.
                              It has been reported that the addition of triamterene to a maintenance schedule of Indomethacin resulted in reversible acute renal failure in two of four healthy volunteers. Indomethacin and triamterene should not be administered together.
                              Indomethacin and potassium-sparing diuretics each may be associated with increased serum potassium levels. The potential effects of Indomethacin and potassium-sparing diuretics on potassium kinetics and renal function should be considered when these agents are administered concurrently.
                              Most of the above effects concerning diuretics have been attributed, at least in part, to mechanisms involving inhibition of prostaglandin synthesis by Indomethacin.
                              During concomitant therapy with NSAIDs, the patient should be observed closely for signs of renal failure (see WARNINGS, Renal Effects), as well as to assure diuretic efficacy.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Lithium
                           
                              Indomethacin capsules 50 mg t.i.d. produced a clinically relevant elevation of plasma lithium and reduction in renal lithium clearance in psychiatric patients and normal subjects with steady state plasma lithium concentrations. This effect has been attributed to inhibition of prostaglandin synthesis. As a consequence, when NSAIDs and lithium are given concomitantly, the patient should be carefully observed for signs of lithium toxicity. (Read circulars for lithium preparations before use of such concomitant therapy.) In addition, the frequency of monitoring serum lithium concentration should be increased at the outset of such combination drug treatment.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Methotrexate
                           
                              NSAIDs have been reported to competitively inhibit methotrexate accumulation in rabbit kidney slices. This may indicate that they could enhance the toxicity of methotrexate. Caution should be used when NSAIDs are administered concomitantly with methotrexate.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           NSAIDs
                           
                              The concomitant use of Indomethacin with other NSAIDs is not recommended due to the increased possibility of gastrointestinal toxicity, with little or no increase in efficacy.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Oral Anticoagulants
                           
                              Clinical studies have shown that Indomethacin does not influence the hypoprothrombinemia produced by anticoagulants. However, when any additional drug, including Indomethacin, is added to the treatment of patients on anticoagulant therapy, the patients should be observed for alterations of the prothrombin time. In post-marketing experience, bleeding has been reported in patients on concomitant treatment with anticoagulants and Indomethacin. Caution should be exercised when Indomethacin and anticoagulants are administered concomitantly. The effects of warfarin and NSAIDs on GI bleeding are synergistic, such that users of both drugs together have a risk of serious GI bleeding higher than users of either drug alone.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Probenecid
                           
                              When Indomethacin is given to patients receiving probenecid, the plasma levels of Indomethacin are likely to be increased. Therefore, a lower total daily dosage of Indomethacin may produce a satisfactory therapeutic effect. When increases in the dose of Indomethacin are made, they should be made carefully and in small increments.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               