
               
               
               Drug Interactions
               
                  Fexofenadine hydrochloride and pseudoephedrine hydrochloride do 
not influence the pharmacokinetics of each other when administered 
concomitantly.
                  Fexofenadine has been shown to exhibit minimal (ca. 5%) metabolism. However, 
co-administration of fexofenadine hydrochloride with either ketoconazole or 
erythromycin led to increased plasma concentrations of fexofenadine. 
Fexofenadine had no effect on the pharmacokinetics of either erythromycin or 
ketoconazole. In 2 separate studies, fexofenadine hydrochloride 120 mg twice 
daily (twice the recommended dose) was co-administered with erythromycin 500 mg 
every 8 hours or ketoconazole 400 mg once daily under steady-state conditions to 
healthy volunteers (n=24, each study). No differences in adverse events or 
QTc interval were observed when subjects were 
administered fexofenadine hydrochloride alone or in combination with either 
erythromycin or ketoconazole. The findings of these studies are summarized in 
the following table.
                  


                  


The changes in plasma levels were within the range of plasma levels achieved 
in adequate and well-controlled clinical trials.
                  The mechanism of these interactions has been evaluated in in vitro, in situ, and in vivo animal models. These studies indicate that 
ketoconazole or erythromycin co-administration enhances fexofenadine 
gastrointestinal absorption. This observed increase in the bioavailability of 
fexofenadine may be due to transport-related effects, such as p-glycoprotein. 
In vivo animal studies also suggest that in addition 
to enhancing absorption, ketoconazole decreases fexofenadine gastrointestinal 
secretion, while erythromycin may also decrease biliary excretion.
                  Due to the pseudoephedrine component, ALLEGRA-D 12 HOUR is contraindicated in 
patients taking monoamine oxidase inhibitors and for 14 days after stopping use 
of an MAO inhibitor. Concomitant use with antihypertensive drugs which interfere 
with sympathetic activity (e.g., methyldopa, mecamylamine, and reserpine) may 
reduce their antihypertensive effects. Increased ectopic pacemaker activity can 
occur when pseudoephedrine is used concomitantly with digitalis. Care should be 
taken in the administration of ALLEGRA-D 12 HOUR concomitantly with other 
sympathomimetic amines because combined effects on the cardiovascular system may 
be harmful to the patient (see Warnings).
                  
                  Drug Interactions with AntacidsAdministration of 120 mg of fexofenadine hydrochloride (2 × 60 mg 
capsule) within 15 minutes of an aluminum and magnesium containing antacid 
(Maalox®) decreased fexofenadine AUC by 41% and Cmax by 
43%. ALLEGRA-D 12 HOUR should not be taken closely in time with aluminum and 
magnesium containing antacids.
                  
                  Interactions with Fruit JuicesFruit juices such as grapefruit, orange and apple may reduce the 
bioavailability and exposure of fexofenadine. This is based on the results from 
3 clinical studies using histamine induced skin wheals and flares coupled with 
population pharmacokinetic analysis. The size of wheal and flare were 
significantly larger when fexofenadine hydrochloride was administered with 
either grapefruit or orange juices compared to water. Based on the literature 
reports, the same effects may be extrapolated to other fruit juices such as 
apple juice. The clinical significance of these observations is unknown. In 
addition, based on the population pharmacokinetics analysis of the combined data 
from grapefruit and orange juices studies with the data from a bioequivalence 
study, the bioavailability of fexofenadine was reduced by 36%. Therefore, to 
maximize the effects of fexofenadine, it is recommended that ALLEGRA-D 12 HOUR 
should be taken with water (See Dosage and Administration).
                  
                  Carcinogenesis, Mutagenesis, Impairment of 
FertilityThere are no animal or in vitro 
studies on the combination product fexofenadine hydrochloride and 
pseudoephedrine hydrochloride to evaluate carcinogenesis, mutagenesis, or 
impairment of fertility.
                  The carcinogenic potential and reproductive toxicity of fexofenadine 
hydrochloride were assessed using terfenadine studies with adequate fexofenadine 
exposure (area-under-the plasma concentration versus time curve [AUC]). No 
evidence of carcinogenicity was observed when mice and rats were given daily 
oral doses up to 150 mg/kg of terfenadine for 18 and 24 months, respectively. In 
both species, 150 mg/kg of terfenadine produced AUC values of fexofenadine that 
were approximately 3 times the human AUC at the maximum recommended human daily 
oral dose of ALLEGRA-D 12 HOUR.
                  Two-year feeding studies in rats and mice conducted under the auspices of the 
National Toxicology Program (NTP) demonstrated no evidence of carcinogenic 
potential with ephedrine sulfate, a structurally related drug with 
pharmacological properties similar to pseudoephedrine, at doses up to 10 and 27 
mg/kg, respectively (less than the maximum recommended human daily oral dose of 
pseudoephedrine hydrochloride on a mg/m2 basis).
                  In in vitro (Bacterial Reverse Mutation, CHO/HGPRT 
Forward Mutation, and Rat Lymphocyte Chromosomal Aberration assays) and in vivo (Mouse Bone Marrow Micronucleus assay) tests, 
fexofenadine hydrochloride revealed no evidence of mutagenicity.
                  Reproduction and fertility studies with terfenadine in rats producedno effect 
on male or female fertility at oral doses up to 300 mg/kg/day. However, reduced 
implants and post implantation losses were reported at 300 mg/kg. A reduction in 
implants was also observed at an oral dose of 150 mg/kg/day. Oral doses of 150 
and 300 mg/kg of terfenadine produced AUC values of fexofenadine that were 
approximately 4 times the AUC at the maximum recommended human daily oral dose 
of ALLEGRA-D 12 HOUR. In mice, fexofenadine produced no effect on male or female 
fertility at average dietary doses up to 4438 mg/kg (approximately 15 times the 
maximum recommended human daily oral dose of ALLEGRA-D 12 HOUR based on 
comparison of the AUCs).
                  
                  Pregnancy
                  Teratogenic EffectsCategory C. Terfenadine alone was not teratogenic in rats and 
rabbits at oral doses up to 300 mg/kg; 300 mg/kg of terfenadine produced 
fexofenadine AUC values that were approximately 4 and 30 times, respectively, 
the AUC at the maximum recommended human daily oral dose of ALLEGRA-D 12 
HOUR.
                  In mice, no adverse effects and no teratogenic effects during gestation were 
observed with fexofenadine at dietary doses up to 3730 mg/kg (approximately 15 
times the maximum recommended human daily oral dose of ALLEGRA-D 12 HOUR based 
on comparison of the AUCs).
                  The combination of terfenadine and pseudoephedrine hydrochloride in a ratio 
of 1:2 by weight was studied in rats and rabbits. In rats, an oral combination 
dose of 150/300 mg/kg produced reduced fetal weight and delayed ossification 
with a finding of wavy ribs. The dose of 150 mg/kg of terfenadine in rats 
produced an AUC value of fexofenadine that was approximately 4 times the AUC at 
the maximum recommended human daily oral dose of ALLEGRA-D 12 HOUR. The dose of 
300 mg/kg of pseudoephedrine hydrochloride in rats was approximately 10 times 
the maximum recommended human daily oral dose of ALLEGRA-D 12 HOUR on a 
mg/m2 basis. In rabbits, an oral combination dose of 
100/200 mg/kg produced decreased fetal weight. By extrapolation, the AUC of 
fexofenadine for 100 mg/kg orally of terfenadine was approximately 10 times the 
AUC at the maximum recommended human daily oral dose of ALLEGRA-D 12 HOUR. The 
dose of 200 mg/kg of pseudoephedrine hydrochloride was approximately 15 times 
the maximum recommended human daily oral dose of ALLEGRA-D 12 HOUR on a 
mg/m2 basis.
                  There are no adequate and well-controlled studies in pregnant women. 
ALLEGRA-D 12 HOUR should be used during pregnancy only if the potential benefit 
justifies the potential risk to the fetus.
                  
                  Nonteratogenic EffectsDose-related decreases in pup weight gain and survival were 
observed in rats exposed to an oral dose of 150 mg/kg of terfenadine; this dose 
produced an AUC of fexofenadine that was approximately 4 times the AUC at the 
maximum recommended human daily oral dose of ALLEGRA-D 12 HOUR.
                  
                  Nursing MothersIt is not known if fexofenadine is excreted in human milk. 
Because many drugs are excreted in human milk, caution should be used when 
fexofenadine hydrochloride is administered to a nursing woman. Pseudoephedrine 
hydrochloride administered alone distributes into breast milk of lactating human 
females. Pseudoephedrine concentrations in milk are consistently higher than 
those in plasma. The total amount of drug in milk as judged by AUC is 2 to 3 
times greater than the plasma AUC. The fraction of a pseudoephedrine dose 
excreted in milk is estimated to be 0.4% to 0.7%. A decision should be made 
whether to discontinue nursing or to discontinue the drug, taking into account 
the importance of the drug to the mother. Caution should be exercised when 
ALLEGRA-D 12 HOUR is administered to nursing women.
                  
                  Pediatric UseSafety and effectiveness of ALLEGRA-D 12 HOUR in children below 
the age of 12 years have not been established. In addition, the doses of the 
individual components in ALLEGRA-D 12 HOUR exceed the recommended individual 
doses for pediatric patients under 12 years of age. ALLEGRA-D 12 HOUR is not 
recommended for pediatric patients under 12 years of age.
                  
                  Geriatric UseClinical studies of ALLEGRA-D 12 HOUR did not include sufficient 
numbers of subjects aged 65 and older to determine whether they respond 
differently from younger subjects. Other reported clinical experience has not 
identified differences in responses between the elderly and younger subjects, 
although the elderly are more likely to have adverse reactions to 
sympathomimetic amines.
                  The pseudoephedrine component of ALLEGRA-D 12 HOUR is known to be 
substantially excreted by the kidney, and the risk of toxic reactions to this 
drug may be greater in patients with impaired renal function. Because elderly 
patients are more likely to have decreased renal function, care should be taken 
in dose selection, and it may be useful to monitor renal function.
               
               
            
         