
                     
                     
                     
                        Drug Interactions
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              CYP 3A4 Inhibitors (e.g.
                              ,
                               Macrolide Antibiotics and Protease Inhibitors)
                           
                           
                              There have been rare reports of serious adverse events in connection with the coadministration of certain ergot alkaloid drugs (e.g., dihydroergotamine and ergotamine) and potent CYP 3A4 inhibitors, resulting in vasospasm leading to cerebral ischemia and/or ischemia of the extremities. Although there have been no reports of such interactions with methylergonovine alone, potent CYP 3A4 inhibitors should not be coadministered with methylergonovine. Examples of some of the more potent CYP 3A4 inhibitors include macrolide antibiotics (e.g., erythromycin, troleandomycin, clarithromycin), HIV protease or reverse transcriptase inhibitors (e.g., ritonavir, indinavir, nelfinavir, delavirdine) or azole antifungals (e.g., ketoconazole, itraconazole, voriconazole). Less potent CYP 3A4 inhibitors should be administered with caution. Less potent inhibitors include saquinavir, nefazodone, fluconazole, grapefruit juice, fluoxetine, fluvoxamine, zileuton, and clotrimazole. These lists are not exhaustive, and the prescriber should consider the effects on CYP 3A4 of other agents being considered for concomitant use with methylergonovine.
                              
                                 CYP3A4 inducers
                              
                              Drugs (e.g. nevirapine, rifampicin) that are strong inducers of CYP3A4 are likely to decrease the pharmacological action of Methergine.
                              
                                 Beta-blockers
                              
                              Caution should be exercised when Methergine is used concurrently with beta-blockers. Concomitant administration with beta-blockers may enhance the vasoconstrictive action of ergot alkaloids.
                              
                                 Anesthetics
                              
                              Anesthetics like halothan and methoxyfluran may reduce the oxytocic potency of Methergine.
                              
                                 Glyceryl trinitrate and other antianginal drugs
                              
                              Methylergonovine maleate produces vasoconstriction and can be expected to reduce the effect of glyceryl trinitrate and other antianginal drugs.
                              No pharmacokinetic interactions involving other cytochrome P450 isoenzymes are known.
                              Caution should be exercised when Methergine (methylergonovine maleate) is used concurrently with other vasoconstrictors, ergot alkaloids, or prostaglandins.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               