
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              •Coadministration with probenecid is not recommended. (7.1)
                           
                              •Concomitant use of amoxicillin/clavulanate potassium and oral anticoagulants may increase the prolongation of prothrombin time. (7.2) 
                           
                              •Coadministration with allopurinol increases the risk of rash. (7.3) 
                           
                              •Amoxicillin/clavulanate potassium may reduce efficacy of oral contraceptives. (7.4)
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 Probenecid 
                     
                        Probenecid decreases the renal tubular secretion of amoxicillin but does not delay renal excretion of clavulanic acid. Concurrent use with amoxicillin/clavulanate potassium may result in increased and prolonged blood concentrations of amoxicillin. Coadministration of probenecid is not recommended. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 Oral Anticoagulants 
                     
                        Abnormal prolongation of prothrombin time (increased international normalized ratio [INR]) has been reported in patients receiving amoxicillin and oral anticoagulants. Appropriate monitoring should be undertaken when anticoagulants are prescribed concurrently with amoxicillin/clavulanate potassium. Adjustments in the dose of oral anticoagulants may be necessary to maintain the desired level of anticoagulation. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3 Allopurinol 
                     
                        The concurrent administration of allopurinol and amoxicillin increases the incidence of rashes in patients receiving both drugs as compared to patients receiving amoxicillin alone. It is not known whether this potentiation of amoxicillin rashes is due to allopurinol or the hyperuricemia present in these patients. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4 Oral Contraceptives 
                     
                        Amoxicillin/clavulanate potassium may affect intestinal flora, leading to lower estrogen reabsorption and reduced efficacy of combined oral estrogen/progesterone contraceptives. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.5 Effects on Laboratory Tests 
                     
                        High urine concentrations of amoxicillin may result in false-positive reactions when testing for the presence of glucose in urine using CLINITEST®, Benedict’s Solution, or Fehling’s Solution. Since this effect may also occur with amoxicillin/clavulanate potassium, it is recommended that glucose tests based on enzymatic glucose oxidase reactions be used. 
                        Following administration of amoxicillin to pregnant women, a transient decrease in plasma concentration of total conjugated estriol, estriol-glucuronide, conjugated estrone, and estradiol has been noted.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         