
               
               
               
                  7     
                  DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           Desipramine: Exposure increases 8-fold. Reduce desipramine dose and adjust based on clinical response. (7.5, 12.4)
                           Paroxetine: Exposure increases 2-fold. Reduce paroxetine dose and adjust based on clinical response. (7.5, 12.4) 
                           Digoxin: Increased digoxin substrate plasma concentration may occur. (7.6)
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        7.1 
                        MAOIs
                     
                     
                        Do not use NUEDEXTA with monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs) or in patients who have taken MAOIs within the preceding 14 days [see Contraindications (
                           
                              4.3
                           
                           )]. 
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        7.2 
                        Drugs that Prolong QT and are Metabolized by CYP2D6
                     
                     
                        Do not use with drugs that both prolong QT interval and are metabolized by CYP2D6 (e.g., thioridazine or pimozide) [see Contraindications (
                           
                              4.4
                           
                           )]. 
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        7.3 
                        Drugs that Prolong QT and Concomitant CYP3A4 Inhibitors
                     
                     
                        Recommend ECG in patients taking drugs with NUEDEXTA that prolong the QT interval and in patients taking concomitant moderate or strong CYP3A4 inhibitors [see Warnings and Precautions (
                           
                              5.3
                           
                           )]. 
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        7.4 
                        SSRIs and Tricyclic Antidepressants
                     
                     
                        Use of NUEDEXTA with SSRIs or tricyclic antidepressants increases the risk of ‘serotonin syndrome’ [s
                           ee Warnings and Precautions
                            
                           (
                           
                              5.6
                           
                           )]. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        7.5 
                        CYP2D6
                         Substrate
                     
                     
                        The co-administration of NUEDEXTA with drugs that undergo extensive CYP2D6 metabolism may result in altered drug effects, due to accumulation of parent drug and/or failure of metabolite formation [see Warnings and Precautions (5.4)]. Therapy with medications that are primarily metabolized by CYP2D6 and that have a relatively narrow therapeutic index should be initiated at a low dose if a patient is receiving NUEDEXTA concurrently. If NUEDEXTA is added to the treatment regimen of a patient already receiving a drug primarily metabolized by CYP2D6, the need for a dose modification of the original medication should be considered. The extent to which CYP2D6 interactions may pose clinical problems will depend on the pharmacokinetics of the substrate involved. 
                        In cases of prodrugs whose actions are mediated by the CYP2D6-produced metabolites (for example, codeine and hydrocodone, whose analgesic and antitussive effects appear to be mediated by morphine and hydromorphone, respectively), it may not be possible to achieve the desired clinical benefits in the presence of NUEDEXTA due to quinidine-mediated inhibition of CYP2D6. Consider use of alternative treatment with NUEDEXTA when clinically indicated. 
                        Drug interactions with desipramine and paroxetine have been studied in controlled clinical trials with a higher dose combination of dextromethorphan/quinidine (dextromethorphan hydrobromide 30 mg/quinidine sulfate 30 mg) than NUEDEXTA; study results are described below. No other drug interactions with CYP2D6 substrates have been systematically investigated, although concomitant use of such drugs was allowed in clinical trials with NUEDEXTA and in clinical trials with higher dose formulations of dextromethorphan/quinidine. 
                        
                           Desipramine (CYP2D6 substrate): 

                           The tricyclic antidepressant desipramine is metabolized primarily by CYP2D6. A drug interaction study was conducted between a higher combination dose of dextromethorphan (dextromethorphan hydrobromide 30 mg/quinidine sulfate 30 mg) and desipramine 25 mg. The combination dose of dextromethorphan/quinidine increased steady state desipramine levels approximately 8-fold. If NUEDEXTA and desipramine are prescribed concomitantly, the initial dose of desipramine should be markedly reduced. The dose of desipramine can then be adjusted based on clinical response; however, a dose above 40 mg/day is not recommended.
                        
                           Paroxetine (CYP2D6 inhibitor and substrate)
                           : 

                           When the combination dose of dextromethorphan hydrobromide 30 mg/quinidine sulfate 30 mg was added to paroxetine at steady state, paroxetine exposure (AUC0-24) increased by 1.7 fold and Cmax increased by 1.5 fold. Consideration should be given to initiating treatment with a lower dose of paroxetine if given with NUEDEXTA. The dose of paroxetine can then be adjusted based on clinical response; however, dosage above 35 mg/day is not recommended. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        7.6 
                        Digoxin
                     
                     
                        Quinidine is an inhibitor of P-glycoprotein. Concomitant administration of quinidine with digoxin, a P-glycoprotein substrate, results in serum digoxin levels that may be as much as doubled. Plasma digoxin concentrations should be closely monitored in patients taking NUEDEXTA concomitantly, and the digoxin dose reduced, as necessary.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        7.7
                         
                        Alcohol
                     
                     
                        As with any other CNS drug, caution should be used when NUEDEXTA is taken in combination with other centrally acting drugs and alcohol.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         