
               
               
               
                  Clinical Pharmacology
                  
                  Mechanism of ActionRYZOLT™ is a centrally acting synthetic opioid analgesic. 
Although its mode of action is not completely understood, at least two 
complementary mechanisms that demonstrate three different types of activity 
appear applicable: binding of parent and M1 metabolite to µ-opioid receptors and 
weak inhibition of reuptake of norepinephrine and serotonin.
                  Opioid activity is due to both low affinity binding of the parent compound 
and higher affinity binding of the O-demethylated 
metabolite (M1) to mu-opioid receptors. In animal models, M1 is up to 6 times 
more potent than tramadol in producing analgesia and 200 times more potent in 
mu-opioid binding. Tramadol-induced analgesia is only partially antagonized by 
the opiate antagonist naloxone in several animal tests. The relative 
contribution of both tramadol and M1 to human analgesia is dependent upon the 
plasma concentrations of each compound. 
                  Tramadol has been shown to inhibit reuptake of norepinephrine and serotonin 
in vitro, as have some other opioid analgesics. These 
mechanisms may contribute independently to the overall analgesic profile of 
tramadol. 
                  Apart from analgesia, tramadol hydrochloride administration may produce 
various symptoms (including dizziness, somnolence, nausea, constipation, 
sweating and pruritus) similar to that of other opioids. In contrast to 
morphine, tramadol has not been shown to cause histamine release. At therapeutic 
doses, tramadol has no effect on heart rate, left-ventricular function or 
cardiac index. Orthostatic hypotension has been observed. 
                  
                  
                  PharmacokineticsThe analgesic activity of tramadol hydrochloride is due to both 
parent drug and the M1 metabolite (See CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY, 
    Mechanism of Action
                     ).
                  RYZOLT™ is formulated as a racemate and both tramadol and M1 are detected in 
the circulation.
                  The pharmacokinetics of tramadol and M1 are dose-proportional over a 100 to 
300 mg dose range in healthy subjects. 
                  
                  
                  AbsorptionThe median time to peak plasma concentrations of tramadol and M1 
after multiple-dose administration of RYZOLT™ 200 mg tablets to healthy subjects 
are attained at about 4 h and 5 h, respectively (Table 1 and Figure 1). 
                  The pharmacokinetic parameter values for RYZOLT™ 200 mg administered once 
daily and tramadol immediate-release 50 mg administered every six hours are 
provided in Table 1. The relative bioavailability of a 200 mg RYZOLT™ tablet 
compared to a 50 mg immediate-release tablet dosed every six hours was 
approximately 95% in healthy subjects.
                  Steady-state plasma concentrations are reached within approximately 48 hours. 

                  
                     Figure 1.Mean Tramadol Plasma Concentrations at Steady State 
Following Five Days of Oral Administration of RYZOLT™ 200 mg Once Daily and 
Immediate-Release Tramadol 50 mg Every 6 Hours.
                  
                  

                  
                     
                  
                  
                     Figure 2. Mean M1 Plasma Concentrations at Steady State 
Following Five Days of Oral Administration of RYZOLT™ 200 mg Once Daily and 
Immediate-Release Tramadol 50 mg Every 6 Hours
                     

                  
                  

                  
                     
                  
                  Food EffectCo-administration with a high fat meal did not significantly 
affect AUC (overall exposure to tramadol); however, Cmax 
(peak plasma concentration) increased 67% following a single 300 mg tablet 
administration and 54% following a single 200 mg tablet administration. RYZOLT™ 
was administered without regard to food in all clinical trials.
                  
                  
                  DistributionThe volume of distribution of tramadol is 2.6 and 2.9 L/kg in 
males and females, respectively, following a 100 mg intravenous dose. The 
binding of tramadol to human plasma proteins is approximately 20%. Protein 
binding also appears to be independent of concentration up to 10 µg/mL. 
Saturation of plasma protein binding occurs only at concentrations outside the 
clinically relevant range.
                  
                  
                  MetabolismTramadol is extensively metabolized after oral administration. 
The major metabolic pathways appear to be N- and 
O-demethylation and glucuronidation or sulfation in 
the liver. N-demethylation is mediated by CYP3A4 and 
CYP2B6. One metabolite (O-desmethyltramadol, denoted 
M1) is pharmacologically active in animal models. Formation of M1 is dependent 
on CYP2D6 and as such is subject to inhibition and polymorphism, which may 
affect the therapeutic response (See PRECAUTIONS - Drug Interactions
                     ).
                  
                  
                  EliminationTramadol is eliminated primarily through metabolism by the liver 
and the metabolites are eliminated primarily by the kidneys. Approximately 30% 
of the dose is excreted in the urine as unchanged drug, whereas 60% of the dose 
is excreted as metabolites. The remainder is excreted either as unidentified or 
as unextractable metabolites. After single administration of RYZOLT™, the mean 
terminal plasma elimination half-lives of racemic tramadol and racemic M1 are 
6.5 ± 1.5 and 7.5 ± 1.4 hours, respectively. 
                  
                  
                  Special Populations
                  
                  Renal ImpairmentImpaired renal function results in a decreased rate and extent of 
excretion of tramadol and its active metabolite, M1 in patients taking an 
immediate-release formulation of tramadol. RYZOLT™ has not been studied in 
patients with renal impairment. The limited availability of dose strengths and 
once daily dosing of RYZOLT™ do not permit the dosing flexibility required for 
safe use in patients with severe renal impairment. Therefore, RYZOLT™ should not 
be used in patients with severe renal impairment (creatinine clearance less than 
30 mL/min) (See WARNINGS, Use in Renal 
and Hepatic Disease and 
                     
                        DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION
                     ). The total 
amount of tramadol and M1 removed during a 4-hour dialysis period is less than 
7% of the administered dose.
                  
                  
                  Hepatic ImpairmentThe metabolism of tramadol and M1 is reduced in patients with 
advanced cirrhosis of the liver, resulting in both a larger area under the 
concentration time curve (AUC) for tramadol and longer mean tramadol and M1 
elimination half-lives (13 hours for tramadol and 19 hours for M1) after the 
administration of tramadol immediate-release tablets. RYZOLT™ has not been 
studied in patients with hepatic impairment. The limited availability of dose 
strengths and once daily dosing of RYZOLT™ do not permit the dosing flexibility 
required for safe use in patients with hepatic impairment. Therefore, RYZOLT™ 
should not be used in patients with hepatic impairment (see WARNINGS, Use in Renal and Hepatic Disease 
and 
                     
                        DOSAGE AND 
ADMINISTRATION
                     ).
                  
                  
                  Geriatric PatientsHealthy elderly subjects aged 65 to 75 years administered an 
immediate-release formulation of tramadol, have plasma concentrations and 
elimination half-lives comparable to those observed in healthy subjects less 
than 65 years of age. In subjects over 75 years, mean maximum plasma 
concentrations are elevated (208 vs. 162 ng/mL) and the mean elimination 
half-life is prolonged (7 vs. 6 hours) compared to subjects 65 to 75 years of 
age. Adjustment of the daily dose is recommended for patients older than 75 
years (See 
                        DOSAGE AND 
ADMINISTRATION
                     ).
                  
                  
                  GenderFollowing a 100 mg IV dose of tramadol, plasma clearance was 6.4 
mL/min/kg in males and 5.7 mL/min/kg in females. Following a single oral dose of 
immediate-release tramadol, and after adjusting for body weight, females had a 
12% higher peak tramadol concentration and a 35% higher area under the 
concentration-time curve compared to males. The clinical significance of this 
difference is unknown.
                  
                  
                  Drug InteractionsThe formation of the active metabolite of tramadol, M1, is 
mediated by CYP2D6, a polymorphic enzyme. Approximately 7% of the population has 
reduced activity of CYP2D6. These individuals are "poor metabolizers" of 
debrisoquine, dextromethorphan and tricyclic antidepressants, among other drugs. 
In studies in healthy subjects administered immediate-release tramadol products, 
concentrations of tramadol were approximately 20% higher in "poor metabolizers" 
versus "extensive metabolizers", while M1 concentrations were 40% lower. In vitro drug interaction studies in human liver microsomes 
indicate that inhibitors of CYP2D6 (amitriptyline, quinidine and fluoxetine and 
its metabolite norfluoxetine,) inhibit the metabolism of tramadol to various 
degrees, suggesting that concomitant administration of these compounds could 
result in increases in tramadol concentrations and decreased concentrations of 
M1. The full pharmacological impact of these alterations in terms of either 
efficacy or safety is unknown. 
                  Tramadol is also metabolized by CYP3A4. Administration of CYP3A4 inhibitors, 
such as ketoconazole and erythromycin, or inducers, such as rifampin and St. 
John’s Wort, with RYZOLT™ may affect the metabolism of tramadol leading to 
altered tramadol exposure (see 
                        PRECAUTIONS
                     ).
                  
                     Quinidine
                  
                  Quinidineis a selective inhibitor of CYP2D6, so that 
concomitant administration of quinidine and RYZOLT™ may result in increased 
concentrations of tramadol and reduced concentrations of M1. The clinical 
consequences of these findings are unknown (see 
                        PRECAUTIONS
                     ). In vitro 
drug interaction studies in human liver microsomes indicate that tramadol has no 
effect on quinidine metabolism.
                  
                     Carbamazepine
                  
                  Carbamazepine, a CYP3A4 inducer, increases tramadol metabolism. Patients 
taking carbamazepine may have a significantly reduced analgesic effect of 
tramadol. Because of the seizure risk associated with tramadol, concomitant 
administration of RYZOLT™ and carbamazepine is not recommended (see 
                        PRECAUTIONS
                     ).
                  
                     Cimetidine
                  
                  Concomitant administration of tramadol immediate-release tablets with 
cimetidine does not result in clinically significant changes in tramadol 
pharmacokinetics. No alteration of the RYZOLT™ dosage regimen with cimetidine is 
recommended.
                  
                  
                  Clinical StudiesRYZOLT™ was studied in four 12-week, randomized, double-blind, 
controlled studies in patients with moderate to severe pain due to 
osteoarthritis. Efficacy was demonstrated in one double-blind, 
placebo-controlled, randomized withdrawal design study. In this study, patients 
who experienced a reduction of pain and were able to tolerate RYZOLT™ during an 
open-label titration period, were then randomized to RYZOLT™ or to placebo for 
12 weeks. Sixty-five percent of patients were able to successfully titrate onto 
RYZOLT™. After a washout, patients randomized to RYZOLT™ were titrated to 200 mg 
or 300 mg of RYZOLT™ based on tolerability and remained on that dose for the 
following 12-week period. Approximately 24% of patients discontinued during the 
randomized period of the study, with more patients discontinuing from the 
RYZOLT™ arm than the placebo arm due to adverse events (10% vs. 5%, 
respectively) and more patients discontinuing from the placebo arm than the 
RYZOLT™ arm due to lack of efficacy (10% vs. 8%, respectively). Patients treated 
with RYZOLT™ demonstrated a greater improvement in pain intensity, measured on 
an 11-point numerical rating scale, at the end of treatment compared to patients 
randomized to placebo. Figure 3 shows the fraction of patients achieving various 
degree of improvement in pain from baseline to the end of treatment (week 12). 
The figure is cumulative, so that patients whose change from baseline is, for 
example, 50%, are also included at every level of improvement below 50%. 
Patients who did not complete the study were assigned 0% improvement.
                  
                     Figure 3. Proportion of Patients Achieving Various Levels of 
Pain Relief as Measured by 12-Week Pain Intensity.
                  
                  

                  
                     
                  
                  
                     

                  
                  
                     
                        

                     
                  
               
               
               
                  
                     Ryzolt Fig 1
                     
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     Ryzolt Fig 2
                     
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     Ryzolt Fig 3
                     
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         