
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           Additive CNS-depressant effects with combination use. Use with ethanol causes additive psychomotor impairment ( )
                                        CNS Depressants:
                              7.1
                           
                           Combination use may decrease exposure and effects of eszopiclone ( )
                                        Rifampicin:
                              7.2
                           
                           Combination use increases exposure and effect of eszopiclone. Dose reduction of eszopiclone is needed ( )
                                        Ketoconazole:
                              7.2
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 CNS Active Drugs
                     
                        An additive effect on psychomotor performance was seen with coadministration of eszopiclone and ethanol.
                                    Ethanol:
                        
                        Coadministration of eszopiclone and olanzapine produced a decrease in DSST scores. The interaction was pharmacodynamic; there was no alteration in the pharmacokinetics of either drug.
                                    Olanzapine:
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 Drugs That Inhibit or Induce CYP3A4
                     
                        
                           
                              Drugs That Inhibit CYP3A4 (Ketoconazole)
                           
                        
                        CYP3A4 is a major metabolic pathway for elimination of eszopiclone. The exposure of eszopiclone was increased by coadministration of ketoconazole, a potent inhibitor of CYP3A4. Other strong inhibitors of CYP3A4 (e.g., itraconazole, clarithromycin, nefazodone, troleandomycin, ritonavir, nelfinavir) would be expected to behave similarly. Dose reduction of eszopiclone is needed for patient coadministered eszopiclone with potent CYP3A4 inhibitors [ ].
                                    see Dosage and Administration ( )
                                        2.3
                           
                        
                        
                           
                              Drugs That Induce CYP3A4 (Rifampicin)
                           
                        
                        Racemic zopiclone exposure was decreased 80% by concomitant use of rifampicin, a potent inducer of CYP3A4. A similar effect would be expected with eszopiclone. Combination use with CYP3A4 inducer may decrease the exposure and effects of eszopiclone.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         