
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        The HER2 (or c-erbB2) proto-oncogene encodes a transmembrane receptor protein of 185 kDa, which is structurally related to the epidermal growth factor receptor. Herceptin has been shown, in both in vitro assays and in animals, to inhibit the proliferation of human tumor cells that overexpress HER2. 
                        Herceptin is a mediator of antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity (ADCC). In vitro, Herceptin-mediated ADCC has been shown to be preferentially exerted on HER2 overexpressing cancer cells compared with cancer cells that do not overexpress HER2. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Cardiac Electrophysiology
                              
                              The effects of trastuzumab on electrocardiographic (ECG) endpoints, including QTc interval duration, were evaluated in patients with HER2 positive solid tumors.  Trastuzumab had no clinically relevant effect on the QTc interval duration and there was no apparent relationship between serum trastuzumab concentrations and change in QTcF interval duration in patients with HER2 positive solid tumors.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        The pharmacokinetics of trastuzumab was evaluated in a pooled population pharmacokinetic (PK) model analysis of 1,582 subjects with primarily breast cancer and metastatic gastric cancer (MGC) receiving intravenous Herceptin.  Total trastuzumab clearance increases with decreasing concentrations due to parallel linear and non-linear elimination pathways.
                        Although the average trastuzumab exposure was higher following the first cycle in breast cancer patients receiving the three-weekly schedule compared to the weekly schedule of Herceptin, the average steady-state exposure was essentially the same at both dosages.  The average trastuzumab exposure following the first cycle and at steady state as well as the time to steady state was higher in breast cancer patients compared to MGC patients at the same dosage; however, the reason for this exposure difference is unknown.  Additional predicted trastuzumab exposure and PK parameters following the first Herceptin cycle and at steady state exposure are described in Tables 7 and 8, respectively.
                        Population PK based simulations indicate that following discontinuation of Herceptin, concentrations in at least 95% of breast cancer and MGC patients will decrease to approximately 3% of the population predicted steady-state trough serum concentration (approximately 97% washout) by 7 months [see Warnings and Precautions (5.1)
                            and 
                              Use in Specific Populations (8.1, 8.6)
                           ].
                        



                     



                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Specific Populations:  Based on a population pharmacokinetic analysis, no clinically significant differences were observed in the pharmacokinetics of trastuzumab based on age (<65 (n=1294); ≥65 (n=288)), race (Asian (n=264); non-Asian (n=1324)) and renal impairment (mild (creatinine clearance [CLcr] 60 to 90 mL/min) (n=636) or moderate (CLcr 30 to 60 mL/min) (n=133)).  The pharmacokinetics of trastuzumab in patients with severe renal impairment, end-stage-renal disease with or without hemodialysis, or hepatic impairment is unknown.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Drug Interaction Studies:
                              
                              There have been no formal drug interaction studies performed with Herceptin in humans.  Clinically significant interactions between Herceptin and concomitant medications used in clinical trials have not been observed.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Paclitaxel and doxorubicin:  Concentrations of paclitaxel and doxorubicin and their major metabolites (i.e., 6-α hydroxyl-paclitaxel [POH], and doxorubicinol [DOL], respectively) were not altered in the presence of trastuzumab when used as combination therapy in clinical trials.  Trastuzumab concentrations were not altered as part of this combination therapy.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Docetaxel and carboplatin:  When Herceptin was administered in combination with docetaxel or carboplatin, neither the plasma concentrations of docetaxel or carboplatin nor the plasma concentrations of trastuzumab was altered.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Cisplatin and capecitabine:  In a drug interaction substudy conducted in patients in Study 7, the pharmacokinetics of cisplatin, capecitabine and their metabolites were not altered when administered in combination with Herceptin.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         