
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           Pharmacodynamic Actions
                           
 Naltrexone hydrochloride is a pure opioid antagonist. It markedly attenuates or completely blocks, reversibly, the subjective effects of intravenously administered opioids.
        

 
                        When coadministered with morphine, on a chronic basis, naltrexone hydrochloride blocks the physical dependence to morphine, heroin and other opioids.
                        Naltrexone hydrochloride has few, if any, intrinsic actions besides its opioid blocking properties. However, it does produce some pupillary constriction, by an unknown mechanism.
                        The administration of naltrexone hydrochloride  is not associated with the development of tolerance or dependence. In subjects physically dependent on opioids, naltrexone hydrochloride will precipitate withdrawal symptomatology.
                        Clinical studies indicate that 50 mg of naltrexone hydrochloride will block the pharmacologic effects of 25 mg of intravenously administered heroin for periods as long as 24 hours. Other data suggest that doubling the dose of naltrexone hydrochloride provides blockade for 48 hours, and tripling the dose of naltrexone hydrochloride provides blockade for about 72 hours.
                        Naltrexone hydrochloride blocks the effects of opioids by competitive binding (i.e., analogous to competitive inhibition of enzymes) at opioid receptors. This makes the blockade produced potentially surmountable, but overcoming full naltrexone blockade by administration of very high doses of opiates has resulted in excessive symptoms of histamine release in experimental subjects.
                        The mechanism of action of naltrexone hydrochloride in alcoholism is not understood; however, involvement of the endogenous opioid system is suggested by preclinical data. Naltrexone hydrochloride, an opioid receptor antagonist, competitively binds to such receptors and may block the effects of endogenous opioids. Opioid antagonists have been shown to reduce alcohol consumption by animals, and naltrexone hydrochloride has been shown to reduce alcohol consumption in clinical studies.
                        Naltrexone hydrochloride is not aversive therapy and does not cause a disulfiram-like reaction either as a result of opiate use or ethanol ingestion.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           Pharmacokinetics
                           

Naltrexone hydrochloride is a pure opioid receptor antagonist. Although well absorbed orally, naltrexone is subject to significant first pass metabolism with oral bioavailability estimates ranging from 5 to 40%. The activity of naltrexone is believed to be due to both parent and the 6-β-naltrexol metabolite. Both parent drug and metabolites are excreted primarily by the kidney (53% to 79% of the dose), however, urinary excretion of unchanged naltrexone accounts for less than 2% of an oral dose and fecal excretion is a minor elimination pathway. The mean elimination half-life (T
         
 
  1/2) values for naltrexone and 6-β-naltrexol are 4 hours and 13 hours, respectively. Naltrexone and 6-β-naltrexol are dose proportional in terms of AUC and C
         
 
  max over the range of 50 to 200 mg and do not accumulate after 100 mg daily doses.
        

 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           Absorption
                           
 Following oral administration, naltrexone undergoes rapid and nearly complete absorption with approximately 96% of the dose absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract. Peak plasma levels of both naltrexone and 6-β-naltrexol occur within one hour of dosing.
        

 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           Distribution
                           
 The volume of distribution for naltrexone following intravenous administration is estimated to be 1350 liters. 
         
 
  In vitro tests with human plasma show naltrexone to be 21% bound to plasma proteins over the therapeutic dose range.
        

 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           Metabolism
                           
 The systemic clearance (after intravenous administration) of naltrexone is ~3.5 L/min, which exceeds liver blood flow (~1.2 L/min). This suggests both that naltrexone is a highly extracted drug (>98% metabolized) and that extrahepatic sites of drug metabolism exist. The major metabolite of naltrexone is 6-β-naltrexol. Two other minor metabolites are 2-hydroxy-3-methoxy-6-β-naltrexol and 2-hydroxy-3-methyl-naltrexone. Naltrexone and its metabolites are also conjugated to form additional metabolic products.
        

 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           Elimination
                           
The renal clearance for naltrexone ranges from 30 to 127 mL/min and suggests that renal elimination is primarily by glomerular filtration. In comparison, the renal clearance for 6-β-naltrexol ranges from 230 to 369 mL/min, suggesting an additional renal tubular secretory mechanism. The urinary excretion of unchanged naltrexone accounts for less than 2% of an oral dose; urinary excretion of unchanged and conjugated 6-β-naltrexol accounts for 43% of an oral dose. The pharmacokinetic profile of naltrexone suggests that naltrexone and its metabolites may undergo enterohepatic recycling.
        

 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           Hepatic and Renal Impairment
                           
 Naltrexone appears to have extra-hepatic sites of drug metabolism and its major metabolite undergoes active tubular secretion (see 
         
 
  
                              Metabolism
                            above). Adequate studies of naltrexone in patients with severe hepatic or renal impairment have not been conducted (see 
         
 
  
                              PRECAUTIONS: Special Risk Patients).
         
 
  
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Clinical Trials
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Alcoholism: The efficacy of naltrexone hydrochloride as an aid to the treatment of alcoholism was tested in placebo-controlled, outpatient, double blind trials. These studies used a dose of naltrexone hydrochloride tablets 50 mg once daily for 12 weeks as an adjunct to social and psychotherapeutic methods when given under conditions that enhanced patient compliance. Patients with psychosis, dementia, and secondary psychiatric diagnoses were excluded from these studies.
          

 
                              In one of these studies, 104 alcohol-dependent patients were randomized to receive either naltrexone hydrochloride tablets 50 mg once daily or placebo. In this study, naltrexone hydrochloride proved superior to placebo in measures of drinking including abstention rates (51% vs. 23%), number of drinking days, and relapse (31% vs. 60%). In a second study with 82 alcohol-dependent patients, the group of patients receiving naltrexone hydrochloride were shown to have lower relapse rates (21% vs. 41%), less alcohol craving, and fewer drinking days compared with patients who received placebo, but these results depended on the specific analysis used.
                              The clinical use of naltrexone hydrochloride as adjunctive pharmacotherapy for the treatment of alcoholism was also evaluated in a multicenter safety study. This study of 865 individuals with alcoholism included patients with comorbid psychiatric conditions, concomitant medications, polysubstance abuse and HIV disease. Results of this study demonstrated that the side effect profile of naltrexone hydrochloride appears to be similar in both alcoholic and opioid dependent populations, and that serious side effects are uncommon.
                              In the clinical studies, treatment with naltrexone hydrochloride supported abstinence, prevented relapse and decreased alcohol consumption. In the uncontrolled study, the patterns of abstinence and relapse were similar to those observed in the controlled studies. Naltrexone hydrochloride was not uniformly helpful to all patients, and the expected effect of the drug is a modest improvement in the outcome of conventional treatment.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Treatment of Opioid Addiction Naltrexone hydrochloride has been shown to produce complete blockade of the euphoric effects of opioids in both volunteer and addict populations. When administered by means that enforce compliance, it will produce an effective opioid blockade, but has not been shown to affect the use of cocaine or other non-opioid drugs of abuse.
          

 
                              There are no data that demonstrate an unequivocally beneficial effect of naltrexone hydrochloride on rates of recidivism among detoxified, formerly opioid-dependent individuals who self-administer the drug. The failure of the drug in this setting appears to be due to poor medication compliance.
                              The drug is reported to be of greatest use in good prognosis opioid addicts who take the drug as part of a comprehensive occupational rehabilitative program, behavioral contract, or other compliance-enhancing protocol. Naltrexone hydrochloride,  unlike methadone or LAAM (levo-alpha-acetyl-methadol), does not reinforce medication compliance and is expected to have a therapeutic effect only when given under external conditions that support continued use of the medication.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         