
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Pharmacology
                     
                        Propoxyphene is a centrally acting opiate analgesic. In vitro studies demonstrated propoxyphene and the metabolite norpropoxyphene inhibit sodium channels (local anesthetic effect) with norpropoxyphene being approximately 2 fold more potent than propoxyphene and propoxyphene approximately 10 fold more potent than lidocaine. Propoxyphene and norpropoxyphene inhibit the voltage-gated potassium current carried by cardiac rapidly activating delayed rectifier (hERG) channels with approximately equal potency. It is unclear if the effects on ion channels occur within therapeutic dose range. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Pharmacokinetics
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Absorption
                           
                              Peak plasma concentrations of propoxyphene are reached in 2 to 2.5 h. After a 65 mg oral dose of propoxyphene hydrochloride, peak plasma levels of 0.05 to 0.1 mcg/mL for propoxyphene and 0.1 to 0.2 mcg/mL for norpropoxyphene (major metabolite) are achieved. Repeated doses of propoxyphene at 6 h intervals lead to increasing plasma concentrations, with a plateau after the ninth dose at 48 h. Propoxyphene has a half-life of 6 to 12 h, whereas that of norpropoxyphene is 30 to 36 h. 
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Distribution
                           
                              Propoxyphene is about 80% bound to proteins and has a large volume of distribution, 16 L/kg. 
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Metabolism
                           
                              Propoxyphene undergoes extensive first-pass metabolism by intestinal and hepatic enzymes. The major route of metabolism is cytochrome CYP3A4 mediated N-demethylation to norpropoxyphene, which is excreted by the kidneys. Ring hydroxylation and glucuronide formation are minor metabolic pathways. 
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Excretion
                           
                              In 48 h, approximately 20 to 25% of the administered dose of propoxyphene is excreted via the urine, most of which is free or conjugated norpropoxyphene. The renal clearance rate of propoxyphene is 2.6 L/min. 
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         