
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Rifaximin is an antibacterial drug
                                    [see Clinical Pharmacology ( )].
                                        12.4
                           
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        
                           
                              Absorption
                           
                        
                        
                           Travelers’ Diarrhea
                        
                        Systemic absorption of rifaximin (200 mg three times daily) was evaluated in 13 subjects challenged with shigellosis on Days 1 and 3 of a three-day course of treatment.  Rifaximin plasma concentrations and exposures were low and variable. There was no evidence of accumulation of rifaximin following repeated administration for 3 days (9 doses).  Peak plasma rifaximin concentrations after 3 and 9 consecutive doses ranged from 0.81 to 3.4 ng/mL on Day 1 and 0.68 to 2.26 ng/mL on Day 3.  Similarly, AUC estimates were 6.95 ± 5.15 ng•h/mL on Day 1 and 7.83 ± 4.94 ng•h/mL on Day 3.  XIFAXAN is not suitable for treating systemic bacterial infections because of limited systemic exposure after oral administration .
                                    0-last
                           [see Warnings and Precautions ( )]
                                        5.1
                           
                        
                        
                           Hepatic Encephalopathy
                        
                        After a single dose and multiple doses of rifaximin 550 mg in healthy subjects, the mean time to reach peak plasma concentrations was about an hour. The pharmacokinetic (PK) parameters were highly variable and the accumulation ratio based on AUC was 1.37.
                        The PK of rifaximin in patients with a history of HE was evaluated after administration of XIFAXAN, 550 mg two times a day. The PK parameters were associated with a high variability and mean rifaximin exposure (AUC ) in patients with a history of HE (147 ng•h/mL) was approximately 12-fold higher than that observed in healthy subjects following the same dosing regimen (12.3 ng•h/mL).  When PK parameters were analyzed based on Child-Pugh Class A, B, and C, the mean AUC  was 10-, 13-, and 20-fold higher, respectively, compared to that in healthy subjects (Table 3).
                                    τ
                           τ
                        
                        
                           Table 3.   Mean (± SD) Pharmacokinetic Parameters of Rifaximin at Steady-State in Patients with a History of Hepatic Encephalopathy by Child-Pugh Class
                           
                              1
                           
                        
                        


                        


Cross-study comparison with PK parameters in healthy subjects
                                    1
                        
                        Median (range)
                                    2
                        
                        
                           Food Effect in Healthy Subjects
                        
                        A high-fat meal consumed 30 minutes prior to XIFAXAN dosing in healthy subjects delayed the mean time to peak plasma concentration from 0.75 to 1.5 hours and increased the systemic exposure (AUC) of rifaximin by 2-fold (Table 4).
                        
                           Table 4.  Mean (± SD) Pharmacokinetic Parameters After Single-Dose Administration of XIFAXAN Tablets 550 mg in Healthy Subjects
                        
                        
                           Under Fasting and Fed Conditions (N = 12)
                        
                        


                        


Median (range)
                                    1
                        
                        XIFAXAN can be administered with or without food .
                                    [see Dosage and Administration ( and )]
                                        2.1 
                              2.2
                           
                        
                        
                           
                              Distribution
                           
                        
                        Rifaximin is moderately bound to human plasma proteins.  , the mean protein binding ratio was 67.5% in healthy subjects and 62% in patients with hepatic impairment when XIFAXAN 550 mg was administered.
                                    In vivo
                        
                        
                           
                              Metabolism and Excretion
                           
                        
                        In a mass balance study, after administration of 400 mg C-rifaximin orally to healthy volunteers, of the 96.94% total recovery, 96.62% of the administered radioactivity was recovered in feces almost exclusively as the unchanged drug and 0.32% was recovered in urine mostly as metabolites with 0.03% as the unchanged drug. Rifaximin accounted for 18% of radioactivity in plasma.  This suggests that the absorbed rifaximin undergoes metabolism with minimal renal excretion of the unchanged drug.  The enzymes responsible for metabolizing rifaximin are unknown.
                                    14
                        
                        In a separate study, rifaximin was detected in the bile after cholecystectomy in patients with intact gastrointestinal mucosa, suggesting biliary excretion of rifaximin.
                        
                           
                              Specific Populations
                           
                        
                        
                           Hepatic Impairment
                        
                        The systemic exposure of rifaximin was markedly elevated in patients with hepatic impairment compared to healthy subjects.  The mean AUC in patients with Child-Pugh Class C hepatic impairment was 2-fold higher than in patients with Child-Pugh Class A hepatic impairment (see Table 3), .
                                    [see Warnings and Precautions ( ) and Use in Specific Populations ( )]
                                        5.4
                              8.7
                           
                        
                        
                           Renal Impairment
                        
                        The pharmacokinetics of rifaximin in patients with impaired renal function has not been studied.
                        
                           
                              Drug Interactions
                           
                        
                        drug interaction studies have shown that rifaximin, at concentrations ranging from 2 to 200 ng/mL, did not inhibit human hepatic cytochrome P450 isoenzymes 1A2, 2A6, 2B6, 2C9, 2C19, 2D6, 2E1, and 3A4. 
                                    In vitro
                        
                        In an study, rifaximin was shown to induce CYP3A4 at the concentration of 0.2 µM.
                                    in vitro
                        
                        
                           An study suggests that rifaximin is a substrate of P-glycoprotein.  In the presence of P-glycoprotein inhibitor verapamil, the efflux ratio of rifaximin was reduced greater than 50% .  Following co-administration of a single 600-mg dose of cyclosporine, a potent inhibitor of P-glycoprotein and a weak inhibitor of CYP3A4, OATP, and BCRP, with a single dose of rifaximin 550 mg, rifaximin mean C was increased 83-fold, from 0.48 to 40.0 ng/mL; mean AUC was increased 124-fold, from 2.54 to 314 ng.h/mL.
                                        in vitro
                              in vitro
                              max
                              ∞
                           
                        
                        The inhibitory effect of rifaximin on P-gp transport was observed in an study.  The effect of rifaximin on P-gp transporter was not evaluated .
                                    in vitro
                           in vivo
                        
                        
                           Midazolam
                        
                        The effect of rifaximin 200 mg administered orally every 8 hours for 3 days and for 7 days on the pharmacokinetics of a single dose of either midazolam 2 mg intravenous or midazolam 6 mg orally was evaluated in healthy subjects.  No significant difference was observed in the metrics of systemic exposure or elimination of intravenous or oral midazolam or its major metabolite, 1’-hydroxymidazolam, between midazolam alone or together with rifaximin.  Therefore, rifaximin was not shown to significantly affect intestinal or hepatic CYP3A4 activity for the 200 mg three times a day dosing regimen.
                        After XIFAXAN 550 mg was administered three times a day for 7 days and 14 days to healthy subjects, the mean AUC of single midazolam 2 mg orally was 3.8% and 8.8% lower, respectively, than when midazolam was administered alone.  The mean C of midazolam was also decreased by 4-5% when XIFAXAN was administered for 7-14 days prior to midazolam administration.  This degree of interaction is not considered clinically meaningful.
                                    max
                        
                        The effect of rifaximin on CYP3A4 in patients with impaired liver function who have elevated systemic exposure is not known.
                        
                           Oral Contraceptives Containing 0.07 mg Ethinyl Estradiol and 0.5 mg Norgestimate
                        
                        The oral contraceptive study utilized an open-label, crossover design in 28 healthy female subjects to determine if rifaximin 200 mg orally administered three times a day for 3 days (the dosing regimen for travelers’ diarrhea) altered the pharmacokinetics of a single dose of an oral contraceptive containing 0.07 mg ethinyl estradiol and 0.5 mg norgestimate.  Results showed that the pharmacokinetics of single doses of ethinyl estradiol and norgestimate were not altered by rifaximin.
                         Effect of rifaximin on oral contraceptives was not studied for XIFAXAN 550 mg twice a day, the dosing regimen for hepatic encephalopathy.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.4 Microbiology
                     
                        
                           
                              Mechanism of Action
                           
                        
                              Rifaximin is a non-aminoglycoside semi-synthetic antibacterial derived from rifamycin SV.  Rifaximin acts by binding to the beta-subunit of bacterial DNA-dependent RNA polymerase resulting in inhibition of bacterial RNA synthesis.
                        
                           
                              Drug Resistance and Cross-Resistance
                           
                        
                        has been shown to develop resistance to rifaximin .  However, the clinical significance of such an effect has not been studied. 
                                    Escherichia coli
                           in vitro
                        
                        Rifaximin is a structural analog of rifampin. Organisms with high rifaximin minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) values also have elevated MIC values against rifampin. Cross-resistance between rifaximin and other classes of antimicrobials has not been studied. 
                        
                           
                              Activity In Vitro and in Critical Infections
                           
                        
                        Rifaximin has been shown to be active against the following pathogen in clinical studies of infectious diarrhea as described in the section: (enterotoxigenic and enteroaggregative strains).
                                    Indications and Usage ( )
                                        1
                           
                           Escherichia coli
                        
                        For HE, rifaximin is thought to have an effect on the gastrointestinal flora.
                        
                           
                              Susceptibility Tests
                           
                        
                        susceptibility testing was performed according to the National Committee for Clinical Laboratory Standards (NCCLS) agar dilution method M7-A6 . However, the correlation between susceptibility testing and clinical outcome has not been determined.
                                    In vitro
                           [see References ( )]
                                        15
                           
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         