
               
               
               DRUG INTERACTIONS
               Serotonergic Drugs
 
Based on the mechanism of action of SNRIs and SSRIs 
including citalopram, and the potential for serotonin syndrome, caution is 
advised when citalopram is coadministered with other drugs that may affect the 
serotonergic neurotransmitter systems, such as triptans, linezolid (an 
antibiotic which is a reversible non-selective MAOI), lithium, tramadol, or St. 
John's Wort (see 
                     WARNINGS-Serotonin 
Syndrome
                  ). The concomitant use of citalopram with other SSRIs, SNRIs 
or tryptophan is not recommended (see 
                     
                        PRECAUTIONS - Drug 
Interactions
                     
                  ).
 
Triptans
 
There have been rare 
postmarketing reports of serotonin syndrome with use of an SSRI and a triptan. 
If concomitant treatment of citalopram with a triptan is clinically warranted, 
careful observation of the patient is advised, particularly during treatment 
initiation and dose increases (see 
                     WARNINGS - Serotonin Syndrome
                  ).
 
CNS Drugs 
- Given the primary CNS effects of citalopram, caution 
should be used when it is taken in combination with other centrally acting 
drugs.
 
Alcohol - Although citalopram did not potentiate the cognitive 
and motor effects of alcohol in a clinical trial, as with other psychotropic 
medications, the use of alcohol by depressed patients taking citalopram tablets 
are not recommended.
 
Monoamine Oxidase Inhibitors (MAOIs) - See 
                     CONTRAINDICATIONS
                   and 
                     WARNINGS
                  .
 
Drugs That Interfere With 
Hemostasis (NSAIDs, Aspirin, Warfarin, etc.) - Serotonin release by platelets 
plays an important role in hemostasis. Epidemiological studies of the 
case-control and cohort design that have demonstrated an association between use 
of psychotropic drugs that interfere with serotonin reuptake and the occurrence 
of upper gastrointestinal bleeding have also shown that concurrent use of an 
NSAID or aspirin may potentiate the risk of bleeding. Altered anticoagulant 
effects, including increased bleeding, have been reported when SSRIs and SNRIs 
are coadministered with warfarin. Patients receiving warfarin therapy should be 
carefully monitored when citalopram is initiated or 
discontinued.
 
Cimetidine - In subjects who had received 21 days of 40 
mg/day citalopram tablets, combined administration of 400 mg/day cimetidine for 
8 days resulted in an increase in citalopram AUC and Cmax 
of 43% and 39%, respectively. The clinical significance of these findings is 
unknown.
 
Digoxin – In subjects who had received 21 days of 40 mg/day 
citalopram tablets, combined administration of citalopram tablets and digoxin 
(single dose of 1 mg) did not significantly affect the pharmacokinetics of 
either citalopram or digoxin.
 
Lithium - 
Coadministration of citalopram tablets (40 mg/day for 10 days) and lithium (30 
mmol/day for 5 days) had no significant effect on the pharmacokinetics of 
citalopram or lithium. Nevertheless, plasma lithium levels should be monitored 
with appropriate adjustment to the lithium dose in accordance with standard 
clinical practice. Because lithium may enhance the serotonergic effects of 
citalopram, caution should be exercised when citalopram tablets and lithium are 
coadministered.
 
Pimozide – In a controlled study, a single dose of 
pimozide 2 mg co-administered with citalopram 40 mg given once daily for 11 days 
was associated with a mean increase in QTc values of approximately 10 msec 
compared to pimozide given alone. Citalopram did not alter the mean AUC or 
Cmax of pimozide. The mechanism of this pharmacodynamic 
interaction is not known.
 
Theophylline - 
Combined administration of citalopram tablets (40 mg/day for 21 days) and the 
CYP1A2 substrate theophylline (single dose of 300 mg) did not affect the 
pharmacokinetics of theophylline.  The effect of theophylline on the 
pharmacokinetics of citalopram was not evaluated.
 
Sumatriptan - There have been rare postmarketing reports describing 
patients with weakness, hyperreflexia, and incoordination following the use of a 
SSRI and sumatriptan. If concomitant treatment with sumatriptan and an SSRI 
(e.g., fluoxetine, fluvoxamine, paroxetine, sertraline, citalopram) is 
clinically warranted, appropriate observation of the patient is 
advised.
 
Warfarin - Administration of 40 mg/day 
citalopram tablets for 21 days did not affect the pharmacokinetics of warfarin, 
a CYP3A4 substrate. Prothrombin time was increased by 5%, the clinical 
significance of which is unknown.
 
Carbamazepine - Combined administration of citalopram tablets (40 mg/day for 
14 days) and carbamazepine (titrated to 400 mg/day for 35 days) did not 
significantly affect the pharmacokinetics of carbamazepine, a CYP3A4 
substrate. Although trough citalopram plasma levels were unaffected, given the 
enzyme-inducing properties of carbamazepine, the possibility that carbamazepine 
might increase the clearance of citalopram should be considered if the two drugs 
are coadministered.
 
Triazolam - Combined 
administration of citalopram tablets (titrated to 40 mg/day for 28 days) and the 
CYP3A4 substrate triazolam (single dose of 0.25 mg) did not significantly affect 
the pharmacokinetics of either citalopram or triazolam.
 
Ketoconazole 
- Combined administration of citalopram tablets (40 mg) 
and ketoconazole (200 mg) decreased the Cmax and AUC of 
ketoconazole by 21% and 10%, respectively, and did not significantly affect the 
pharmacokinetics of citalopram.
 
CYP3A4 and 2C19 Inhibitors - 
                  In vitro studies indicated that 
CYP3A4 and 2C19 are the primary enzymes involved in the metabolism of 
citalopram. However, coadministration of citalopram (40 mg) and ketoconazole 
(200 mg), a potent inhibitor of CYP3A4, did not significantly affect the 
pharmacokinetics of citalopram. Because citalopram is metabolized by multiple 
enzyme systems, inhibition of a single enzyme may not appreciably decrease 
citalopram clearance.
 
Metoprolol - 
Administration of 40 mg/day citalopram tablets for 22 days resulted in a 
two-fold increasein the plasma levels of the beta-adrenergic blocker 
metoprolol.  Increased metoprolol plasma levels have been associated with 
decreased cardioselectivity. Coadministration of citalopram tablets and 
metoprolol had no clinically significant effects on blood pressure or heart 
rate.
 
Imipramine and Other Tricyclic Antidepressants (TCAs) - 
                  In vitro studies suggest that 
citalopram is a relatively weak inhibitor of CYP2D6. Coadministration 
of citalopram tablets (40 mg/day for 10 days) with the TCA imipramine (single 
dose of 100 mg), a substrate for CYP2D6, did not significantly affect the plasma 
concentrations of imipramine or citalopram. However, the concentration of the 
imipramine metabolite desipramine was increased by approximately 50%. The 
clinical significance of the desipramine change is unknown. Nevertheless, 
caution is indicated in the coadministration of TCAs with citalopram 
tablets.
 
Electroconvulsive Therapy (ECT) - There are no clinical studies 
of the combined use of electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) and citalopram tablets.
                  
                  Carcinogenesis, Mutagenesis, Impairment of 
Fertility
                  
                  Carcinogenesis
Citalopram was administered in 
the diet to NMRI/BOM strain mice and COBS WI strain rats for 18 and 24 months, 
respectively. There was no evidence for carcinogenicity of citalopram in mice 
receiving up to 240 mg/kg/day, which is equivalent to 20 times the maximum 
recommended human daily dose (MRHD) of 60 mg on a surface area (mg/m2) basis. There was an increased incidence of small intestine 
carcinoma in rats receiving 8 or 24 mg/kg/day, doses which are approximately 1.3 
and 4 times the MRHD, respectively, on a mg/m2 basis. A 
no-effect dose for this finding was not established. The relevance of these 
findings to humans is unknown.  
                  
                  Mutagenesis
Citalopram was mutagenic in the 
in vitro bacterial reverse mutation assay (Ames test) 
in 2 of 5 bacterial strains (Salmonella TA98 and TA1537) in the absence of 
metabolic activation. It was clastogenic in the in 
vitro Chinese hamster lung cell assay for chromosomal aberrations in the 
presence and absence of metabolic activation. Citalopram was not mutagenic in 
the in vitro mammalian forward gene mutation assay 
(HPRT) in mouse lymphoma cells or in a coupled in vitro/in 
vivo unscheduled DNA synthesis (UDS) assay in rat liver. It was not 
clastogenic in the in vitro chromosomal aberration 
assay in human lymphocytes or in two in vivo mouse 
micronucleus assays.
                  
                  Impairment of Fertility
When citalopram was 
administered orally to 16 male and 24 female rats prior to and throughout mating 
and gestation at doses of 32, 48, and 72 mg/kg/day, mating was decreased at all 
doses, and fertility was decreased at doses ≥ 32 mg/kg/day, approximately 5 
times the MRHD of 60 mg/day on a body surface area (mg/m2) basis. Gestation duration was increased at 48 mg/kg/day, 
approximately 8 times the MRHD.
                  
               
               
            
         