


CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY





Pharmacodynamics
REVEX
                                    prevents or reverses the effects of opioids, including
                                    respiratory depression, sedation, and hypotension.
                                    Pharmacodynamic studies have shown that REVEX has a longer
                                    duration of action than naloxone at fully reversing doses. REVEX
                                    has no opioid agonist activity.REVEX is
                                    not known to produce respiratory depression, psychotomimetic
                                    effects, or pupillary constriction. No pharmacological activity
                                    was observed when REVEX was administered in the absence of
                                    opioid agonists.REVEX has
                                    not been shown to produce tolerance, physical dependence, or
                                    abuse potential.REVEX can
                                    produce acute withdrawal symptoms in individuals who are opioid              dependent.







Pharmacokinetics
Nalmefene
                                    exhibited dose proportional pharmacokinetics following
                                    intravenous administration of 0.5 mg to 2.0 mg. Pharmacokinetic
                                    parameters for nalmefene after a 1 mg intravenous administration
                                    in adult male volunteers are listed in Table 1.










Absorption
Nalmefene was completely bioavailable following
                                            intramuscular or subcutaneous administration in 12 male
                                            volunteers relative to intravenous nalmefene. The
                                            relative bioavailabilities of intramuscular and
                                            subcutaneous routes of administration were 101.5%± 8.1% (Mean ± SD) and 99.7%± 6.9%, respectively. Nalmefene will be
                                            administered primarily as an intravenous bolus, however,
                                            nalmefene can be given intra-muscularly (IM) or
                                            subcutaneously (SC) if venous access cannot be
                                            established. While the time to maximum plasma nalmefene
                                            concentration was 2.3 ± 1.1 hours following
                                            intramuscular and 1.5 ± 1.2 hours following
                                            subcutaneous administrations, therapeutic plasma
                                            concentrations are likely to be reached within 5-15       minutes after a 1 mg dose in an emergency. Because of
                                            the variability in the speed of absorption for IM& SC dosing, and the inability to titrate to
                                            effect, great care should be taken if repeated doses
                                            must be given by these routes.







Distribution
Following a 1 mg parenteral dose, nalmefene was rapidly
                                            distributed. In a study of brain receptor occupancy, a 1
                                            mg dose of nalmefene blocked over 80% of brain opioid
                                            receptors within 5 minutes after administration. The
                                            apparent volumes of distribution centrally (Vc) and at steady-state (Vdss) are
                                            3.9 ± 1.1 L/kg and 8.6 ± 1.7 L/kg,   respectively. Ultrafiltration studies of nalmefene have
                                            demonstrated that 45% (CV 4.1%) is bound to plasma
                                            proteins over a concentration range of 0.1 to 2µg/mL. An in
                                            vitro determination of the distribution of
                                            nalmefene in human blood demonstrated that nalmefene
                                            distributed 67% (CV 8.7%) into red blood cells and 39%
                                            (CV 6.4%) into plasma. The whole blood to plasma ratio
                                            was 1.3 (CV 6.6%) over the nominal concentration range
                                            in whole blood from 0.376 to 30 ng/mL.c) and at steady-state (V







Metabolism
Nalmefene is metabolized by the liver, primarily by
                                            glucuronide conjugation, and excreted in the urine.
                                            Nalmefene is also metabolized to trace amounts of an
                                            N-dealkylated metabolite. Nalmefene glucuronide is
                                            inactive and the N-dealkylated metabolite has minimal
                                            pharmacological activity. Less than 5% of nalmefene is
                                            excreted in the urine unchanged. Seventeen percent (17%)
                                            of the nalmefene dose is excreted in the feces. The
                                            plasma concentration-time profile in some subjects
                                            suggests that nalmefene undergoes enterohepatic
                                            recycling.







Elimination
After intravenous administration of 1 mg REVEX to
                                            normal males (ages 19-32), plasma concentrations
                                            declined biexponentially with a redistribution and a
                                            terminal elimination half-life of 41 ± 34
                                            minutes and 10.8 ± 5.2 hours, respectively. The
                                            systemic clearance of nalmefene is 0.8 ± 0.2
                                            L/hr/kg and the renal clearance is 0.08 ± 0.04
                                            L/hr/kg.









Special Populations





Elderly
Dose proportionality was observed in nalmefene AUC0-inf following 0.5 to 2 mg intravenous
                                            administration to elderly male subjects. Following a 1
                                            mg intravenous nalmefene dose, there were no significant
                                            differences between young (19-32 years) and elderly
                                            (62-80 years) adult male subjects with respect to plasma
                                            clearance, steady-state volume of distribution, or
                                            half-life. There was an apparent age-related decrease in
                                            the central volume of distribution (young: 3.9± 1.1 L/kg, elderly: 2.8 ± 1.1 L/kg)
                                            that resulted in a greater initial nalmefene
                                            concentration in the elderly group. While initial                      nalmefene plasma concentrations were transiently higher
                                            in the elderly, it would not be anticipated that this
                                            population would require dosing adjustment. No clinical
                                            adverse events were noted in the elderly following the 1
                                            mg intravenous nalmefene dose.0-inf following 0.5 to 2 mg intravenous
                                            administration to elderly male subjects. Following a 1
                                            mg intravenous nalmefene dose, there were no significant
                                            differences between young (19-32 years) and elderly
                                            (62-80 years) adult male subjects with respect to plasma
                                            clearance, steady-state volume of distribution, or
                                            half-life. There was an apparent age-related decrease in
                                            the central volume of distribution (young: 3.9± 1.1 L/kg, elderly: 2.8 ± 1.1 L/kg)
                                            that resulted in a greater initial nalmefene
                                            concentration in the elderly group. While initial                      nalmefene plasma concentrations were transiently higher
                                            in the elderly, it would not be anticipated that this
                                            population would require dosing adjustment. No clinical
                                            adverse events were noted in the elderly following the 1
                                            mg intravenous nalmefene dose.







Patients
                                        with Hepatic Impairment
Subjects with hepatic disease, when compared to matched
                                            normal controls, had a 28.3% decrease in plasma
                                            clearance of nalmefene (0.56 ± 0.21 L/hr/kg
                                            versus 0.78 ± 0.24 L/hr/kg, respectively).
                                            Elimination half-life increased from 10.2 ± 2.2
                                            hours to 11.9 ± 2.0 hours in the hepatically
                                            impaired. No dosage adjustment is recommended since
                                            nalmefene will be administered as an acute course of
                                            therapy.







Patients
                                        with Renal Impairment
There was a statistically significant 27% decrease in plasma clearance of nalmefene in the end-stage renal
                                            disease (ESRD) population during interdialysis (0.57± 0.20 L/hr/kg) and a 25% decreased plasma
                                            clearance in the ESRD population during intradialysis
                                            (0.59 ± 0.18 L/hr/kg) compared to normals (0.79± 0.24 L/hr/kg). The elimination half-life was
                                            prolonged in ESRD patients from 10.2 ± 2.2
                                            hours in normals to 26.1 ± 9.9 hours. (SeeDOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION.)DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION.)







Gender
                                        Differences
There has not been sufficient pharmacokinetic study to                make a definitive statement as to whether the
                                            pharmacokinetics of nalmefene differs between the
                                            genders.






