
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           CNS depressants: Increased risk of respiratory depression, hypotension, profound sedation, or coma. Use with caution in reduced dosages. (7.1)
                           Muscle relaxants: Enhance the neuromuscular blocking action of skeletal muscle relaxants and produce an increased degree of respiratory depression. (7.2)
                           Mixed agonist/antagonist opioid analgesics (i.e. pentazocine, nalbuphine, and butorphanol): May reduce the analgesic effect and/or may precipitate withdrawal symptoms. (7.3)
                           Cimetidine: Precipitates apnea, confusion and muscle twitching. (7.4)
                           Monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs): Potentiate the action of morphine sulfate. Morphine sulfate should not be used in patients taking MAOIs or within 14 days of stopping such treatment. (7.5)
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 CNS Depressants
                     
                        Other central nervous system (CNS) depressants including sedatives, hypnotics, general anesthetics, antiemetics, phenothiazines, or other tranquilizers or alcohol increases the risk of respiratory depression, hypotension, profound sedation, or coma. Use morphine sulfate with caution and in reduced dosages in patients taking these agents.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 Muscle Relaxants
                     
                        Morphine sulfate may enhance the neuromuscular blocking action of skeletal muscle relaxants and produce an increased degree of respiratory depression.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3 Mixed Agonist/Antagonist Opioid Analgesics
                     
                        Do not administer mixed agonist/antagonist analgesics (i.e., pentazocine, nalbuphine, and butorphanol) to patients who have received or are receiving a course of therapy with a pure opioid agonist analgesic such as morphine sulfate. In these patients, mixed agonist/antagonist analgesics may reduce the analgesic effect and/or may precipitate withdrawal symptoms.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4 Cimetidine
                     
                        Concomitant administration of morphine sulfate and cimetidine has been reported to precipitate apnea, confusion, and muscle twitching in an isolated report. Monitor patients for increased respiratory and CNS depression when receiving cimetidine concomitantly with morphine sulfate.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.5 Monoamine Oxidase Inhibitors (MAOIs)
                     
                        MAOIs markedly potentiate the action of morphine sulfate. Allow at least 14 days after stopping treatment with MAOIs before initiating treatment with morphine sulfate.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.6 Anticholinergics
                     
                        Anticholinergics or other medications with anticholinergic activity when used concurrently with opioid analgesics may result in increased risk of urinary retention and/or severe constipation, which may lead to paralytic ileus.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.7 P-Glycoprotein (PGP) Inhibitors
                     
                        Based on published reports, PGP inhibitors (e.g. quinidine) may increase the absorption/exposure of morphine sulfate by about two fold. Therefore, exercise caution when morphine sulfate is co-administered with PGP inhibitors.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         