
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     General
                     
                        When technetium Tc99m pertechnetate is added to tetrofosmin in the presence of stannous reductant, a lipophilic, cationic technetium Tc99m complex is formed, Tc99m tetrofosmin. This complex is the active ingredient in the reconstituted drug product, on whose biodistribution and pharmacokinetic properties the indications for use depend.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        Studies in normal volunteers have demonstrated rapid myocardial uptake of Tc99m tetrofosmin, and rapid blood, liver and lung clearances. Uptake in the myocardium reaches a maximum of about 1.2% of the injected dose (i.d.) at 5 minutes and approximately 1% of the i.d. at 2 hours, respectively. Background activities in the blood, liver and lung were less than 5% of the administered activity in whole blood at 10 minutes post-injection, less than 4.5% i.d., after 60 minutes, and less than 2% i.d. after 30 minutes. Approximately 66% of the injected activity is excreted within 48 hours post-injection, with approximately 40% excreted in the urine and 26% in the feces.
                        The kinetics, elimination and protein binding of Tc99m tetrofosmin have not been determined.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        The pharmacodynamic cellular uptake of tetrofosmin in humans has not been established. In humans the recommended imaging time is 15 minutes at stress and 30 minutes at rest.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Metabolism
                     
                        The metabolic profile of tetrofosmin has not been established.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Drug-Drug Interactions
                     
                        Specific drug-drug interactions have not been studied.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         