


CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY






Mechanism of Action
Angiotensin II is formed from angiotensin I in a reaction catalyzed by angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE, kininase II).  Angiotensin II is the principal pressor agent of the renin-angiotensin system, with effects that include vasoconstriction, stimulation of synthesis and release of aldosterone, cardiac stimulation and renal reabsorption of sodium. Olmesartan blocks the vasoconstrictor effects of angiotensin II by selectively blocking the binding of angiotensin II to the AT1 receptor in vascular smooth muscle.  Its action is, therefore, independent of the pathways for angiotensin II synthesis.1 receptor in vascular smooth muscle.  Its action is, therefore, independent of the pathways for angiotensin II synthesis.An AT2 receptor is found also in many tissues, but this receptor is not known to be associated with cardiovascular homeostasis.  Olmesartan has more than a 12,500-fold greater affinity for the AT1 receptor than for the AT2 receptor.2 receptor is found also in many tissues, but this receptor is not known to be associated with cardiovascular homeostasis.  Olmesartan has more than a 12,500-fold greater affinity for the ATBlockade of the renin-angiotensin system with ACE inhibitors, which inhibit the biosynthesis of angiotensin II from angiotensin I, is a mechanism of many drugs used to treat hypertension. ACE inhibitors also inhibit the degradation of bradykinin, a reaction also catalyzed by ACE. Because olmesartan medoxomil does not inhibit ACE (kininase II), it does not affect the response to bradykinin. Whether this difference has clinical relevance is not yet known.Blockade of the angiotensin II receptor inhibits the negative regulatory feedback of angiotensin II on renin secretion, but the resulting increased plasma renin activity and circulating angiotensin II levels do not overcome the effect of olmesartan on blood pressure.







Pharmacokinetics
GeneralGeneralOlmesartan medoxomil is rapidly and completely bioactivated by ester hydrolysis to olmesartan during absorption from the gastrointestinal tract.  Olmesartan appears to be eliminated in a biphasic manner with a terminal elimination half-life of approximately 13 hours.  Olmesartan shows linear pharmacokinetics following single oral doses of up to 320 mg and multiple oral doses of up to 80 mg.  Steady-state levels of olmesartan are achieved within 3 to 5 days and no accumulation in plasma occurs with once-daily dosing.The absolute bioavailability of olmesartan is approximately 26%.  After oral administration, the peak plasma concentration (Cmax) of olmesartan is reached after 1 to 2 hours.  Food does not affect the bioavailability of olmesartan.max) of olmesartan is reached after 1 to 2 hours.  Food does not affect the bioavailability of olmesartan.







Metabolism and Excretion
Following the rapid and complete conversion of olmesartan medoxomil to olmesartan during absorption, there is virtually no further metabolism of olmesartan.  Total plasma clearance of olmesartan is 1.3 L/h, with a renal clearance of 0.6 L/h.  Approximately 35% to 50% of the absorbed dose is recovered in urine while the remainder is eliminated in feces via the bile.







Distribution
The volume of distribution of olmesartan is approximately 17 L.  Olmesartan is highly bound to plasma proteins (99%) and does not penetrate red blood cells.  The protein binding is constant at plasma olmesartan concentrations well above the range achieved with recommended doses.In rats, olmesartan crossed the blood-brain barrier poorly, if at all.  Olmesartan passed across the placental barrier in rats and was distributed to the fetus.  Olmesartan was distributed to milk at low levels in rats.







Special Populations
Pediatric:The pharmacokinetics of olmesartan have not been investigated in patients <18 years of age.Pediatric:The pharmacokinetics of olmesartan have not been investigated in patients <18 years of age.Geriatrics:The pharmacokinetics of olmesartan were studied in the elderly (≥65 years).  Overall, maximum plasma concentrations of olmesartan were similar in young adults and the elderly.  Modest accumulation of olmesartan was observed in the elderly with repeated dosing; AUCss, t was 33% higher in elderly patients, corresponding to an approximate 30% reduction in CLR..Geriatrics:The pharmacokinetics of olmesartan were studied in the elderly (≥65 years).  Overall, maximum plasma concentrations of olmesartan were similar in young adults and the elderly.  Modest accumulation of olmesartan was observed in the elderly with repeated dosing; AUCss, t was 33% higher in elderly patients, corresponding to an approximate 30% reduction in CLR..Gender:Minor differences were observed in the pharmacokinetics of olmesartan in women compared to men.  AUC and Cmax were 10-15% higher in women than in men.Gender:Minor differences were observed in the pharmacokinetics of olmesartan in women compared to men.  AUC and Cmax were 10-15% higher in women than in men.Renal Insufficiency:In patients with renal insufficiency, serum concentrations of olmesartan were elevated compared to subjects with normal renal function.  After repeated dosing, the AUC was approximately tripled in patients with severe renal impairment (creatinine clearance <20 mL/min).  The pharmacokinetics of olmesartan in patients undergoing hemodialysis has not been studied.Renal Insufficiency:In patients with renal insufficiency, serum concentrations of olmesartan were elevated compared to subjects with normal renal function.  After repeated dosing, the AUC was approximately tripled in patients with severe renal impairment (creatinine clearance <20 mL/min).  The pharmacokinetics of olmesartan in patients undergoing hemodialysis has not been studied.Hepatic Insufficiency:Increases in AUC0-∞ and Cmaxwere observed in patients with moderate hepatic impairment compared to those in matched controls, with an increase in AUC of about 60%.Hepatic Insufficiency:Increases in AUC







Drug Interactions
See PRECAUTIONS, Drug Interactions.PRECAUTIONS, Drug Interactions.







Pharmacodynamics
Olmesartan medoxomil doses of 2.5 to 40 mg inhibit the pressor effects of angiotensin I infusion. The duration of the inhibitory effect was related to dose, with doses of olmesartan medoxomil >40 mg giving >90% inhibition at 24 hours.Plasma concentrations of angiotensin I and angiotensin II and plasma renin activity (PRA) increase after single and repeated administration of olmesartan medoxomil to healthy subjects and hypertensive patients.  Repeated administration of up to 80 mg olmesartan medoxomil had minimal influence on aldosterone levels and no effect on serum potassium.







Clinical Trials
The antihypertensive effects of BENICAR® have been demonstrated in seven placebo-controlled studies at doses ranging from 2.5 to 80 mg for 6 to 12 weeks, each showing statistically significant reductions in peak and trough blood pressure.  A total of 2693 patients (2145 BENICAR®; 548 placebo) with essential hypertension were studied.  BENICAR® once daily (QD) lowered diastolic and systolic blood pressure. The response was dose-related, as shown in the following graph.  An olmesartan medoxomil dose of 20 mg daily produces a trough sitting BP reduction over placebo of about 10/6 mm Hg  and a dose of 40 mg daily produces a trough sitting BP reduction over placebo of about 12/7 mm Hg. Olmesartan medoxomil doses greater than 40 mg had little additional effect. The onset of the antihypertensive effect occurred within 1 week and was largely manifest after 2 weeks.® have been demonstrated in seven placebo-controlled studies at doses ranging from 2.5 to 80 mg for 6 to 12 weeks, each showing statistically significant reductions in peak and trough blood pressure.  A total of 2693 patients (2145 BENICAR
Data above are from seven placebo-controlled studies (2145 BENICAR® patients, 548 placebo patients).The blood pressure lowering effect was maintained throughout the 24-hour period with BENICAR®once daily, with trough-to-peak ratios for systolic and diastolic response between 60 and 80%.®once daily, with trough-to-peak ratios for systolic and diastolic response between 60 and 80%.The blood pressure lowering effect of BENICAR®, with and without hydrochlorothiazide, was maintained in patients treated for up to 1 year.  There was no evidence of tachyphylaxis during long-term treatment with BENICAR® or rebound effect following abrupt withdrawal of olmesartan medoxomil after 1 year of treatment.®, with and without hydrochlorothiazide, was maintained in patients treated for up to 1 year.  There was no evidence of tachyphylaxis during long-term treatment with BENICARThe antihypertensive effect of BENICAR® was similar in men and women and in patients older and younger than 65 years. The effect was smaller in black patients (usually a low-renin population), as has been seen with other ACE inhibitors, angiotensin receptor blockers and beta-blockers. BENICAR® had an additional blood pressure lowering effect when added to hydrochlorothiazide.® was similar in men and women and in patients older and younger than 65 years. The effect was smaller in black patients (usually a low-renin population), as has been seen with other ACE inhibitors, angiotensin receptor blockers and beta-blockers. BENICAR









