
                     
                     
                     Drug Interactions
                     
                        
                           
                              Telmisartan
                           
                        
                        
                           Aliskiren: Do not co-administer aliskiren with telmisartan and hydrochlorothiazide tablets in patients with diabetes. Avoid use of aliskiren with telmisartan and hydrochlorothiazide tablets in patients with renal impairment (GFR <60 mL/min).
                        
                           Digoxin: When telmisartan was co-administered with digoxin, median increases in digoxin peak plasma concentration (49%) and in trough concentration (20%) were observed. It is, therefore, recommended that digoxin levels be monitored when initiating, adjusting, and discontinuing telmisartan to avoid possible over-or under-digitalization.   
                        
                           Lithium: Reversible increases in serum lithium concentrations and toxicity have been reported during concomitant administration of lithium with angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitors. Cases have also been reported with angiotensin II receptor antagonists including telmisartan. Because lithium should not be used with diuretics, the use of lithium with telmisartan and hydrochlorothiazide is not recommended. 
                        
                           Non-Steroidal Anti-Inflammatory Agents including Selective Cyclooxygenase-2 Inhibitors (COX-2 Inhibitors): In patients who are elderly, volume-depleted (including those on diuretic therapy), or with compromised renal function, co-administration of NSAIDs, including selective COX-2 inhibitors, with angiotensin II receptor antagonists, including telmisartan, may result in deterioration of renal function, including possible acute renal failure. These effects are usually reversible. Monitor renal function periodically in patients receiving telmisartan and NSAID therapy. 
                        The antihypertensive effect of angiotensin II receptor antagonists, including telmisartan may be attenuated by NSAIDs including selective COX-2 inhibitors. 
                        
                           Ramipril and Ramiprilat: Co-administration of telmisartan 80 mg once daily and ramipril 10 mg once daily to healthy subjects increases steady-state Cmax and AUC of ramipril 2.3 and 2.1 fold, respectively, and Cmax and AUC of ramiprilat 2.4 and 1.5 fold, respectively. In contrast, Cmax and AUC of telmisartan decrease by 31% and 16%, respectively. When co-administering telmisartan and ramipril, the response may be greater because of the possibly additive pharmacodynamic effects of the combined drugs, and also because of the increased exposure to ramipril and ramiprilat in the presence of telmisartan.
                        
                           Warfarin: Telmisartan administered for 10 days slightly decreased the mean warfarin trough plasma concentration; this decrease did not result in a change in International Normalized Ratio (INR).   
                        
                           Other Drugs: Co-administration of telmisartan did not result in a clinically significant interaction with acetaminophen, amlodipine, glibenclamide, simvastatin, hydrochlorothiazide or ibuprofen. Telmisartan is not metabolized by the cytochrome P450 system and had no effects in vitro on cytochrome P450 enzymes, except for some inhibition of CYP2C19. Telmisartan is not expected to interact with drugs that inhibit cytochrome P450 enzymes; it is also not expected to interact with drugs metabolized by cytochrome P450 enzymes, except for possible inhibition of the metabolism of drugs metabolized by CYP2C19. 
                        
                           
                              Hydrochlorothiazide 
                           
                        
                        When administered concurrently, the following drugs may interact with thiazide diuretics: 
                        
                           Alcohol, barbiturates, or narcotics: Potentiation of orthostatic hypotension may occur. 
                        
                           Antidiabetic drugs (oral agents and insulin): Dosage adjustment of the antidiabetic drug may be required. 
                        
                           Other antihypertensive drugs: Additive effect or potentiation. 
                        
                           Cholestyramine and colestipol resins: Absorption of hydrochlorothiazide is impaired in the presence of anionic exchange resins. Single doses of either cholestyramine or colestipol resins bind the hydrochlorothiazide and reduce its absorption from the gastrointestinal tract by up to 85% and 43%, respectively. 
                        
                           Corticosteroids, ACTH: Intensified electrolyte depletion, particularly hypokalemia. 
                        
                           Pressor amines (e.g., norepinephrine): Possible decreased response to pressor amines but not sufficient to preclude their use. 
                        
                           Skeletal muscle relaxants, nondepolarizing (e.g., tubocurarine): Possible increased responsiveness to the muscle relaxant. 
                        
                           Lithium: Should not generally be given with diuretics. Diuretic agents reduce the renal clearance of lithium and add a high risk of lithium toxicity. Refer to the package insert for lithium preparations before use of such preparations with telmisartan and hydrochlorothiazide tablets. 
                        
                           Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs: In some patients, the administration of a non-steroidal anti- inflammatory agent can reduce the diuretic, natriuretic, and antihypertensive effects of loop, potassium-sparing and thiazide diuretics. Therefore, when telmisartan and hydrochlorothiazide tablets and non-steroidal anti -inflammatory agents are used concomitantly, the patient should be observed closely to determine if the desired effect of the diuretic is obtained. 
                     
                     
                  
               