
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              •Strong inhibitors of CYP2D6: Reduce BRINTELLIX dose by half when a strong CYP2D6 inhibitor (e.g., bupropion, fluoxetine, paroxetine, or quinidine) is coadministered (2.6 and 7.3).
                           
                              •Strong CYP Inducers: Consider increasing BRINTELLIX dose when a strong CYP inducer (e.g., rifampin, carbamazepine, or phenytoin) is coadministered for more than 14 days. The maximum recommended dose should not exceed 3 times the original dose (2.7 and 7.3).
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 CNS Active Agents
                     
                        
                           Monoamine Oxidase Inhibitors
                        
                        Adverse reactions, some of which are serious or fatal, can develop in patients who use MAOIs or who have recently been discontinued from an MAOI and started on a serotonergic antidepressant(s) or who have recently had SSRI or SNRI therapy discontinued prior to initiation of an MAOI [see Dosage and Administration (2.4), Contraindications (4) and Warnings and Precautions (5.2)].
                        
                           Serotonergic Drugs
                        
                        Based on the mechanism of action of BRINTELLIX and the potential for serotonin toxicity, serotonin syndrome may occur when BRINTELLIX is coadministered with other drugs that may affect the serotonergic neurotransmitter systems (e.g., SSRIs, SNRIs, triptans, buspirone, tramadol, and tryptophan products etc.). Closely monitor symptoms of serotonin syndrome if BRINTELLIX is co-administered with other serotonergic drugs. Treatment with BRINTELLIX and any concomitant serotonergic agents should be discontinued immediately if serotonin syndrome occurs [see Warnings and Precautions (5.2)].
                        
                        
                           Other CNS Active Agents 
                        
                        No clinically relevant effect was observed on steady state lithium exposure following coadministration with multiple daily doses of BRINTELLIX. Multiple doses of BRINTELLIX did not affect the pharmacokinetics or pharmacodynamics (composite cognitive score) of diazepam. A clinical study has shown that BRINTELLIX (single dose of 20 or 40 mg) did not increase the impairment of mental and motor skills caused by alcohol (single dose of 0.6 g/kg). Details on the potential pharmacokinetic interactions between BRINTELLIX and bupropion can be found in Section  7.3.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 Drugs that Interfere with Hemostasis (e.g., NSAIDs, Aspirin, and Warfarin)
                     
                        Serotonin release by platelets plays an important role in hemostasis. Epidemiological studies of case-control and cohort design have demonstrated an association between use of psychotropic drugs that interfere with serotonin reuptake and the occurrence of upper gastrointestinal bleeding. These studies have also shown that concurrent use of an NSAID or aspirin may potentiate this risk of bleeding. Altered anticoagulant effects, including increased bleeding, have been reported when SSRIs and SNRIs are coadministered with warfarin.
                        Following coadministration of stable doses of warfarin (1 to 10 mg/day) with multiple daily doses of BRINTELLIX, no significant effects were observed in INR, prothrombin values or total warfarin (protein bound plus free drug) pharmacokinetics for both R- and S-warfarin [see Drug Interactions (7.4)]. Coadministration of aspirin 150 mg/day with multiple daily doses of BRINTELLIX had no significant inhibitory effect on platelet aggregation or pharmacokinetics of aspirin and salicylic acid [see Drug Interactions (7.4)]. Patients receiving other drugs that interfere with hemostasis should be carefully monitored when BRINTELLIX is initiated or discontinued [see Warnings and Precautions (5.3)].
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3 Potential for Other Drugs to Affect BRINTELLIX
                     
                        Reduce BRINTELLIX dose by half when a strong CYP2D6 inhibitor (e.g., bupropion, fluoxetine, paroxetine, quinidine) is coadministered. Consider increasing the BRINTELLIX dose when a strong CYP inducer (e.g., rifampicin, carbamazepine, phenytoin) is coadministered. The maximum dose is not recommended to exceed three times the original dose [see Dosage and Administration 
                           (
                              2.5 and 2.6)] (Figure 1).
                        
                           Figure 1. Impact of Other Drugs on Vortioxetine PK
                        
                        
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           Figure1.jpg
                           
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4 Potential for BRINTELLIX to Affect Other Drugs
                     
                        No dose adjustment for the comedications is needed when BRINTELLIX is coadministered with a substrate of CYP1A2 (e.g., duloxetine), CYP2A6, CYP2B6 (e.g., bupropion), CYP2C8 (e.g., repaglinide), CYP2C9 (e.g., S-warfarin), CYP2C19 (e.g., diazepam), CYP2D6 (e.g., venlafaxine), CYP3A4/5 (e.g., budesonide), and P-gp (e.g., digoxin). In addition, no dose adjustment for lithium, aspirin, and warfarin is necessary.
                        Vortioxetine and its metabolites are unlikely to inhibit the following CYP enzymes and transporter based on in vitro data: CYP1A2, CYP2A6, CYP2B6, CYP2C8, CYP2C9, CYP2C19, CYP2D6, CYP2E1, CYP3A4/5, and P-gp. As such, no clinically relevant interactions with drugs metabolized by these CYP enzymes would be expected.
                        In addition, vortioxetine did not induce CYP1A2, CYP2A6, CYP2B6, CYP2C8, CYP2C9, CYP2C19, and CYP3A4/5 in an in vitro study in cultured human hepatocytes. Chronic administration of BRINTELLIX is unlikely to induce the metabolism of drugs metabolized by these CYP isoforms. Furthermore, in a series of clinical drug interaction studies, coadministration of BRINTELLIX with substrates for CYP2B6 (e.g., bupropion), CYP2C9 (e.g., warfarin), and CYP2C19 (e.g., diazepam), had no clinical meaningful effect on the pharmacokinetics of these substrates (Figure 2).
                        
                        Because vortioxetine is highly bound to plasma protein, coadministration of BRINTELLIX with another drug that is highly protein bound may increase free concentrations of the other drug. However, in a clinical study with coadministration of BRINTELLIX (10 mg/day) and warfarin (1 mg/day to 10 mg/day), a highly protein-bound drug, no significant change in INR was observed [see Drug Interactions (7.2)].
                        
                        
                           Figure 2. Impact of Vortioxetine on PK of Other Drugs
                        
                        
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           Figure2.jpg
                           
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         