
               
               
               
                  CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  Meclizine hydrochloride is an antihistamine which shows marked protective activity against nebulized histamine and lethal doses of intravenously injected histamine in guinea pigs. It has a marked effect in blocking the vasodepressor response to histamine, but only a slight blocking action against acetylcholine. Its activity is relatively weak in inhibiting the spasmogenic action of histamine on isolated guinea pig ileum. 
               
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           Pharmacokinetics
                        
                     
                     
                        The available pharmacokinetic information for meclizine following oral administration has been summarized from published literature.
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                    Absorption
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              Meclizine is absorbed after oral administration with maximum plasma concentrations reaching at a median Tmax value of 3 hours post-dose (range: 1.5 to 6 hours) for the tablet dosage form.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                    Distribution
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              Drug distribution characteristics for meclizine in humans in unknown.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                    Metabolism
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              The metabolic fate of meclizine in humans in unknown. In an in vitro metabolic study using human hepatic microsome and recombinant CYP enzyme, CYP2D6 was found to be the dominant enzyme for metabolism of meclizine.
                              The genetic polymorphism of CYP2D6 that results in extensive-, poor-,intermediate- and ultrarapid metabolizer phenotypes could contribute to large inter-individual variability in meclizine exposure.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                    Elimination
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              Meclizine has a plasma elimination half-life of about 5 - 6 hours in humans.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         