
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  Studies in animals have shown tolmetin sodium to possess 
anti-inflammatory, analgesic and antipyretic activity. In the rat, tolmetin 
prevents the development of experimentally induced polyarthritis and also 
decreases established inflammation.
                  The mode of action of tolmetin is not known. However, studies in laboratory 
animals and man have demonstrated that the anti-inflammatory action of tolmetin 
is not due to pituitary-adrenal stimulation. Tolmetin 
inhibits prostaglandin synthetase in vitro and lowers 
the plasma level of prostaglandin E in man. This reduction in prostaglandin 
synthesis may be responsible for the anti-inflammatory action. Tolmetin does not 
appear to alter the course of the underlying disease in man.
                  In patients with rheumatoid arthritis and in normal volunteers, tolmetin 
sodium is rapidly and almost completely absorbed with peak plasma levels being 
reached within 30 to 60 minutes after an oral therapeutic dose. In controlled 
studies, the time to reach peak tolmetin plasma concentration is approximately 
20 minutes longer following administration of a 600 mg tablet, compared to an 
equivalent dose given as 200 mg tablets. The clinical meaningfulness of this 
finding, if any, is unknown. Tolmetin displays a biphasic elimination from the 
plasma consisting of a rapid phase with a half-life of 1 to 2 hours followed by 
a slower phase with a half-life of about 5 hours. Peak plasma levels of 
approximately 40 mcg/mL are obtained with a 400 mg oral dose. Essentially all of 
the administered dose is recovered in the urine in 24 hours either as an 
inactive oxidative metabolite or as conjugates of tolmetin. An 18-day 
multiple-dose study demonstrated no accumulation of tolmetin when compared with 
a single dose.
                  In two fecal blood loss studies of 4 to 6 days duration involving 15 subjects 
each, tolmetin did not induce an increase in blood loss over that observed 
during a 4-day drug free control period. In the same studies, aspirin produced a 
greater blood loss than occurred during the drug free control period, and a 
greater blood loss than occurred during the tolmetin sodium treatment period. In 
one of the two studies, indomethacin produced a greater fecal blood loss than 
occurred during the drug free control period; in the second study, indomethacin 
did not induce a significant increase in blood loss.
                  Tolmetin is effective in treating both the acute flares and in the long-term 
management of the symptoms of rheumatoid arthritis, osteoarthritis and juvenile 
rheumatoid arthritis.
                  In patients with either rheumatoid arthritis or osteoarthritis, tolmetin is 
as effective as aspirin and indomethacin in controlling disease activity, but 
the frequency of the milder gastrointestinal adverse effects and tinnitus was 
less than in aspirin-treated patients, and the incidence of central nervous 
system adverse effects was less than in indomethacin-treated patients.
                  In patients with juvenile rheumatoid arthritis, tolmetin is as effective as 
aspirin in controlling disease activity, with a similar incidence of adverse 
reactions. Mean SGOT values, initially elevated in patients on previous aspirin 
therapy, remained elevated in the aspirin group and decreased in the tolmetin 
group.
                  Tolmetin has produced additional therapeutic benefit when added to a regimen 
of gold salts and, to a lesser extent, with corticosteroids. Tolmetin should not 
be used in conjunction with salicylates since greater benefit from the 
combination is not likely, but the potential for adverse reactions is increased.
               
               
            
         