
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  

                  

                  Pharmacokinetics

                  Pantoprazole sodium delayed-release tablets are prepared as an enteric-coated tablet so that absorption of pantoprazole begins only after the tablet leaves the stomach. Peak serum concentration (C max) and area under the serum concentration time curve (AUC) increase in a manner proportional to oral and intravenous doses from 10 mg to 80 mg. Pantoprazole does not accumulate and its pharmacokinetics are unaltered with multiple daily dosing. Following oral or intravenous administration, the serum concentration of pantoprazole declines biexponentially with a terminal elimination half-life of approximately one hour. In extensive metabolizers (see CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY, Pharmacokinetics, Metabolism) with normal liver function receiving an oral dose of the enteric-coated 40 mg pantoprazole tablet, the peak concentration (Cmax) is 2.5 mcg/mL, the time to reach the peak concentration (tmax) is 2.5 h and the total area under the plasma concentration versus time curve (AUC) is 4.8 mcghr/mL. When pantoprazole is given with food, its tmax is highly variable and may increase significantly. Following intravenous administration of pantoprazole to extensive metabolizers, its total clearance is 7.6 to 14.0 L/h and its apparent volume of distribution is 11.0 to 23.6 L.

                  

                  Absorption

                  
                  

                  

                  Distribution

                  The apparent volume of distribution of pantoprazole is approximately 11.0 to 23.6 L, distributing mainly in extracellular fluid. The serum protein binding of pantoprazole is about 98%, primarily to albumin.

                  

                  Metabolism

                  23%) with once daily dosing.

                  

                  Elimination

                  After a single oral or intravenous dose of 14C-labeled pantoprazole to healthy, normal metabolizer volunteers, approximately 71% of the dose was excreted in the urine with 18% excreted in the feces through biliary excretion. There was no renal excretion of unchanged pantoprazole.

                  

                  Special Populations

                  
                  

                  Geriatric

                  Only slight to moderate increases in pantoprazole AUC (43%) and C(26%) were found in elderly volunteers (64 to 76 years of age) after repeated oral administration, compared with younger subjects. No dosage adjustment is recommended based on age.

                  

                  Pediatric

                  The pharmacokinetics of pantoprazole have not been investigated in patients < 18 years of age.

                  

                  Gender

                  There is a modest increase in pantoprazole AUC and C max in women compared to men. However, weight-normalized clearance values are similar in women and men. No dosage adjustment is needed based on gender (see PRECAUTIONS, Use in Women).

                  

                  Renal impairment

                  In patients with severe renal impairment, pharmacokinetic parameters for pantoprazole were similar to those of healthy subjects. No dosage adjustment is necessary in patients with renal impairment or in patients undergoing hemodialysis.

                  

                  Hepatic impairment

                  In patients with mild to severe hepatic impairment, maximum pantoprazole concentrations increased only slightly (1.5 fold) relative to healthy subjects. Although serum half-life values increased to 7 to 9 hours and AUC values increased by 5 to 7 fold in hepatic-impaired patients, these increases were no greater than those observed in slow CYP2C19 metabolizers, where no dosage frequency adjustment is warranted. These pharmacokinetic changes in hepatic-impaired patients result in minimal drug accumulation following once daily multiple-dose administration. No dosage adjustment is needed in patients with mild to severe hepatic impairment. Doses higher than 40 mg/day have not been studied in hepatically-impaired patients.

                  

                  Drug-Drug Interactions

                  Pantoprazole is metabolized mainly by CYP2C19 and to minor extents by CYPs 3A4, 2D6 and 2C9. In in vivo drug-drug interaction studies with CYP2C19 substrates (diazepam [also a CYP3A4 substrate] and phenytoin [also a CYP3A4 inducer]), nifedipine, midazolam, and clarithromycin (CYP3A4 substrates), metoprolol (a CYP2D6 substrate), diclofenac, naproxen and piroxicam (CYP2C9 substrates) and theophylline (a CYP1A2 substrate) in healthy subjects, the pharmacokinetics of pantoprazole were not significantly altered. It is, therefore, expected that other drugs metabolized by CYPs 2C19, 3A4, 2D6, 2C9, and 1A2 would not significantly affect the pharmacokinetics of pantoprazole. In vivo studies also suggest that pantoprazole does not significantly affect the kinetics of other drugs (cisapride, theophylline, diazepam [and its active metabolite, desmethyldiazepam], phenytoin, warfarin, metoprolol, nifedipine, carbamazepine, midazolam, clarithromycin, naproxen, piroxicam, and oral contraceptives [levonorgestrel/ethinyl estradiol]) metabolized by CYPs 2C19, 3A4, 2C9, 2D6, and 1A2. Therefore, it is expected that pantoprazole would not significantly affect the pharmacokinetics of other drugs metabolized by these isozymes. Dosage adjustment of such drugs is not necessary when they are coadministered with pantoprazole. In other in vivo studies, digoxin, ethanol, glyburide, antipyrine, caffeine, metronidazole, and amoxicillin had no clinically relevant interactions with pantoprazole. Although no significant drug-drug interactions have been observed in clinical studies, the potential for significant drug-drug interactions with more than once daily dosing with high doses of pantoprazole has not been studied in poor metabolizers or individuals who are hepatically impaired.

                  

                  

                  

               
               
            
         