
               
               
               
                  CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
                  PharmacodynamicsThe antidepressant, antiobsessive compulsive, and antibulimic 
actions of fluoxetine are presumed to be linked to its inhibition of CNS 
neuronal uptake of serotonin. Studies at clinically relevant doses in man have 
demonstrated that fluoxetine blocks the uptake of serotonin into human 
platelets. Studies in animals also suggest that fluoxetine is a much more potent 
uptake inhibitor of serotonin than of norepinephrine.
                  Antagonism of muscarinic, histaminergic, and α1–adrenergic receptors has been hypothesized to be associated 
with various anticholinergic, sedative, and cardiovascular effects of classical 
tricyclic antidepressant (TCA) drugs. Fluoxetine binds to these and other 
membrane receptors from brain tissue much less potently in vitro than do the 
tricyclic drugs.
                  
                  Absorption, Distribution, Metabolism, and 
Excretion
                  
                     Systemic bioavailability — In man, 
following a single oral 40–mg dose, peak plasma concentrations of fluoxetine 
from 15 to 55 ng/mL are observed after 6 to 8 hours.
                  The Pulvule, oral solution, and Prozac Weekly capsule dosage forms of 
fluoxetine are bioequivalent. Food does not appear to affect the systemic 
bioavailability of fluoxetine, although it may delay its absorption by 1 to 2 
hours, which is probably not clinically significant. Thus, fluoxetine may be 
administered with or without food. Prozac Weekly capsules, a delayed–release 
formulation, contain enteric–coated pellets that resist dissolution until 
reaching a segment of the gastrointestinal tract where the pH exceeds 5.5. The 
enteric coating delays the onset of absorption of fluoxetine 1 to 2 hours 
relative to the immediate–release formulations.
                  
                  
                     Protein binding — Over the concentration 
range from 200 to 1000 ng/mL, approximately 94.5% of fluoxetine is bound 
in vitro to human serum proteins, including albumin and α1–glycoprotein. The interaction between fluoxetine and other 
highly protein–bound drugs has not been fully evaluated, but may be important 
(see
                      PRECAUTIONS).
                  
                  
                     Enantiomers — Fluoxetine is a racemic 
mixture (50/50) of R–fluoxetine and S–fluoxetine enantiomers. In animal models, both 
enantiomers are specific and potent serotonin uptake inhibitors with essentially 
equivalent pharmacologic activity. The S–fluoxetine 
enantiomer is eliminated more slowly and is the predominant enantiomer present 
in plasma at steady state.
                  
                  
                     Metabolism — Fluoxetine is extensively 
metabolized in the liver to norfluoxetine and a number of other unidentified 
metabolites. The only identified active metabolite, norfluoxetine, is formed by 
demethylation of fluoxetine. In animal models, S–norfluoxetine is a potent and selective inhibitor of 
serotonin uptake and has activity essentially equivalent to R– or S–fluoxetine. R–norfluoxetine is significantly less potent than the 
parent drug in the inhibition of serotonin uptake. The primary route of 
elimination appears to be hepatic metabolism to inactive metabolites excreted by 
the kidney.
                  
                  
                     Clinical issues related to 
metabolism/elimination — The complexity of the metabolism of fluoxetine 
has several consequences that may potentially affect fluoxetine’s clinical 
use.
                  
                     Variability in metabolism — A subset (about 7%) 
of the population has reduced activity of the drug metabolizing enzyme 
cytochrome P450 2D6 (CYP2D6). Such individuals are referred to as “poor 
metabolizers” of drugs such as debrisoquin, dextromethorphan, and the TCAs. In a 
study involving labeled and unlabeled enantiomers administered as a racemate, 
these individuals metabolized S–fluoxetine at a 
slower rate and thus achieved higher concentrations of S–fluoxetine. Consequently, concentrations of S–norfluoxetine at steady state were lower. The metabolism 
of R–fluoxetine in these poor metabolizers appears 
normal. When compared with normal metabolizers, the total sum at steady state of 
the plasma concentrations of the 4 active enantiomers was not significantly 
greater among poor metabolizers. Thus, the net pharmacodynamic activities were 
essentially the same. Alternative, nonsaturable pathways (non–2D6) also 
contribute to the metabolism of fluoxetine. This explains how fluoxetine 
achieves a steady–state concentration rather than increasing without limit.
                  Because fluoxetine’s metabolism, like that of a number of other compounds 
including TCAs and other selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs), 
involves the CYP2D6 system, concomitant therapy with drugs also metabolized by 
this enzyme system (such as the TCAs) may lead to drug interactions (see
                      Drug Interactions 
                     under PRECAUTIONS).
                  
                     Accumulation and slow elimination — The 
relatively slow elimination of fluoxetine (elimination half–life of 1 to 3 days 
after acute administration and 4 to 6 days after chronic administration) and its 
active metabolite, norfluoxetine (elimination half–life of 4 to 16 days after 
acute and chronic administration), leads to significant accumulation of these 
active species in chronic use and delayed attainment of steady state, even when 
a fixed dose is used. After 30 days of dosing at 40 mg/day, plasma 
concentrations of fluoxetine in the range of 91 to 302 ng/mL and norfluoxetine 
in the range of 72 to 258 ng/mL have been observed. Plasma concentrations of 
fluoxetine were higher than those predicted by single–dose studies, because 
fluoxetine’s metabolism is not proportional to dose. Norfluoxetine, however, 
appears to have linear pharmacokinetics. Its mean terminal half–life after a 
single dose was 8.6 days and after multiple dosing was 9.3 days. Steady–state 
levels after prolonged dosing are similar to levels seen at 4 to 5 weeks.
                  The long elimination half–lives of fluoxetine and norfluoxetine assure that, 
even when dosing is stopped, active drug substance will persist in the body for 
weeks (primarily depending on individual patient characteristics, previous 
dosing regimen, and length of previous therapy at discontinuation). This is of 
potential consequence when drug discontinuation is required or when drugs are 
prescribed that might interact with fluoxetine and norfluoxetine following the 
discontinuation of Prozac.
                  
                  
                     Weekly dosing — Administration of Prozac 
Weekly once weekly results in increased fluctuation between peak and trough 
concentrations of fluoxetine and norfluoxetine compared with once–daily dosing 
[for fluoxetine: 24% (daily) to 164% (weekly) and for norfluoxetine: 17% (daily) 
to 43% (weekly)]. Plasma concentrations may not necessarily be predictive of 
clinical response. Peak concentrations from once–weekly doses of Prozac Weekly 
capsules of fluoxetine are in the range of the average concentration for 20–mg 
once–daily dosing. Average trough concentrations are 76% lower for fluoxetine 
and 47% lower for norfluoxetine than the concentrations maintained by 20–mg 
once–daily dosing. Average steady–state concentrations of either once–daily or 
once–weekly dosing are in relative proportion to the total dose administered. 
Average steady–state fluoxetine concentrations are approximately 50% lower 
following the once–weekly regimen compared with the once–daily regimen.
                  Cmax for fluoxetine following the 90–mg dose was 
approximately 1.7–fold higher than the Cmax value for the 
established 20–mg once–daily regimen following transition the next day to the 
once–weekly regimen. In contrast, when the first 90–mg once–weekly dose and the 
last 20–mg once–daily dose were separated by 1 week, Cmax 
values were similar. Also, there was a transient increase in the average 
steady–state concentrations of fluoxetine observed following transition the next 
day to the once–weekly regimen. From a pharmacokinetic perspective, it may be 
better to separate the first 90–mg weekly dose and the last 20–mg once–daily 
dose by 1 week (see
                      DOSAGE AND 
ADMINISTRATION).
                  
                  
                     Liver disease — As might be predicted 
from its primary site of metabolism, liver impairment can affect the elimination 
of fluoxetine. The elimination half–life of fluoxetine was prolonged in a study 
of cirrhotic patients, with a mean of 7.6 days compared with the range of 2 to 3 
days seen in subjects without liver disease; norfluoxetine elimination was also 
delayed, with a mean duration of 12 days for cirrhotic patients compared with 
the range of 7 to 9 days in normal subjects. This suggests that the use of 
fluoxetine in patients with liver disease must be approached with caution. If 
fluoxetine is administered to patients with liver disease, a lower or less 
frequent dose should be used (see
                      PRECAUTIONS 
                     and
                      DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION).
                  
                  
                     Renal disease — In depressed patients on 
dialysis (N=12), fluoxetine administered as 20 mg once daily for 2 months 
produced steady–state fluoxetine and norfluoxetine plasma concentrations 
comparable with those seen in patients with normal renal function. While the 
possibility exists that renally excreted metabolites of fluoxetine may 
accumulate to higher levels in patients with severe renal dysfunction, use of a 
lower or less frequent dose is not routinely necessary in renally impaired 
patients (see
                      Use in 
Patients with Concomitant Illness 
                     under 
PRECAUTIONS and
                      DOSAGE AND 
ADMINISTRATION).
                  
                  Age
                     Geriatric pharmacokinetics — The 
disposition of single doses of fluoxetine in healthy elderly subjects (>65 
years of age) did not differ significantly from that in younger normal subjects. 
However, given the long half–life and nonlinear disposition of the drug, a 
single–dose study is not adequate to rule out the possibility of altered 
pharmacokinetics in the elderly, particularly if they have systemic illness or 
are receiving multiple drugs for concomitant diseases. The effects of age upon 
the metabolism of fluoxetine have been investigated in 260 elderly but otherwise 
healthy depressed patients (≥60 years of age) who received 20 mg fluoxetine for 
6 weeks. Combined fluoxetine plus norfluoxetine plasma concentrations were 
209.3 ± 85.7 ng/mL at the end of 6 weeks. No unusual age–associated pattern of 
adverse events was observed in those elderly patients.
                  

               
               
            
         