
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Triamcinolone acetonide is a synthetic fluorinated corticosteroid with approximately 8 times the potency of prednisone in animal models of inflammation.
                        Although the precise mechanism of corticosteroid antiallergic action is unknown, corticosteroids have been shown to have a wide range of actions on multiple cell types (e.g., mast cells, eosinophils, neutrophils, macrophages, lymphocytes) and mediators (e.g., histamine, eicosanoids, leukotrienes, cytokines) involved in inflammation.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        In order to determine if systemic absorption plays a role in the effect of Triamcinolone Acetonide Nasal Spray on allergic rhinitis symptoms, a two week double-blind, placebo-controlled clinical study was conducted comparing Triamcinolone Acetonide, orally ingested triamcinolone acetonide, and placebo in 297 adult patients with seasonal allergic rhinitis. The study demonstrated that the therapeutic efficacy of Triamcinolone Acetonide Nasal Spray can be attributed to the topical effects of triamcinolone acetonide.
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Adrenal Function: In order to evaluate the effects of systemic absorption on the Hypothalamic-Pituitary-Adrenal (HPA) axis, 4 clinical studies, one each in adults and in children 6–12 years of age, 2–5 years of age, and 2–11 years of age, were conducted.
                              The adult clinical study compared 220 mcg or 440 mcg Triamcinolone Acetonide per day, or 10 mg prednisone per day with placebo for 42 days. Adrenal response to a six-hour 250 mcg cosyntropin stimulation test showed that Triamcinolone Acetonide administered at doses of 220 mcg and 440 mcg had no statistically significant effect on HPA activity versus placebo. Conversely, oral prednisone at 10 mg/day significantly reduced the response to ACTH.
                              A study evaluating plasma cortisol response thirty and sixty minutes after 250 mcg cosyntropin stimulation in 80 pediatric patients 6 to 12 years of age who received 220 mcg or 440 mcg (twice the maximum recommended daily dose) daily for six weeks was conducted. No abnormal response to cosyntropin infusion (peak serum cortisol <18 mcg/dL) was observed in any pediatric patient after six weeks of dosing with Triamcinolone Acetonide at 440 mcg per day.
                              In pediatric patients 2 to 5 years of age (n = 61) receiving Triamcinolone Acetonide Nasal Spray 110 mcg per day intranasally, HPA axis function was assessed by cosyntropin stimulation test; however, the results were inconclusive.
                              An effect of Triamcinolone Acetonide Nasal Spray on adrenal function in children 2 to 5 years of age cannot be ruled out.
                              In a 6-week trial in 140 children 2 to 11 years of age with allergic rhinitis, a daily dose of 110 or 220 mcg of Triamcinolone Acetonide Nasal Spray was compared to placebo nasal spray.  A subset of 24 children 6 to 11 years of age received a higher dose of 220 mcg of Triamcinolone Acetonide Nasal Spray.  A positive control was not included in this trial.  Adrenal function was assessed by measurement of 24 hour serum cortisol levels before and after the treatment.  The difference from placebo in the change from baseline in LS mean serum cortisol AUC (0–24 hr) at the end of week 6 for the Triamcinolone Acetonide Nasal Spray treatment groups (110 mcg and 220 mcg) was  -4.2 mcg∙hour/dL (95% CI:  -14.7, 6.4).
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        Based upon intravenous dosing of triamcinolone acetonide phosphate ester in adults, the half-life of triamcinolone acetonide was reported to be 88 minutes. The volume of distribution (Vd) reported was 99.5 L (SD ± 27.5) and clearance was 45.2 L/hour (SD ± 9.1) for triamcinolone acetonide. The plasma half-life of corticosteroids does not correlate well with the biologic half-life.
                        Pharmacokinetic characterization of the Triamcinolone Acetonide Nasal Spray formulation was determined in both normal adult subjects and patients with allergic rhinitis. Single dose intranasal administration of 220 mcg of Triamcinolone Acetonide Nasal Spray in normal adult subjects and patients demonstrated minimal absorption of triamcinolone acetonide. The mean peak plasma concentration was approximately 0.5 ng/mL (range: 0.1 to 1.0 ng/mL) and occurred at 1.5 hours post dose. The mean plasma drug concentration was less than 0.06 ng/mL at 12 hours, and below the assay detection limit (the minimum LOQ of the assay was 0.025 ng/ml) at 24 hours. The average terminal half-life was 3.1 hours. The range of mean AUC0–
                           ∞ values was 1.4 ng∙hr/mL to 4.7 ng∙hr/mL between doses of 110 mcg to 440 mcg in both patients and healthy volunteers. Dose proportionality was demonstrated in both normal adult subjects and in allergic rhinitis patients following single intranasal doses of 110 mcg or 220 mcg Triamcinolone Acetonide Nasal Spray. The Cmax and AUC0–∞ of the 440 mcg dose increased less than proportionally when compared to 110 and 220 mcg doses.
                        Following multiple dose administration of Triamcinolone Acetonide 440 mcg once daily in pediatric patients 6 to 12 years of age, plasma drug concentrations, AUC0–∞, Cmax and Tmax were similar to those values observed in adult patients receiving the same dose. Intranasal administration of Triamcinolone Acetonide 110 mcg once daily in pediatric patients 2 to 5 years of age exhibited similar systemic exposure to that achieved in adult patients 20 to 49 years of age with intranasal administration of Triamcinolone Acetonide at a dose of 220 mcg once daily. Based on the population pharmacokinetic modeling, the apparent clearance and volume of distribution following intranasal administration of Triamcinolone Acetonide in pediatric patients 2 to 5 years of age were found to be approximately half of that in adults.
                        In animal studies using rats and dogs, three metabolites of triamcinolone acetonide have been identified. They are 6β-hydroxytriamcinolone acetonide, 21-carboxytriamcinolone acetonide and 21-carboxy-6β-hydroxytriamcinolone acetonide. All three metabolites are expected to be substantially less active than the parent compound due to (a) the dependence of anti-inflammatory activity on the presence of a 21-hydroxyl group, (b) the decreased activity observed upon 6-hydroxylation, and (c) the markedly increased water solubility favoring rapid elimination. There appeared to be some quantitative differences in the metabolites among species. No differences were detected in metabolic pattern as a function of route of administration.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         