
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Aspirin [acetylsalicylic acid (ASA)] inhibits prostaglandin synthesis resulting in inhibition of platelet aggregation for their lifespan of about 7-10 days.  The acetyl group of aspirin binds with a serine residue of cyclooxygenase-1 (COX-1), resulting in irreversible inactivation of the enzyme. Inhibition of COX-1 prevents conversion of arachidonic acid to thromboxane A2 (TXA2), which is a potent agonist of platelet aggregation.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        The dose-response relationship for DURLAZA and immediate release (IR) aspirin towards COX-1 inhibition was characterized by examining the inhibition of serum TXB2 and urine 11-dehydro-TXB2 at 24 h following a single dose. Doses over the range of 20 mg to 325 mg for DURLAZA and 5 mg to 81 mg for IR aspirin respectively were studied. Half-maximal inhibition of serum TXB2 and urine 11-dehydro-TXB2 occurred with doses of DURLAZA (ID50) about 2-fold the dose of immediate release (IR) aspirin. Based on this relationship, the pharmacodynamic effect of DURLAZA 162.5 mg is similar to that attained with IR aspirin 81 mg.  The mean inhibition of serum TXB2 following DURLAZA (82%) is lower when compared to IR aspirin 81 mg (93%) following the first dose. However, upon repeat administration, near maximal inhibition of serum TXB2 is achieved, similar to what is achieved following repeated daily doses of IR aspirin.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        Following oral administration, DURLAZA exhibits extended release of aspirin from the encapsulated microparticles, thereby prolonging the absorption of aspirin across the GI tract compared to IR aspirin (Figure 1).  Once absorbed, aspirin is metabolized, distributed, and excreted in a manner similar to that of aspirin absorbed from IR dosage forms.
                        
                        Absorption:  Following administration of DURLAZA, the time to reach peak plasma concentration of aspirin is slightly longer compared to following IR aspirin dosage form. Median Tmax for DURLAZA is about 2 h when compared to 1 h following IR aspirin (see Figure 1). The mean Cmax for  DURLAZA is approximately 35% of that following IR aspirin 81 mg. The area under the plasma concentration-time curve for aspirin following administration of DURLAZA is approximately 70% of that following IR aspirin.   The rate of DURLAZA absorption is dependent on food, alcohol, and gastric pH.
                        Distribution:  The volume of distribution of usual doses of aspirin in normal subjects averages approximately 170 mL/kg of body weight.
                        Metabolism:  Aspirin is rapidly hydrolyzed in the plasma to salicylic acid such that plasma levels of aspirin following DURLAZA administration are essentially undetectable 4-8 hours after dosing. In contrast to immediate release aspirin, measurable levels of salicylic acid at 24 hours following a single dose of DURLAZA were observed.  Salicylic acid is primarily conjugated in the liver to form salicyluric acid, a phenolic glucuronide, an acyl glucuronide, and a number of minor metabolites.
                        Elimination: The mean plasma half-life of aspirin may range from 20 to 60 min. Following therapeutic doses, approximately 10%  is found excreted in the urine as salicylic acid, 75% as salicylic acid, and 10% phenolic and 5% acyl glucuronides of salicylic acid.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         