
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
                  
                     
                        Alcohol:
                       Do not take DURLAZA 2 hours before or 1 hour after consuming alcohol. Alcohol can interfere with the controlled release properties of DURLAZA.
                  
                     
                        Renin-angiotensin system (RAS) inhibitors: 
                     In patients who are elderly, volume-depleted (including those on diuretic therapy), or who have compromised renal function, coadministration of NSAIDs, including DURLAZA, with RAS inhibitors may result in deterioration of renal function, including possible acute renal failure. These effects are usually reversible. Monitor renal function periodically in patients receiving RAS inhibitors and DURLAZA.
                  NSAIDs, including DURLAZA may attenuate the antihypertensive effects of RAS inhibitors.
                  
                     
                        Anticoagulant and antiplatelets:
                      Increased risk of bleeding
                  
                     
                        Anticonvulsants:
                       Salicylate can displace protein-bound phenytoin and valproic acid, leading to a decrease in the total concentration of phenytoin and an increase in serum valproic acid levels.
                  
                     
                        Methotrexate
                     :  Salicylate can inhibit renal clearance of methotrexate, leading to bone marrow toxicity, especially in the elderly or renal impaired.
                  
                     
                        Nonsteroidal Anti-inflammatory Drugs (NSAIDs):
                       The concurrent use of DURLAZA with other NSAIDs increases the risk of bleeding and may result in renal impairment.
                  Ibuprofen can interfere with the anti-platelet effect of low dose aspirin.  Patients who use DURLAZA and take a single dose of ibuprofen 400 mg should dose the ibuprofen at least 2-4 hours or longer after ingestion of DURLAZA. Wait 8 hours after ibuprofen dosing, before giving aspirin, to avoid significant interference.
                  Nonselective NSAIDs may interfere with the antiplatelet effect of low-dose aspirin.
               
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           Alcohol: do not take DURLAZA 2 hours before or 1 hour after consuming alcohol (7)
                           
                           Dual inhibition of the renin-angiotensin system: Increased risk of renal impairment, hypotension and hyperkalemia (7)
                           
                           Anticoagulant and antiplatelets: increased risk of bleeding (7)
                           
                           Anticonvulsants: decreased phenytoin concentration and increased serum valproic acid levels (7)
                           
                           Methotrexate: increased risk of bone marrow toxicity (7)
                           
                           NSAIDs: Increased risk of bleeding. Nonselective NSAIDs may interfere with DURLAZAs antiplatelet effect (7)
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         