
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Gabapentin enacarbil is a prodrug of gabapentin and, accordingly, its therapeutic effects in RLS and PHN are attributable to gabapentin.
                        The precise mechanism by which gabapentin is efficacious in RLS and PHN is unknown.
                        The mechanism of action by which gabapentin is efficacious in PHN is unknown but in animal models of analgesia, gabapentin prevents allodynia (pain-related behavior in response to a normally innocuous stimulus) and hyperalgesia (exaggerated response to painful stimuli). Gabapentin prevents pain-related responses in several models of neuropathic pain in rats and mice (e.g., spinal nerve ligation models, spinal cord injury model, acute herpes zoster infection model). Gabapentin also decreases pain-related responses after peripheral inflammation (carrageenan footpad test, late phase of formalin test), but does not alter immediate pain-related behaviors (rat tail flick test, formalin footpad acute phase). The relevance of these models to human pain is not known.
                        Gabapentin is structurally related to the neurotransmitter gamma aminobutyric acid (GABA) but has no effect on GABA binding, uptake, or degradation. Gabapentin enacarbil and gabapentin have been tested in radioligand binding assays, and neither exhibited affinity for a number of other common receptor, ion channel, or transporter proteins.
                        
                           In vitro studies have shown that gabapentin binds with high affinity to the α2δ subunit of voltage activated calcium channels; however, the relationship of this binding to the therapeutic effects of gabapentin enacarbil in RLS and PHN is unknown.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        HORIZANT is an extended-release formulation of gabapentin enacarbil, a prodrug of gabapentin. HORIZANT provides approximately dose-proportional and extended exposure to gabapentin over the range 300 to 6,000 mg. HORIZANT and gabapentin are not interchangeable because the same daily dose of each results in different plasma concentrations of gabapentin.
                        For subjects with PHN taking HORIZANT 600 mg twice daily, the estimated steady state mean Cmax was 5.35 µg/mL, mean AUC24 was approximately 109 µg*hr/mL, mean Cmin was 3.63 µg/mL, and mean peak trough ratio was 1.5.
                        
                           Absorption: The pathway for absorption of gabapentin enacarbil is believed to include active transport via a proton-linked monocarboxylate transporter, MCT-1. This transporter is expressed at high levels in the intestinal tract and is not saturated by administration of high doses of HORIZANT. Mean bioavailability of gabapentin (based on urinary recovery of gabapentin) for HORIZANT in the fed state is about 75%. Bioavailability under fasting conditions has been estimated by gabapentin urinary recovery to be 42% to 65%. In a food effect study, the exposure of gabapentin increased by 24%, 34%, and 44% with low, moderate, and high fat meals, respectively. The Tmax of gabapentin after administration of 600 mg of HORIZANT was 5.0 hours in fasted subjects and 7.3 hours in fed subjects. Steady state is reached in 2 days with daily administration.
                        
                           Distribution: Plasma protein binding of gabapentin has been reported to be <3%. The apparent volume of distribution of gabapentin in subjects receiving HORIZANT is 76 L.
                        
                           Metabolism: After oral administration, gabapentin enacarbil undergoes extensive first-pass hydrolysis by non specific carboxylesterases primarily in enterocytes and to a lesser extent in the liver, to form gabapentin, carbon dioxide, acetaldehyde, and isobutyric acid. Levels of gabapentin enacarbil in blood are low and transient (≤2% of corresponding gabapentin plasma levels). Released gabapentin is not appreciably metabolized in humans. Neither gabapentin enacarbil nor gabapentin are substrates, inhibitors, or inducers of the major cytochrome P450 enzymes (CYP1A2, CYP2A6, CYP2B6, CYP2C8, CYP2C9, CYP2C19, CYP2D6, CYP2E1, and CYP3A4). Gabapentin enacarbil is neither a substrate nor an inhibitor of P-glycoprotein in vitro.
                        
                           Elimination: Following hydrolysis of gabapentin enacarbil, the released gabapentin is excreted unchanged by the kidney. Gabapentin renal excretion is believed to involve a component of active secretion via an organic cation transporter (OCT2) present in the kidney. In a human pharmacokinetic study with immediate release 14C gabapentin enacarbil, mean recovery of total radioactivity in urine was 94%, with 5% of the radioactive dose recovered in feces.
                        Apparent oral clearance (CL/F) of gabapentin from plasma after dosing of HORIZANT with food ranged from 6.0 to 9.3 L/hr. Following oral dosing of HORIZANT, plasma clearance of gabapentin is approximately proportional to creatinine clearance. Renal clearance (CLr) of gabapentin ranged from 5 to 7 L/hr, regardless of food intake or food type. The elimination half life (t½) of gabapentin ranges from 5.1 to 6.0 hours and is unaltered by dose or following multiple doses of HORIZANT.
                        
                           Special Populations:
                            Race: In the population pharmacokinetic study, the majority (94%) of subjects in the clinical studies was Caucasian, and no single other race was greater than 4%; therefore, the effect of race could not be studied.
                        
                           Gender: There are no clinically meaningful differences in pharmacokinetics of HORIZANT between male and female patients.
                        
                           Geriatric Patients: There are no clinically significant differences in pharmacokinetics of HORIZANT between geriatric patients (≥65 years of age) and younger patients (18 to <65 years of age). However, the pharmacokinetics in geriatric patients may be affected by an age-related decline in renal function [see Use in Specific Populations (8.5)].
                        
                           Renal Impairment: Gabapentin clearance after dosing with HORIZANT is approximately proportional to CrCl. Apparent oral clearance (CL/F) decreased in moderate (4.2 L/hr) and severe renal impairment patients (1.7 L/hr) compared with 6.0 to 9.3 L/hr in patients without renal impairment. Similarly, CLr was decreased to 3 and 1 L/hr in moderate and severe renal impairment patients, respectively, compared with 5 to 7 L/hr in non-renal impairment patients. Dosage reduction in patients with renal dysfunction not on dialysis is necessary.
                        Gabapentin is effectively removed from plasma by hemodialysis. The mean percentage of gabapentin recovered following hemodialysis in patients with end stage renal disease was 29% (expressed as a proportion of the gabapentin released from HORIZANT). For patients with PHN on hemodialysis, dosage reduction is required [see Dosage and Administration (2.3)]. For patients with RLS on hemodialysis, treatment with HORIZANT is not recommended [see Dosage and Administration (2.3)].
                        
                           Drug Interactions: Neither gabapentin enacarbil nor gabapentin are substrates, inhibitors, or inducers of the major cytochrome P450 enzymes. Gabapentin enacarbil is neither a substrate or an inhibitor of P-glycoprotein in vitro.
                        Pharmacokinetic drug-drug interaction studies were conducted to examine the potential for an interaction of gabapentin enacarbil with cimetidine and naproxen. No significant pharmacokinetic interactions were observed. No clinically relevant pharmacokinetic interactions are expected between HORIZANT and other substrates of organic cation transporter type 2 (OCT2) and monocarboxylate transporter type 1 (MCT-1).
                        
                           Ethanol: An in vitro dissolution study was conducted to evaluate the impact of ethanol (5, 10, 20, and 40%), on the extended-release characteristics of HORIZANT. The in vitro study showed that about 63% of the total gabapentin enacarbil dose was released at 1 hour at the highest alcohol level (40%), and about 43% of total drug was released at 1 hour with 5% alcohol. Ethanol causes a more rapid release of gabapentin enacarbil from the extended-release tablets that may increase the risk for adverse events associated with HORIZANT. Consumption of alcohol is not recommended when taking HORIZANT.
                        
                           Cimetidine: Gabapentin released from HORIZANT is eliminated by renal clearance via OCT2. Cimetidine is a known substrate for this same elimination pathway. Coadministration of 1,200 mg of HORIZANT once daily with cimetidine 400 mg 4 times daily showed no effect on cimetidine exposure. There was an increase in AUC of gabapentin (24%) and a decrease in renal clearance of gabapentin (20%); these effects are not expected to be clinically relevant. No clinically relevant pharmacokinetic interactions are expected between HORIZANT and other substrates of OCT2.
                        
                           Naproxen: The pathway for absorption of gabapentin enacarbil includes active transport via a proton-linked MCT-1. Coadministration of 1,200 mg of HORIZANT once daily with naproxen 500 mg twice daily, a known substrate of MCT-1, showed no effect on naproxen exposure or steady-state gabapentin Cmax and AUC. No clinically relevant pharmacokinetic interactions are expected between HORIZANT and other substrates of MCT-1.
                        
                           Morphine: Administration of a single 600-mg dose of HORIZANT 2 hours after a single 60-mg dose of extended-release morphine sulfate in 18 subjects was associated with increased somnolence/sedation, dizziness, and nausea for the combination compared to HORIZANT or morphine alone as measured by the visual analog scale. No changes in Cmax and AUC of gabapentin, morphine or its active metabolite morphine-6-glucuronide were observed.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.6	Cardiac Electrophysiology
                     
                        At a dose of 6,000 mg, gabapentin enacarbil does not prolong QTc to a clinically relevant extent.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         