
                     
                     
                     Drug Interactions
                     
                        In view of the long and variable half-life of amiodarone, potential for drug interactions exists, not only with concomitant medication, but also with drugs administered after discontinuation of amiodarone.
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Pharmacodynamic interactions
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Drugs inducing TdP or prolonging QT
                                 
                                    Co-administration of amiodarone with drugs known to prolong the QT interval (such as class I and III antiarrhythmics, lithium, certain phenothiazines, tricyclic antidepressants, certain fluoroquinolone and macrolide antibiotics, IV pentamidine, and azole antifungals) increases the risk of Torsades de Points. Avoid concomitant use of drugs that prolong the QT interval.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Drugs lowering heart rate or causing automaticity or conduction disorders
                                 
                                    Concomitant use of drugs with depressant effects on the sinus and AV node (e.g., digoxin, beta blockers, verapamil, diltiazem, clonidine) can potentiate the electrophysiologic and hemodynamic effects of amiodarone, resulting in bradycardia, sinus arrest, and AV block. Monitor heart rate in patients on amiodarone and concomitant drugs that slow heart rate
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Pharmocokinetic interactions
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Effects of other medicinal products on amiodarone
                                 
                                    Since amiodarone is a substrate for CYP3A and CYP2C8, drugs/substances that inhibit CYP3A (e.g., certain protease inhibitors, loratadine, cimetidine, trazodone) may decrease the metabolism and increase serum concentrations of amiodarone. Concomitant use of CYP3A inducers (rifampin, St. John's Wort), may lead to decreased serum concentrations and loss of efficacy. Consider serial measurement of amiodarone serum concentration during concomitant use of drugs affecting CYP3A activity.
                                    Grapefruit juice given to healthy volunteers increased amiodarone AUC by 50% and Cmax by 84%, and decreased DEA to unquantifiable concentrations. Grapefruit juice inhibits CYP3A-mediated metabolism of oral amiodarone in the intestinal mucosa, resulting in increased plasma levels of amiodarone; therefore, grapefruit juice should not be taken during treatment with oral amiodarone. This information should be considered when transitioning from intravenous to oral amiodarone. Cholestyramine reduces enterohepatic circulation of amiodarone thereby increasing its elimination. This results in reduced amiodarone serum levels and half-life.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Effects of amiodarone on other medicinal products
                                 
                                    Amiodarone inhibits P-glycoprotein and certain CYP450 enzymes, including CYP1A2, CYP2C9, CYP2D6, and CYP3A. This inhibition can result in unexpectedly high plasma levels of other drugs which are metabolized by those CYP450 enzymes or are substrates of P-glycoprotein. Reported examples of this interaction include the following:
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                       
                                       Cyclosporine
                                       
                                          (CYP3A substrate) administered in combination with oral amiodarone has been reported to produce persistently elevated plasma concentrations of cyclosporine resulting in elevated creatinine, despite reduction in dose of cyclosporine. Monitor cyclosporine drug levels and renal function in patients taking both drugs.
                                       
                                       
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                       
                                       HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors
                                       
                                          The use of HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors that are CYP3A substrates in combination with amiodarone has been associated with reports of myopathy/rhabdomyolysis. Limit the dose of simvastatin in patients on amiodarone to 20 mg daily. Limit the daily dose of lovastatin to 40 mg. Lower starting and maintenance doses of other CYP3A substrates (e.g., atorvastatin) may be required as amiodarone may increase the plasma concentration of these drugs.
                                       
                                       
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                       
                                       Digoxin
                                       
                                          In patients receiving digoxin therapy, administration of oral amiodarone results in an increase in the serum digoxin concentration. Amiodarone taken concomitantly with digoxin increases the serum digoxin concentration by 70% after one day. On initiation of oral amiodarone, the need for digitalis therapy should be reviewed and the dose reduced by approximately 50% or discontinued. If digitalis treatment is continued, serum levels should be closely monitored and patients observed for clinical evidence of toxicity.
                                       
                                       
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                       
                                       Antiarrhythmics
                                       
                                          The metabolism of quinidine, procainamide, flecainide can be inhibited by amiodarone. Amiodarone taken concomitantly with quinidine increases quinidine serum concentration by 33% after two days. Amiodarone taken concomitantly with procainamide for less than seven days increases plasma concentrations of procainamide and n-acetyl procainamide by 55% and 33%, respectively. In general, any added antiarrhythmic drug should be initiated at a lower than usual dose with careful monitoring.
                                          Combination of amiodarone with other antiarrhythmic therapy should be reserved for patients with life-threatening ventricular arrhythmias who are incompletely responsive to a single agent or incompletely responsive to amiodarone. During transition to amiodarone the dose levels of previously administered agents should be reduced by 30 to 50% several days after the addition of amiodarone, when arrhythmia suppression should be beginning. The continued need for the other antiarrhythmic agent should be reviewed after the effects of amiodarone have been established, and discontinuation ordinarily should be attempted. If the treatment is continued, these patients should be particularly carefully monitored for adverse effects, especially conduction disturbances and exacerbation of tachyarrhythmias, as amiodarone is continued. In amiodarone-treated patients who require additional antiarrhythmic therapy, the initial dose of such agents should be approximately half of the usual recommended dose.
                                          Metabolism of lidocaine (CYP3A substrate) can be inhibited by amiodarone resulting in increased lidocaine concentrations. Sinus bradycardia and seizure has been reported in patients receiving concomitant lidocaine and amiodarone.
                                       
                                       
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                       
                                       Anticoagulants
                                       
                                          Potentiation of warfarin-type (CYP2C9 and CYP3A substrate) anticoagulant response is almost always seen in patients receiving amiodarone and can result in serious or fatal bleeding. Since the concomitant administration of warfarin with amiodarone increases the prothrombin time by 100% after 3 to 4 days, the dose of the anticoagulant should be reduced by one-third to one-half, and prothrombin times should be monitored closely.
                                          
                                          A potential interaction between clopidogrel and amiodarone resulting in ineffective inhibition of platelet aggregation has been reported.
                                          Dabigatran etexilate when taken concomitantly with amiodarone may result in elevated serum concentration of dabigatran.
                                       
                                       
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                       
                                       Fentanyl
                                       
                                          (CYP3A substrate) in combination with amiodarone may cause hypotension, bradycardia, and decreased cardiac output.
                                          Increased steady-state levels of phenytoin during concomitant therapy with amiodarone have been reported. Monitor phenytoin levels in patients taking both drugs.
                                          Dextromethorphan is a substrate for both CYP2D6 and CYP3A. Amiodarone inhibits CYP2D6 and CYP3A. Chronic (>2 weeks) amiodarone treatment impairs metabolism of dextromethorphan leading to increased serum concentration.
                                       
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               