
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY

               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of action

                     
                        The mechanism of the antidepressant effect of vilazodone is not fully understood but is thought to be related to its enhancement of serotonergic activity in the CNS through selective inhibition of serotonin reuptake. Vilazodone is also a partial agonist at serotonergic 5-HT1A receptors; however, the net result of this action on serotonergic transmission and its role in vilazodone's antidepressant effect are unknown.

                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics

                     
                        Vilazodone binds with high affinity to the serotonin reuptake site (Ki= 0.1 nM), but not to the norepinephrine (Ki=56 nM) or dopamine (Ki=37 nM) reuptake sites. Vilazodone potently and selectively inhibits reuptake of serotonin (IC50= 1.6 nM).  Vilazodone also binds selectively with high affinity to 5-HT1A receptors (IC50=2.1 nM) and is a 5-HT1A receptor partial agonist.

                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Cardiac Electrophysiology
                              
                              Treatment with VIIBRYD did not prolong the QTc interval. The effect of VIIBRYD [20, 40, 60, and 80 mg (2 times the recommended dosage)] on the QTc interval was evaluated in a randomized, placebo-, and active-controlled (moxifloxacin 400 mg), parallel-group, thorough QTc study in 157 healthy subjects. The study demonstrated an ability to detect small effects. The upper bound of the 90% confidence interval for the largest placebo-adjusted, baseline-corrected QTc interval was below 10 msec, based on the individual correction method (QTcI). Thus, at doses of 2 times the recommended dosage, VIIBRYD did not prolong the QTc interval to a clinically relevant extent.

                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics

                     
                        Vilazodone activity is due primarily to the parent drug.  The pharmacokinetics of vilazodone (5 mg – 80 mg) are dose-proportional. Accumulation of vilazodone after administration of single VIIBRYD doses did not vary with dose, and steady-state was achieved in about 3 days. Elimination of vilazodone is primarily by hepatic metabolism with a terminal half-life of approximately 25 hours. At steady-state, after daily dosing of VIIBRYD 40 mg under fed conditions, the mean Cmax value was 156 ng/mL, and the mean AUC (0-24 hours) value was 1645 ng·h/mL.

                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Absorption
                              
                              Vilazodone concentrations peaked at a median of 4-5 hours (Tmax) after VIIBRYD administration and declined with a terminal half-life of approximately 25 hours.  The absolute bioavailability of vilazodone was 72% with food.Vilazodone AUC and Cmax  in the fasted state can be decreased by approximately 50% and 60%, respectively, compared to the fed state.  Administration without food can result in inadequate drug concentrations and may reduce effectiveness.

                              Coadministration of VIIBRYD with ethanol or with a proton pump inhibitor (pantoprazole) did not affect the rate or extent of vilazodone absorption. In addition, neither the Tmax nor terminal elimination rate of vilazodone was altered by coadministration with either pantoprazole or ethanol.

                              Absorption is decreased by approximately 25% if vomiting occurs within 7 hours of ingestion; no replacement dose is needed.

                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Distribution
                              
                              Vilazodone is widely distributed and approximately 96-99% protein-bound. Administration of VIIBRYD to a patient taking another drug that is highly protein bound may cause increased free concentrations of the other drug, because vilazodone is highly bound to plasma protein.  The interaction between vilazodone and other highly protein-bound drugs has not been evaluated.

                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Metabolism and Elimination
                              
                              VIIBRYD is extensively metabolized through CYP and non-CYP pathways (possibly by carboxylesterase), with only 1% of the dose recovered in the urine and 2% of the dose recovered in the feces as unchanged vilazodone. CYP3A4 is primarily responsible for its metabolism among CYP pathways, with minor contributions from CYP2C19 and CYP2D6.

                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Drug Interaction Studies
                              
                              
                                 Figure 1 below includes the impact of other drugs on the pharmacokinetics of vilazodone [see Drug Interactions (7)].
                              
                              
                                 Figure 1. Effect of Other Drugs on Vilazodone Pharmacokinetics
                              
                              
                                 
                              
                              
                                 In vitro studies indicate that vilazodone is unlikely to inhibit or induce the metabolism of substrates for CYP1A1, 1A2, 2A6, 2B6, 2C9, 2C19, 2D6, 2E1, 3A4 or 3A5, except for CYP2C8. The effect of vilazodone on CYP2C8 activity has not been tested in vivo.   Figure 2 below includes the impact of vilazadone on the pharmacokinetics of other drugs in vivo.

                              
                                 Figure  2. Impact of Vilazodone on Other Drug Pharmacokinetics
                              
                              
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           Figure 1

                           
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           Figure 2

                           
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Studies in Specific Populations:
                              
                              The presence of mild to severe renal impairment or mild to severe hepatic impairment did not affect the apparent clearance of vilazodone (see Figure 3).  There were no pharmacokinetic differences of vilazodone in geriatric patients compared to younger patients, or between males and females (see Figure 3).

                              
                                 Figure 3: Impact of Intrinsic Factors on Vilazodone Pharmacokinetics
                              
                              
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           Figure 3

                           
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         