
               
               
               12  CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1  Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Ivermectin, a member of the avermectin class, causes death of parasites, primarily through binding selectively and with high affinity to glutamate-gated chloride channels, which occur in invertebrate nerve and muscle cells.  This leads to an increase in the permeability of the cell membrane to chloride ions with hyperpolarization of the nerve or muscle cell, resulting in paralysis and death of the parasite.  Compounds of this class may also interact with other ligand-gated chloride channels, such as those gated by the neurotransmitter gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA).  The selective activity of compounds of this class is attributable to the fact that some mammals do not have glutamate-gated chloride channels, the avermectins have a low affinity for mammalian ligand-gated chloride channels, and ivermectin does not readily cross the blood-brain barrier in humans.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2  Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        The pharmacodynamics of SKLICE Lotion are unknown.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3  Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        The absorption of ivermectin from SKLICE Lotion was evaluated in a clinical study in subjects aged from 6 months to 3 years.  This study evaluated pharmacokinetics in 20 lice infested subjects, and 13 of these subjects weighed 15 kg or less (overall weight range 8.5-23.9 kg).  All enrolled subjects received a single treatment with SKLICE Lotion.  The systemic ivermectin exposure was evaluated using an assay with a lower limit of quantitation of 0.05 ng/mL. The mean (± standard deviation) plasma maximum concentration (Cmax) and area under the concentration-time curve from 0 to time of last measurable concentration (AUC0-tlast) were 0.24 ± 0.23 ng/mL and  6.7  ± 11.2hr•ng/mL, respectively. These levels are much lower than those observed following oral administration of 165 mcg/kg dose of ivermectin.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         