
                     
                     
                     
                        Drug Interactions
                     
                     
                        
                           Hypotension - Patients on Diuretic Therapy:
                            Patients on diuretics and especially those in whom diuretic therapy was recently instituted, may occasionally experience an excessive reduction of blood pressure after initiation of therapy with Lisinopril Tablets. The possibility of hypotensive effects with Lisinopril Tablets can be minimized by either discontinuing the diuretic or increasing the salt intake prior to initiation of treatment with Lisinopril Tablets. If it is necessary to continue the diuretic, initiate therapy with Lisinopril Tablets at a dose of 5 mg daily, and provide close medical supervision after the initial dose until blood pressure has stabilized (See 
                              WARNINGS
                           
                           ,
                            and 
                              DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION
                           ) When a diuretic is added to the therapy of a patient receiving Lisinopril Tablets, an additional antihypertensive effect is usually observed. Studies with ACE inhibitors in combination with diuretics indicate that the dose of the ACE inhibitor can be reduced when it is given with a diuretic (See 
                              DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION
                           ).
                        
                           Antidiabetics: Epidemiological studies have suggested that concomitant administration of ACE inhibitors and antidiabetic medicines (insulins, oral hypoglycemic agents) may cause an increased blood-glucose-lowering effect with risk of hypoglycemia. This phenomenon appeared to be more likely to occur during the first weeks of combined treatment and in patients with renal impairment. In diabetic patients treated with oral antidiabetic agents or insulin, glycemic control should be closely monitored for hypoglycemia, especially during the first month of treatment with an ACE inhibitor.
                        
                           Non-Steroidal Anti-I
                           nflammatory Agents inclu
                           ding Selective Cyclooxygenase-
                           2 Inhibitors (COX-2 Inhibitors): In patients who are elderly, volume-depleted (including those on diuretic therapy), or with compromised renal function, co-administration of NSAIDs, including selective COX-2 inhibitors, with ACE inhibitors, including lisinopril, may result in deterioration of renal function, including possible acute renal failure. These effects are usually reversible. Monitor renal function periodically in patients receiving lisinopril and NSAID therapy.
                        The antihypertensive effect of ACE inhibitors, including lisinopril, may be attenuated by NSAIDs.
                     
                     
                  
               