
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Mircera is an erythropoietin receptor activator with greater activity in vivo as well as increased half-life, in contrast to erythropoietin. A primary growth factor for erythroid development, erythropoietin is produced in the kidney and released into the bloodstream in response to hypoxia. In responding to hypoxia, erythropoietin interacts with erythroid progenitor cells to increase red cell production. Production of endogenous erythropoietin is impaired in patients with CKD and erythropoietin deficiency is the primary cause of their anemia.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        Following a single-dose of Mircera in CKD patients, the onset of hemoglobin increase (defined as an increase > 0.4 g/dL from baseline) was observed 7 to 15 days following initial dose administration [see Dosage and Administration (2.2)].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        The pharmacokinetics of Mircera were studied in anemic patients with CKD including patients on dialysis and those not on dialysis. Mircera pharmacokinetics, based on population analyses, were not altered by age, gender, race, or the use of dialysis.
                        Following an IV administration of Mircera 0.4 mcg/kg body weight to CKD patients receiving peritoneal dialysis, the observed terminal half-life was 134 ± 65 hours (mean ± SD), and the total systemic clearance was 0.49 ± 0.18 mL/hr/kg. Following a SC administration of Mircera 0.8 mcg/kg to CKD patients receiving peritoneal dialysis, the terminal half-life was 139 ± 67 hours. The maximum serum concentrations of Mircera were observed 72 hours (median value) following the SC administration. The absolute bioavailability of Mircera after the SC administration was 62%.
                        In CKD patients receiving multiple Mircera doses, pharmacokinetics were studied after the first dose and on week 9 and week 19 or 21. Multiple dosing was found to have no effect on clearance, volume of distribution or bioavailability of Mircera. Based on population analyses of the clinical studies, Mircera did not accumulate following administration every four weeks. However, when Mircera was administered every 2 weeks, blood concentrations at steady state increased by 12%.
                        A comparison of serum concentrations of Mircera measured before and after hemodialysis in 41 patients showed that hemodialysis did not alter serum concentrations.
                        The single-dose pharmacokinetics of Mircera in patients with severe (Child-Pugh Classification Grade C) hepatic impairment and healthy volunteers were similar.
                        The site of SC injection (abdomen, arm or thigh) had no clinically important effects on the pharmacokinetics or pharmacodynamics of Mircera in healthy volunteers.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         