
                     
                     
                     Drug Interactions
                     
                        In clinical trials, no significant adverse reactions occurred with other drugs commonly used in the perioperative period, including:  central nervous system depressants, autonomic drugs, skeletal muscle relaxants, anti-infective agents, hormones and synthetic substitutes, blood derivatives, and cardiovascular drugs.
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Intravenous Anesthetics
                              
                              Sevoflurane administration is compatible with barbiturates, propofol, and other commonly used intravenous anesthetics.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Benzodiazepines and Opioids
                              
                              Benzodiazepines and opioids would be expected to decrease the MAC of sevoflurane in the same manner as with other inhalational anesthetics.  Sevoflurane administration is compatible with benzodiazepines and opioids as commonly used in surgical practice.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Nitrous Oxide
                              
                              As with other halogenated volatile anesthetics, the anesthetic requirement for sevoflurane is decreased when administered in combination with nitrous oxide.  Using 50% N2O, the MAC equivalent dose requirement is reduced approximately 50% in adults, and approximately 25% in pediatric patients (see 
                                    DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION
                                 ).
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Neuromuscular Blocking Agents
                              
                              As is the case with other volatile anesthetics, sevoflurane increases both the intensity and duration of neuromuscular blockade induced by nondepolarizing muscle relaxants.  When used to supplement alfentanil-N2O anesthesia, sevoflurane and isoflurane equally potentiate neuromuscular block induced with pancuronium, vecuronium or atracurium.  Therefore, during sevoflurane anesthesia, the dosage adjustments for these muscle relaxants are similar to those required with isoflurane.
                              Potentiation of neuromuscular blocking agents requires equilibration of muscle with delivered partial pressure of sevoflurane.  Reduced doses of neuromuscular blocking agents during induction of anesthesia may result in delayed onset of conditions suitable for endotracheal intubation or inadequate muscle relaxation.
                              Among available nondepolarizing agents, only vecuronium, pancuronium and atracurium interactions have been studied during sevoflurane anesthesia.  In the absence of specific guidelines:
                              
                                 For endotracheal intubation, do not reduce the dose of nondepolarizing muscle relaxants.
                                 During maintenance of anesthesia, the required dose of nondepolarizing muscle relaxants is likely to be reduced compared to that during N2O/opioid anesthesia.  Administration of supplemental doses of muscle relaxants should be guided by the response to nerve stimulation.
                              
                              The effect of sevoflurane on the duration of depolarizing neuromuscular blockade induced by succinylcholine has not been studied.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               