
                     
                     
                     Drug Interactions
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           P450 Interaction 
                           
                              In vitro metabolism studies showed that CYP1A2 was the major enzyme responsible for the metabolism of ropinirole. There is thus the potential for substrates or inhibitors of this enzyme when coadministered with ropinirole to alter its clearance. Therefore, if therapy with a drug known to be a potent inhibitor of CYP1A2 is stopped or started during treatment with ropinirole, adjustment of the dose of ropinirole may be required.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           L-dopa 
                           
                              Co-administration of carbidopa + L-dopa (Sinemet®1 10/100 mg twice daily) with ropinirole (2 mg three times daily) had no effect on the steady-state pharmacokinetics of ropinirole (N=28 patients). Oral administration of ropinirole 2 mg three times daily increased mean steady state Cmax of L-dopa by 20%, but its AUC was unaffected (N=23 patients).
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Digoxin
                           
                              Co-administration of ropinirole (2 mg three times daily) with digoxin (0.125 to 0.25 mg once daily) did not alter the steady-state pharmacokinetics of digoxin in 10 patients.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Theophylline 
                           
                              Administration of theophylline (300 mg twice daily, a substrate of CYP1A2) did not alter the steady-state pharmacokinetics of ropinirole (2 mg three times daily) in 12 patients with Parkinson’s disease. Ropinirole (2 mg three times daily) did not alter the pharmacokinetics of theophylline (5 mg/kg IV) in 12 patients with Parkinson’s disease.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Ciprofloxacin
                           
                              
                                  Co-administration of ciprofloxacin (500 mg twice daily), an inhibitor of CYP1A2, with ropinirole (2 mg three times daily) increased ropinirole AUC by 84% on average and Cmax by 60% (N=12 patients).
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Estrogens 
                           
                              Population pharmacokinetic analysis revealed that estrogens (mainly ethinylestradiol: intake 0.6 to 3 mg over 4-month to 23-year period) reduced the oral clearance of ropinirole by 36% in 16 patients. Dosage adjustment may not be needed for ropinirole in patients on estrogen therapy because patients must be carefully titrated with ropinirole to tolerance or adequate effect. However, if estrogen therapy is stopped or started during treatment with ropinirole, then adjustment of the dose of ropinirole may be required.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Dopamine Antagonists
                           
                              Since ropinirole is a dopamine agonist, it is possible that dopamine antagonists such as neuroleptics (phenothiazines, butyrophenones, thioxanthenes) or metoclopramide may diminish the effectiveness of ropinirole. Patients with major psychotic disorders treated with neuroleptics should only be treated with dopamine agonists if the potential benefits outweigh the risks.
                              Population analysis showed that commonly administered drugs, e.g., selegiline, amantadine, tricyclic antidepressants, benzodiazepines, ibuprofen, thiazides, antihistamines, and anticholinergics, did not affect the oral clearance of ropinirole.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               