
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
                  {template}
               
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           Do not co-administer with atazanavir or nelfinavir (7.1)
                           Concomitant warfarin use may require monitoring (7.2)
                           May interfere with the absorption of drugs where gastric pH is important for bioavailability (7.4)
                           Co-administration of clopidogrel with 80mg pantoprazole reduces the pharmacological activity of clopidogrel (7.3). 
                           May produce false-positive urine screen for THC (7.5)
                        
                        
                           Information describing use in pediatric patients with erosive esophagitis associated with GERD is approved for Wyeth Pharmaceuticals Inc.’s pantoprazole  sodium delayed-release tablets.  However, due to Wyeth Pharmaceuticals Inc.’s marketing exclusivity rights, this drug product is not labeled with that pediatric information.
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           7.1 Interference with Antiretroviral Therapy
                        
                     
                     
                        Concomitant use of atazanavir or nelfinavir with proton pump inhibitors is not recommended.Coadministration of atazanavir or nelfinavir with proton pump inhibitors is expected to substantially decrease atazanavir or nelfinavir plasma concentrations and may result in a loss of therapeutic effect and development of drug resistance.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        7.2 Coumarin Anticoagulants
                     
                     
                        There have been postmarketing reports of increased INR and prothrombin time in patients receiving proton pump inhibitors, including pantoprazole sodium, and warfarin concomitantly. Increases in INR and prothrombin time may lead to abnormal bleeding and even death. Patients treated with proton pump inhibitors and warfarin concomitantly should be monitored for increases in INR and prothrombin time.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        7.3 Clopidogrel
                     
                     
                        Concomitant administration of pantoprazole and clopidogrel in healthy subjects had no clinically important effect on exposure to the active metabolite of clopidogrel or clopidogrelinduced platelet inhibition [see 
                              Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)
                           ]. No dose adjustment of clopidogrel is necessary when administered with an approved dose of pantoprazole sodium.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        7.4 Drugs for Which Gastric pH can Affect Bioavailability
                     
                     
                        Pantoprazole causes long-lasting inhibition of gastric acid secretion. Therefore, pantoprazole may interfere with absorption of drugs where gastric pH is an important determinant of their bioavailability (e.g., ketoconazole, ampicillin esters, and iron salts).
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        7.5 False Positive Urine Tests for THC
                     
                     
                        There have been reports of false positive urine screening tests for tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) in patients receiving proton pump inhibitors. An alternative confirmatory method should be considered to verify positive results.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         