
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               Amifostine is a prodrug that is dephosphorylated by alkaline phosphatase in tissues to a pharmacologically active free thiol metabolite. This metabolite is believed to be responsible for the reduction of the cumulative renal toxicity of cisplatin. The ability of Amifostine to differentially protect normal tissues is attributed to the higher capillary alkaline phosphatase activity, higher pH and better vascularity of normal tissues relative to tumor tissue, which results in a more rapid generation of the active thiol metabolite as well as a higher rate constant for uptake into cells. The higher concentration of the thiol metabolite in normal tissues is available to bind to, and thereby detoxify, reactive metabolites of cisplatin. This thiol metabolite can also scavenge reactive oxygen species generated by exposure to cisplatin.
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Pharmacokinetics:
                     
                        Clinical pharmacokinetic studies show that Amifostine is rapidly
cleared from the plasma with a distribution half-life of <1 minute
and an elimination half-life of approximately 8 minutes. Less than 10%
of Amifostine remains in the plasma 6 minutes after drug
administration. Amifostine is rapidly metabolized to an active free
thiol metabolite. A disulfide metabolite is produced subsequently and
is less active than the free thiol. After a 10-second bolus dose of 150
mg/m2 of Amifostine, renal excretion of the parent drug and
its two metabolites was low during the hour following drug
administration, averaging 0.69%, 2.64% and 2.22% of the administered
dose for the parent, thiol and disulfide, respectively. Measurable
levels of the free thiol metabolite have been found in bone marrow
cells 5 to 8 minutes after intravenous infusion of Amifostine.
Pretreatment with dexamethasone or metoclopramide has no effect on
Amifostine pharmacokinetics.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Clinical Studies
                     
                        
                           Chemotherapy for Ovarian Cancer. 

                           
                        
                        
                           A randomized controlled trial compared six cycles of cyclophosphamide 1000 mg/m2, and cisplatin 100 mg/m2 with or without Amifostine pretreatment at 910 mg/m2, in two successive cohorts of 121 patients with advanced ovarian cancer. In both cohorts, after multiple cycles of chemotherapy, pretreatment with
Amifostine significantly reduced the cumulative renal toxicity associated with cisplatin as assessed by the proportion of patients who had ≥ 40% decrease in creatinine clearance from pretreatment values, protracted elevations in serum creatinine (>1.5 mg/dL), or severe hypomagnesemia. Subgroup analyses suggested that the effect of Amifostine was present in patients who had received nephrotoxic antibiotics, or who had preexisting diabetes or hypertension (and thus may have been at increased risk for significant nephrotoxicity), as well as in patients who lacked these risks. Selected analyses of the effects of Amifostine in reducing the cumulative renal toxicity of cisplatin in the randomized ovarian cancer study are provided in TABLES 1 and 2, below.
                        



                        


In the randomized ovarian cancer study, Amifostine had no detectable effect on the antitumor efficacy of cisplatin-cyclophosphamide chemotherapy. Objective response rates (including pathologically confirmed complete remission rates), time to progression, and survival duration were all similar in the Amifostine and control study groups. The table below summarizes the principal efficacy findings of the randomized ovarian cancer study.

                           

                        
                        


