
               
               
               7	DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
                  See also 
                        Contraindications (4)
                      and 
                        Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)
                     .
               
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           Co-administration of PREZISTA/ritonavir with other drugs can alter the concentration of other drugs and other drugs may alter the concentrations of darunavir. The potential drug-drug concentrations must be considered prior to and during therapy. (4, 5.5, 7, 12.3).
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1	Potential for PREZISTA/ritonavir to Affect Other Drugs
                     
                        PREZISTA co-administered with ritonavir is an inhibitor of CYP3A and CYP2D6. Co-administration of PREZISTA and ritonavir with drugs that are primarily metabolized by CYP3A and CYP2D6 may result in increased plasma concentrations of such drugs, which could increase or prolong their therapeutic effect and adverse events (see Table 7).
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2	Potential for Other Drugs to Affect Darunavir
                     
                        Darunavir and ritonavir are metabolized by CYP3A. Drugs that induce CYP3A activity would be expected to increase the clearance of darunavir and ritonavir, resulting in lowered plasma concentrations of darunavir and ritonavir. Co-administration of darunavir and ritonavir and other drugs that inhibit CYP3A may decrease the clearance of darunavir and ritonavir and may result in increased plasma concentrations of darunavir and ritonavir (see Table 7).
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3	Established and Other Potentially Significant Drug Interactions
                     
                        Table 7 provides dosing recommendations as a result of drug interactions with PREZISTA/ritonavir. These recommendations are based on either drug interaction studies or predicted interactions due to the expected magnitude of interaction and potential for serious adverse events or loss of efficacy.
                        


                        


In addition to the drugs included in Table 7, the interaction between PREZISTA/ritonavir and the following drugs were evaluated in clinical studies and no dose adjustments are needed for either drug [see 
                              Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)
                           ]: atazanavir, efavirenz, etravirine, nevirapine, omeprazole, ranitidine, and tenofovir disoproxil fumarate.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           Other nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors (NRTIs):
                        Based on the different elimination pathways of the other NRTIs (zidovudine, zalcitabine, emtricitabine, stavudine, lamivudine and abacavir) that are primarily renally excreted, no drug interactions are expected for these drugs and PREZISTA/ritonavir.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           Other PIs:
                        The co-administration of PREZISTA/ritonavir and PIs other than lopinavir/ritonavir, saquinavir, atazanavir, and indinavir has not been studied. Therefore, such co-administration is not recommended.
                     
                  
               
            
         