
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Mitoxantrone, a DNA-reactive agent that intercalates into deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) through hydrogen bonding, causes crosslinks and strand breaks. Mitoxantrone also interferes with ribonucleic acid (RNA) and is a potent inhibitor of topoisomerase II, an enzyme responsible for uncoiling and repairing damaged DNA. It has a cytocidal effect on both proliferating and nonproliferating cultured human cells, suggesting lack of cell cycle phase specificity. 
                        Mitoxantrone injection has been shown in vitro to inhibit B cell, T cell, and macrophage proliferation and impair antigen presentation, as well as the secretion of interferon gamma, TNFα, and IL-2. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        Pharmacokinetics of mitoxantrone in patients following a single intravenous administration of mitoxantrone injection can be characterized by a three-compartment model. The mean alpha half-life of mitoxantrone is 6 to 12 minutes, the mean beta half-life is 1.1 to 3.1 hours and the mean gamma (terminal or elimination) half-life is 23 to 215 hours (median approximately 75 hours). Pharmacokinetic studies have not been performed in humans receiving multiple daily dosing. Distribution to tissues is extensive: steady-state volume of distribution exceeds 1,000 L/m2. Tissue concentrations of mitoxantrone appear to exceed those in the blood during the terminal elimination phase. In the healthy monkey, distribution to brain, spinal cord, eye, and spinal fluid is low. 
                        In patients administered 15 to 90 mg/m2 of mitoxantrone injection intravenously, there is a linear relationship between dose and the area under the concentration-time curve (AUC). 
                        Mitoxantrone is 78% bound to plasma proteins in the observed concentration range of 26 to 455 ng/mL. This binding is independent of concentration and is not affected by the presence of phenytoin, doxorubicin, methotrexate, prednisone, prednisolone, heparin, or aspirin. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Metabolism and Elimination
                     
                        Mitoxantrone is excreted in urine and feces as either unchanged drug or as inactive metabolites. In human studies, 11% and 25% of the dose were recovered in urine and feces, respectively, as either parent drug or metabolite during the 5 day period following drug administration. Of the material recovered in urine, 65% was unchanged drug. The remaining 35% was composed of monocarboxylic and dicarboxylic acid derivatives and their glucuronide conjugates. The pathways leading to the metabolism of mitoxantrone injection have not been elucidated. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Special Populations
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Gender
                           
                              The effect of gender on mitoxantrone pharmacokinetics is unknown. 
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Geriatric
                           
                              In elderly patients with breast cancer, the systemic mitoxantrone clearance was 21.3 L/hr/m2, compared with 28.3 L/hr/m2 and 16.2 L/hr/m2 for non-elderly patients with nasopharyngeal carcinoma and malignant lymphoma, respectively. 
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Pediatric
                           
                              Mitoxantrone pharmacokinetics in the pediatric population are unknown. 
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Race
                           
                              The effect of race on mitoxantrone pharmacokinetics is unknown. 
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Renal Impairment
                           
                              Mitoxantrone pharmacokinetics in patients with renal impairment are unknown. 
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Hepatic Impairment
                           
                              Mitoxantrone clearance is reduced by hepatic impairment. Patients with severe hepatic dysfunction (bilirubin > 3.4 mg/dL) have an AUC more than three times greater than that of patients with normal hepatic function receiving the same dose. Patients with multiple sclerosis who have hepatic impairment should ordinarily not be treated with mitoxantrone injection. Other patients with hepatic impairment should be treated with caution and dosage adjustment may be required. 
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Drug Interactions
                     
                        
                           
                              In vitro drug interaction studies have demonstrated that mitoxantrone did not inhibit CYP450 1A2, 2A6, 2C9, 2C19, 2D6, 2E1, and 3A4 across a broad concentration range. The results of in vitro induction studies are inconclusive, but suggest that mitoxantrone may be a weak inducer of CYP450 2E1 activity. 
                        
                        Pharmacokinetic studies of the interaction of mitoxantrone injection with concomitantly administered medications in humans have not been performed. The pathways leading to the metabolism of mitoxantrone injection have not been elucidated. To date, postmarketing experience has not revealed any significant drug interactions in patients who have received mitoxantrone injection for treatment of cancer. Information on drug interactions in patients with multiple sclerosis is limited. 
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         