
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS

               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           Concurrent use of other CNS depressants may cause respiratory depression, hypotension, and profound sedation or coma. (7.1)

                           Mixed agonist/antagonist analgesics may reduce the analgesic effect of hydromorphone and may precipitate withdrawal symptoms in these patients. (7.2)

                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 Drug Interactions with other CNS Depressants

                     
                        Hydromorphone HCl Injection (HPF) should be used with caution and in reduced dosages when administered to patients concurrently receiving other central nervous system depressants including sedatives or hypnotics, general anesthetics, phenothiazines, centrally acting antiemetics, tranquilizers, and alcohol because respiratory depression, hypotension, and profound sedation or coma may result.

                        When such combined therapy is contemplated, the dose of one or both agents should be reduced. Opioid analgesics, including Hydromorphone HCl Injection (HPF), may enhance the action of neuromuscular blocking agents and produce an increased degree of respiratory depression.

                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 Interactions with Mixed Agonist/Antagonist Opioid Analgesics

                     
                        Agonist/antagonist analgesics (e.g., pentazocine, nalbuphine, and butorphanol) and partial agonist analgesics (buprenorphine) should be administered with caution to a patient who has received or is receiving a course of therapy with a pure opioid agonist analgesic such as Hydromorphone HCl Injection (HPF). In this situation, mixed agonist/antagonist analgesics may reduce the analgesic effect of Hydromorphone HCl Injection (HPF) and/or may precipitate withdrawal symptoms in these patients.

                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3 Monoamine Oxidase Inhibitors (MAOIs)

                     
                        MAOIs may potentiate the action of Hydromorphone HCl Injection (HPF). Allow at least 14 days after stopping treatment with MAOIs before initiating treatment with Hydromorphone HCl Injection (HPF).

                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4 Anticholinergics

                     
                        Anticholinergics or other medications with anticholinergic activity when used concurrently with Hydromorphone HCl Injection (HPF) may result in increased risk of urinary retention and severe constipation, which may lead to paralytic ileus.

                     
                     
                  
               
            
         