
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
                  No drug interaction studies were conducted with SIMCOR. However, the following interactions have been noted with the individual components of SIMCOR: 
                  
                     Simvastatin
                  
               
               
               
                  
                     
                        


                        



                           Fenofibrate: Combination with SIMCOR increases the risk of adverse skeletal muscle effects and should be avoided. (7.3)
                           
                           Coumarin anticoagulants: Combination prolongs INR. Achieve stable INR prior to starting SIMCOR. Monitor INR frequently until stable upon initiation or alteration of SIMCOR therapy. (7.7)
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 Strong CYP3A4 Inhibitors, Cyclosporine, or Danazol
                     
                        Strong CYP3A4 inhibitors: Simvastatin, like several other inhibitors of HMG-CoA reductase, is a substrate of CYP3A4. Simvastatin is metabolized by CYP3A4 but has no CYP3A4 inhibitory activity; therefore it is not expected to affect the plasma concentrations of other drugs metabolized by CYP3A4.
                        Elevated plasma levels of HMG-CoA reductase inhibitory activity increases the risk of myopathy and rhabdomyolysis, particularly with higher doses of SIMCOR [see Warnings and Precautions (5.2) and Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)]. Concomitant use of drugs labeled as having a strong inhibitory effect on CYP3A4 is contraindicated [see Contraindications (4)]. If treatment with itraconazole, ketoconazole, posaconazole, erythromycin, clarithromycin or telithromycin is unavoidable, therapy with SIMCOR must be suspended during the course of treatment.
                        Although not studied clinically, voriconazole has been shown to inhibit lovastatin metabolism in vitro (human liver microsomes). Therefore, voriconazole is likely to increase the plasma concentration of simvastatin. It is recommended that dose adjustment of SIMCOR be considered during concomitant use of voriconazole and SIMCOR to reduce the risk of myopathy, including rhabdomyolysis [see Warnings and Precautions (5.2)].
                        Cyclosporine or Danazol: The risk of myopathy, including rhabdomyolysis is increased by concomitant administration of cyclosporine or danazol. Therefore, concomitant use of these drugs is contraindicated [see Contraindications (4), Warnings and Precautions (5.2) and Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 Verapamil or Diltiazem
                     
                        The risk of myopathy, including rhabdomyolysis is increased by concomitant administration of verapamil or diltiazem with doses of simvastatin exceeding 10 mg. Because all doses of SIMCOR contain simvastatin in excess of 10 mg, concomitant use of these drugs is contraindicated [see Contraindications (4), Warnings and Precautions (5.2) and Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3 Lipid-Lowering Drugs That Can Cause Myopathy When Given Alone
                     
                        Gemfibrozil: Contraindicated with SIMCOR [see Contraindications (4) and Warnings and Precautions (5.2)]. Other fibrates: Combined use with SIMCOR should be avoided [see Warnings and Precautions (5.2)].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4 Amlodipine or Ranolazine
                     
                        The risk of myopathy, including rhabdomyolysis, is increased by concomitant administration of amlodipine or ranolazine [see Dosage and Administration (2.2) and Warnings and Precautions (5.2)
                           
                           and Table 5 in
                           Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.5 Propranolol
                     
                        In healthy male volunteers there was a significant decrease in mean Cmax, but no change in AUC, for simvastatin total and active inhibitors with concomitant administration of single doses of simvastatin and propranolol. The clinical relevance of this finding is unclear. The pharmacokinetics of the enantiomers of propranolol were not affected.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.6 Digoxin
                     
                        Concomitant administration of a single dose of digoxin in healthy male volunteers receiving simvastatin resulted in a slight elevation (less than 0.3 ng/mL) in digoxin concentrations in plasma (as measured by a radioimmunoassay) compared to concomitant administration of placebo and digoxin. Patients taking digoxin should be monitored appropriately when SIMCOR is initiated.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.7 Coumarin Anticoagulants
                     
                        In normal volunteers and hypercholesterolemic patients, simvastatin 20-40 mg/day modestly potentiated the effect of coumarin anticoagulants since the prothrombin time, reported as International Normalized Ratio (INR), increased from a baseline of 1.7 to 1.8 and from 2.6 to 3.4 in the volunteers and patients, respectively. With other reductase inhibitors, clinically evident bleeding and/or increased prothrombin time has been reported in a few patients taking coumarin anticoagulants concomitantly. In such patients, prothrombin time should be determined before starting SIMCOR and frequently enough during early therapy to ensure that no significant alteration of prothrombin time occurs. Once a stable prothrombin time has been documented, prothrombin times can be monitored at the intervals usually recommended for patients on coumarin anticoagulants. If the dose of SIMCOR is changed or discontinued, the same procedure should be repeated. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.8 Colchicine
                     
                        Cases of myopathy, including rhabdomyolysis, have been reported with simvastatin coadministered with colchicine, and caution should be exercised when prescribing SIMCOR with colchicine [see Warnings and Precautions (5.2)].
                        
                           Niacin
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.9 Aspirin
                     
                        Concomitant use of aspirin may decrease the metabolic clearance of niacin. The clinical relevance of this finding is unclear.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.10 Antihypertensive Therapy
                     
                        Niacin may potentiate the effects of ganglionic blocking agents and vasoactive drugs resulting in postural hypotension.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.11 Bile Acid Sequestrants
                     
                        An in vitro study was carried out investigating the niacin-binding capacity of colestipol and cholestyramine. About 98% of available niacin was bound to colestipol, with 10 to 30% binding to cholestyramine. These results suggest that 4 to 6 hours, or as great an interval as possible, should elapse between the ingestion of bile acid-binding resins and the administration of SIMCOR. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.12 Other
                     
                        Nutritional supplements containing large doses of niacin or related compounds may potentiate the adverse effects of SIMCOR.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         