
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Scopolamine, a belladonna alkaloid, is an anticholinergic agent. Scopolamine acts: i) as a competitive inhibitor at
                        postganglionic muscarinic receptor sites of the parasympathetic nervous system, and ii) on smooth muscles that
                        respond to acetylcholine but lack cholinergic innervation. It has been suggested that scopolamine acts in the central
                        nervous system (CNS) by blocking cholinergic transmission from the vestibular nuclei to higher centers in the CNS
                        and from the reticular formation to the vomiting center. Scopolamine can inhibit the secretion of saliva and sweat,
                        decrease gastrointestinal secretions and motility, cause drowsiness, dilate the pupils, increase heart rate, and depress
                        motor function.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        The pharmacokinetics of scopolamine delivered via the system are due to the characteristics of both the drug and
                        dosage form. The system is formulated to deliver in-vivo approximately 1 mg of scopolamine at an approximately
                        constant rate to the systemic circulation over 3 days. Upon application to the postauricular skin, an initial priming
                        dose of scopolamine is released from the adhesive layer to saturate skin-binding sites. The subsequent delivery of
                        scopolamine to the blood is determined by the rate controlling membrane and is designed to produce stable plasma
                        levels in a therapeutic range. Following removal of the used system, there is some degree of continued systemic
                        absorption of scopolamine bound in the skin layers.
                        
                           Absorption

                           Scopolamine is well absorbed percutaneously. Following application to the skin behind the ear, circulating plasma
                        levels are detected within 4 hours with peak levels being obtained, on average, within 24 hours. The average plasma
                        concentration produced is 87 pg/mL (0.28 nM) for free scopolamine and 354 pg/mL for total scopolamine (free +
                        conjugates).
                        
                           Distribution

                           The distribution of scopolamine is not well characterized. It crosses the placenta and the blood brain barrier and may be reversibly bound to plasma proteins.
                        
                           Metabolism and Excretion

                           The exact elimination pattern of scopolamine has not been determined. Following patch removal, plasma levels of scopolamine decline in a log linear fashion with an observed half-life of 9.5 hours. Less than 10% of the total dose is excreted in the urine as the parent drug and metabolites over 108 hours. Scopolamine is extensively metabolized and conjugated with less than 5% of the total dose appearing unchanged in the urine. The enzymes responsible for metabolizing scopolamine are unknown.
                        
                           Drug Interaction
                        
                        An in vitro study using human hepatocytes examined the induction of CYP1A2 and CYP3A4 by scopolamine.
                        Scopolamine did not induce CYP1A2 and CYP3A4 isoenzymes at the concentrations up to 10 nM.
                        In an in vitro study using human liver microsomes which evaluated the inhibition of CYP1A2, 2C8, 2C9, 2C19, 2D6
                        and 3A4, scopolamine did not inhibit these cytochrome P450 isoenzymes at the concentrations up to 1 mcM.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         