
               
               
               DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
                  
              Potential Interactions with Drugs that Inhibit or are Metabolized by Cytochrome P450 Isozymes

                  Multiple hepatic cytochrome P450 (CYP450) enzymes are involved in the oxidative biotransformation of a large number of structurally different drugs and endogenous compounds. The available knowledge concerning the relationship of fluvoxamine and the CYP450-enzyme system has been obtained mostly from pharmacokinetic interaction studies conducted in healthy volunteers, but some preliminary in vitro data are also available.
Based on a finding of substantial interactions of fluvoxamine with certain of these drugs (see later parts of this section and alsoWARNINGSfor details) and limited in vitro data for the 3A4 isozyme, it appears that fluvoxamine inhibits the following isozymes that are known to be involved in the metabolism of the listed drugs:

                  1A22C93A42C19WarfarinWarfarinAlprazolamOmeprazoleTheophyllinePropranololTizanidineIn vitro data suggest that fluvoxamine is a relatively weak inhibitor of the 2D6 isozyme.
Approximately 7% of the normal population has a genetic defect that leads to reduced levels of activity of the cytochrome P4502D6 isozyme. Such individuals have been referred to as "poor metabolizers" (PM) of drugs such as debrisoquin, dextromethorphan, and tricyclic antidepressants. While none of the drugs studied for drug interactions significantly affected the pharmacokinetics of fluvoxamine, an in vivo study of fluvoxamine single- dose pharmokinetics in 13 PM subjects demonstrated altered pharmokinetic properties compared to 16 "extensive metabolizers" (EM): mean Cmax, AUC, and half-life were increased by 52%, 200%, and 62%, respectively, in the PM compared to the EM group. This suggests that fluvoxamine is metabolized, at least in part, by the 2D6 isozyme. Caution is indicated in patients known to have reduced levels of P4502D6 activity and those receiving concomitant drugs known to inhibit this isozyme (e.g. quinidine).
The metabolism of fluvoxamine has not been fully characterized and the effects of potent P450 isozyme inhibition, such as the ketoconazole inhibition of 3A4, on fluvoxamine metabolism have not been studied.
A clinically significant fluvoxamine interaction is possible with drugs having a narrow therapeutic ratio such as terfenadine, astemizole, cisapride, or pimozide, warfarin, theophylline, certain benzodiazepines and phenytoin. If Fluvoxamine Maleate Tablets are to be administered together with a drug that is eliminated via oxidative metabolism and has a narrow therapeutic window, plasma levels and/or pharmacodynamic effects of the latter drug should be monitored closely, at least until steady-state conditions are reached (SeeCONTRAINDICATIONSandWARNINGS).

                  

                  
              CNS Active Drugs

                  
                  

                  
              Alcohol

                  Studies involving single 40 g doses of ethanol (oral administration in one study and intravenous in the other) and multiple dosing with fluvoxamine maleate (50 mg bid) revealed no effect of either drug on the pharmacokinetics or pharmacodynamics of the other.

                  

                  
              Alprazolam

                  SeeWARNINGS.

                  

                  
              Antipsychotics

                  SeeWARNINGS-Other Potentially Important Drug InteractionsNeuroleptic Malignant Syndrome (NMS) or NMS-Like Events.

                  

                  
              Diazepam

                  SeeWARNINGS.

                  

                  
              Carbamazepine

                  Elevated carbamazepine levels and symptoms of toxicity have been reported with the co-administration of fluvoxamine maleate and carbamazepine.

                  

                  
              Clozapine

                  Elevated serum levels of clozapine have been reported in patients taking fluvoxamine maleate and clozapine. Since clozapine related seizures and orthostatic hypotension appear to be dose related, the risk of these adverse events may be higher when fluvoxamine and clozapine are co-administered. Patients should be closely monitored when fluvoxamine maleate and clozapine are used concurrently.

                  

                  
              Lithium

                  As with other serotonergic drugs, lithium may enhance the serotonergic effects of fluvoxamine and, therefore, the combination should be used with caution. Seizures have been reported with the co-administration of fluvoxamine maleate and lithium.

                  

                  
              Lorazepam

                     

                     

                     
                Methadone

                     Significantly increased methadone (plasma level:dose) ratios have been reported when fluvoxamine maleate was administered to patients receiving maintenance methadone treatment, with symptoms of opioid intoxication in one patient. Opioid withdrawal symptoms were reported following fluvoxamine maleate discontinuation in another patient.

                     

                     
                Monoamine Oxidase Inhibitors

                     SeeWARNINGS
                     

                     

                     
                Serotonergic Drugs

                     Based on the mechanism of action of fluvoxamine and the potential for serotonin syndrome, caution is advised when fluvoxamine is coadministered with other drugs that may affect the serotonergic neurotransmitter systems, such as triptans, linezolid (an antibiotic which is a reversible non-selective MAOI), lithium, tramadol, or St. John's Wort (seeWARNINGSSerotonin Syndrome). The concomitant use of fluvoxamine with other SSRIs, SNRIs or tryptophan is not recommended (seePRECAUTIONSDrug Interactions).

                     

                     
                Sumatriptan

                     There have been rare postmarketing reports describing patients with weakness, hyperreflexia, and incoordination following the use of a selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor (SSRI) and sumatriptan. If concomitant treatment with sumatriptan and an SSRI (eg. fluoxetine, fluvoxamine, paroxetine, sertraline) is clinically warranted, appropriate observation of the patient is advised.

                     

                     
                Tacrine

                     In a study of 13 healthy, male volunteers, a single 40 mg dose of tacrine added to fluvoxamine 100 mg/day administered at steady-state was associated with five- and eight-fold increases in tacrine Cmax and AUC, respectively, compared to the administration of tacrine alone. Five subjects experienced nausea, vomiting, sweating, and diarrhea following co-administration, consistent with the cholinergic effects of tacrine.

                     

                     
                Thioridazine

                     SeeCONTRAINDICATIONSandWARNINGS
                     

                     

                     
                Tizanidine

                     SeeCONTRAINDICATIONSandWARNINGS
                     

                     

                     
                Tricyclic Antidepressants (TCAs)

                        

                        

                        
                  Triptans

                        There have been rare postmarketing reports of serotonin syndrome with use of an SSRI and a triptan. If concomitant treatment of fluvoxamine with a triptan is clinically warranted, careful observation of the patient is advised, particularly during treatment initiation and dose increases (seeWARNINGSSerotonin Syndrome).

                        

                        
                  Tryptophan

                        Tryptophan may enhance the serotonergic effects of fluvoxamine, and the combination should, therefore, be used with caution. Severe vomiting has been reported with the co-administration of fluvoxamine maleate and tryptophan.

                        

                        
                  Other Drugs

                        
                        

                        
                  Drugs That Interfere With Hemostasis (NSAIDs, Aspirin, Warfarin, etc.)

                        Serotonin release by platelets plays an important role in hemostasis. Epidemiological studies of the case-control and cohort design that have demonstrated an association between use of psychotropic drugs that interfere with serotonin reuptake and the occurrence of upper gastrointestinal bleeding have also shown that concurrent use of an NSAID or aspirin potentiated the risk of bleeding. Thus, patients should be cautioned about the use of such drugs concurrently with fluvoxamine.

                        

                        
                  Theophylline

                        SeeWARNINGS
                        

                        

                        
                  Warfarin

                        SeeWARNINGS
                        

                        

                        
                  Alosetron

                        Because alosetron is metabolized by a variety of hepatic CYP drug-metabolizing enzymes, inducers or inhibitors of these enzymes may change the clearance of alosetron. Fluvoxamine is a known potent inhibitor of CYP1A2 and also inhibits CYP3A4, CYP2C9, and CYP2C19. In a pharmacokinetic study, 40 healthy female subjects received fluvoxamine in escalating doses from 50 to 200 mg a day for 16 days, with coadministration of alosetron 1 mg on the last day. Fluvoxamine increased mean alosetron plasma concentrations (AUC) approximately 6-fold and prolonged the half-life by approximately 3-fold. (SeeContraindications,Precautions, and Lotronex(alosetron) package insert.)

                        

                        
                  Digoxin

                        Administration of fluvoxamine maleate 100 mg daily for 18 days (N=8) did not significantly affect the pharmacokinetics of a 1.25 mg single intravenous dose of digoxin.

                        

                        
                  Diltiazem

                        Bradycardia has been reported with the co-administration of fluvoxamine maleate and diltiazem.

                        

                        
                  Propranolol and Other Beta-Blockers

                        Co-administration of fluvoxamine maleate 100 mg per day and propranolol 160 mg per day in normal volunteers resulted in a mean five-fold increase (range 2 to 17) in minimum propranolol plasma concentrations. In this study, there was a slight potentiation of the propranolol-induced reduction in heart rate and reduction in the exercise diastolic pressure.
One case of bradycardia and hypotension and a second case of orthostatic hypotension have been reported with the co-administration of fluvoxamine and metoprolol.
If propranolol or metoprolol is co-administered with Fluvoxamine Maleate tablets, a reduction in the initial beta-blocker dose and more cautious dose titration is recommended. No dosage adjustment is required for Fluvoxamine Maleate Tablets.
Co-administration of fluvoxamine maleate 100 mg per day with atenolol 100 mg per day (N=6) did not affect the plasma concentrations of atenolol. Unlike propranolol and metoprolol which undergo hepatic metabolism, atenolol is eliminated primarily by renal excretion.

                        

                        
                  Effects of Smoking on Fluvoxamine Metabolism

                        Smokers had a 25% increase in the metabolism of fluvoxamine compared to nonsmokers.

                        

                        
                  Electroconvulsive Therapy (ECT)

                        There are no clinical studies establishing the benefits or risks of combined use of ECT and fluvoxamine maleate.

                        

                     
                  
               
               
            
         