
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              •Increased INR and prothrombin times have been reported with concomitant use with warfarin. Patients need to be monitored (7.2)
                           
                              •Rabeprazole has been shown to inhibit cyclosporine metabolism in vitro (7.3)
                           
                              •Rabeprazole sodium delayed-release tablets inhibit gastric acid secretion and may interfere with the absorption of drugs where gastric pH is an important determinant of bioavailability (e.g., ketoconazole, iron salts and digoxin) (7.4)
                           
                              •Rabeprazole sodium delayed-release tablets may reduce the plasma levels of atazanavir (7.4)
                           
                              •Methotrexate: rabeprazole sodium delayed-release tablets may increase serum level of methotrexate (7.7)
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1Drugs Metabolized by CYP450 
                     
                        Rabeprazole is metabolized by the cytochrome P450 (CYP450) drug metabolizing enzyme system. Studies in healthy subjects have shown that rabeprazole does not have clinically significant interactions with other drugs metabolized by the CYP450 system, such as warfarin and theophylline given as single oral doses, diazepam as a single intravenous dose, and phenytoin given as a single intravenous dose (with supplemental oral dosing). Steady-state interactions of rabeprazole and other drugs metabolized by this enzyme system have not been studied in patients. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2Warfarin 
                     
                        There have been reports of increased INR and prothrombin time in patients receiving proton pump inhibitors, including rabeprazole, and warfarin concomitantly. Increases in INR and prothrombin time may lead to abnormal bleeding and even death [see Warnings and Precautions (5.2)]. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3Cyclosporine 
                     
                        
                           In vitro incubations employing human liver microsomes indicated that rabeprazole inhibited cyclosporine metabolism with an IC50 of 62 micromolar, a concentration that is over 50 times higher than the Cmax in healthy volunteers following 14 days of dosing with 20 mg of rabeprazole. This degree of inhibition is similar to that by omeprazole at equivalent concentrations. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4Compounds Dependent on Gastric pH for Absorption 
                     
                        Rabeprazole produces sustained inhibition of gastric acid secretion. An interaction with compounds which are dependent on gastric pH for absorption may occur due to the magnitude of acid suppression observed with rabeprazole. For example, in normal subjects, coadministration of rabeprazole 20 mg QD resulted in an approximately 30% decrease in the bioavailability of ketoconazole and increases in the AUC and Cmax for digoxin of 19% and 29%, respectively. Therefore, patients may need to be monitored when such drugs are taken concomitantly with rabeprazole. Coadministration of rabeprazole and antacids produced no clinically relevant changes in plasma rabeprazole concentrations. 
                        Concomitant use of atazanavir and proton pump inhibitors is not recommended. Coadministration of atazanavir with proton pump inhibitors is expected to substantially decrease atazanavir plasma concentrations and thereby reduce its therapeutic effect. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.5Drugs Metabolized by CYP2C19 
                     
                        In a clinical study in Japan evaluating rabeprazole in adult patients categorized by CYP2C19 genotype (n = 6 per genotype category), gastric acid suppression was higher in poor metabolizers as compared to extensive metabolizers. This could be due to higher rabeprazole plasma levels in poor metabolizers. Whether or not interactions of rabeprazole sodium with other drugs metabolized by CYP2C19 would be different between extensive metabolizers and poor metabolizers has not been studied. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.6Combined Administration with Clarithromycin 
                     
                        Combined administration consisting of rabeprazole, amoxicillin, and clarithromycin resulted in increases in plasma concentrations of rabeprazole and 14-hydroxyclarithromycin [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)]. 
                        Concomitant administration of clarithromycin with other drugs can lead to serious adverse reactions due to drug interactions [see Warnings and Precautions in prescribing information for clarithromycin]. Because of these drug interactions, clarithromycin is contraindicated for coadministration with certain drugs [see Contraindications in prescribing information for clarithromycin] [see Drug Interactions in prescribing information for amoxicillin]. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.7Methotrexate 
                     
                        Case reports, published population pharmacokinetic studies, and retrospective analyses suggest that concomitant administration of PPIs and methotrexate (primarily at high dose; see methotrexate prescribing information) may elevate and prolong serum levels of methotrexate and/or its metabolite hydroxymethotrexate. However, no formal drug interaction studies of methotrexate with PPIs have been conducted [see Warnings and Precautions (5.6)]. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.8Clopidogrel 
                     
                        Concomitant administration of rabeprazole and clopidogrel in healthy subjects had no clinically meaningful effect on exposure to the active metabolite of clopidogrel [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)]. No dose adjustment of clopidogrel is necessary when administered with an approved dose of rabeprazole sodium delayed-release tablets.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         