
               
               
               DRUG INTERACTIONS
               Sympathomimetic amines may reduce the antihypertensive effects of methyldopa, mecamylamine, reserpine, and veratrum alkaloids.

                  

                  Other CNS Depressants:  Patients receiving other opioid analgesics, sedatives,or hypnotics, muscle relaxants, general anesthetics, centrally acting anti-emetics, phenothiazines or other tranquilizers, or alcohol concomitantly with this product may exhibit additive depressant effects on the central nervous system.  When such combination therapy is contemplated, the dose of one or both agents should be reduced.  Concomitant use of dihydrocodeine and antihistamines with alcohol and other CNS depressants may have an additive effect.

                  

                  Monoamine Oxidase Inhibitors:  Dihydrocodeine, like all opioids, interact with monoamine oxidase inhibitors causing central nervous system excitation and hypertension. MAO inhibitors and beta-adrenergic blockers increase the effects of sympathomimetics.

                  

                  Information for Patients:
                  
Patients receiving this product should be given the following information:

                  
                     This product may inhibit mental or physical abilities required for the performance of potentially hazardous tasks such as driving a car or operating machinery.
                  
                  
                     Report any adverse experience occurring during therapy.
                  
                  
                     Do not adjust the dose of this product without consulting the prescribing professional.
                  
                  
                     Do not combine this product with alcohol or other central nervous system depressants.
                  
                  
                     Women of childbearing potential who become, or are planning to become pregnant should be advised to consult their physician regarding the effects of opioids and other drug use during pregnancy on themselves and their unborn child.  Patients should be advised that this product is a potential drug of abuse.  They should protect it from theft, and it should never be given to anyone other than the individual for whom it was prescribed.
                  
                  Pregnancy:  Pregnancy Category C:  Animal reproduction studies have not been conducted with this product.  It is also not known whether this combination product can cause fetal harm when administered to pregnant women or can effect reproduction capacity in males and females.  This combination product should be given to a pregnant woman only if clearly needed, especially during the first trimester.

                  

                  Nonteratongenic Effects:
                  
Babies born to mothers who have been taking opioids regularly prior to delivery will be physically dependent.  The withdrawal signs include irritability and excessive crying, tremors, hyperactive reflexes, increased respiratory rate, increased stools, sneezing, yawning, vomiting, and fever.

                  
The intensity of the syndrome does not always correlate with the duration of the maternal opioid use or dose.  There is no consensus on the best method of managing withdrawal.

                  
Chlorpromazine 0.7-1.0 mg/kg q6h, phenobarbital 2 mb/kg q6h, and paregoric 2-4 drops/kg q4h, have been used to treat withdrawal symptoms in infants.  The duration of therapy is 4 to 28 days, with dosages decreased as tolerated.

                  

                  Labor and Delivery:  This product is not recommended for use by women during and immediately before labor and delivery because oral opioids may cause respiratory depression in the newborn.

                  

                  Nursing Mothers:  Due to the possible passage of the ingredients into breast milk, this product should not be given to nursing mothers.

                  

                  Pediatric Use:  This product is not recommended for use in children under two years of age.  Children under two years may be more susceptible to respiratory arrest, coma, and death.  Use of antihistamines is not recommended in infants.  This age group may be at higher risk than other age groups because of an increased susceptibility to anticholinergic effects, such as CNS excitation, and increased tendency toward convulsions.  In older children taking antihistamines, a paradoxical reaction characterized by hyperexcitability my occur.  Very young children may be more susceptible to the effects, especially the vasopressor effects of sympathomimetic amines.

                  

                  Geriatric Use:  This product should be given with caution to the elderly.

                  

                  Hepatic Impairment:  This product should be given with caution to patients with hepatic insufficiency.  Since dihydrocodeine is metabolized by the liver the effects of this combination product should be monitored closely in such patients.

                  

                  Renal Impairment:  This product should be used with caution and at reduced dosage in the presence of impaired renal function.

                  

                  Pancreatic/biliary Tract Disease:  Opioids may cause spasms of the sphincter of Oddi and should be used with caution in patients with biliary tract disease, including pancreatitis.

               
               
            
         