
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  Tobramycin is rapidly absorbed following intramuscular administration. Peak serum concentrations of tobramycin occur between 30 and 90 minutes after intramuscular administration.
                  Following an intramuscular dose of 1 mg/kg of body weight, maximum serum concentrations reach about 4 mcg/mL, and measurable levels persist for as long as 8 hours. Therapeutic serum levels are generally considered to range from 4 to 6 mcg/mL. When tobramycin sulfate is administered by intravenous infusion over a 1-hour period, the serum concentrations are similar to those obtained by intramuscular administration. Tobramycin is poorly absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract.
                  In patients with normal renal function, except neonates, tobramycin administered every 8 hours does not accumulate in the serum. However, in those patients with reduced renal function and in neonates, the serum concentration of the antibiotic is usually higher and can be measured for longer periods of time than in normal adults. Dosage for such patients must, therefore, be adjusted accordingly (see 
                        DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION
                     ).
                  Following parenteral administration, little, if any, metabolic transformation occurs, and tobramycin is eliminated almost exclusively by glomerular filtration. Renal clearance is similar to that of endogenous creatinine. Ultrafiltration studies demonstrate that practically no serum protein binding occurs. In patients with normal renal function, up to 84% of the dose is recoverable from the urine in 8 hours and up to 93% in 24 hours.
                  Peak urine concentrations ranging from 75 to 100 mcg/mL have been observed following the intramuscular injection of a single dose of 1 mg/kg. After several days of treatment, the amount of tobramycin excreted in the urine approaches the daily dose administered. When renal function is impaired, excretion of tobramycin sulfate is slowed, and accumulation of the drug may cause toxic blood levels.
                  The serum half-life in normal individuals is 2 hours. An inverse relationship exists between serum half-life and creatinine clearance, and the dosage schedule should be adjusted according to the degree of renal impairment (see 
                        DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION
                     ). In patients undergoing dialysis, 25% to 70% of the administered dose may be removed, depending on the duration and type of dialysis.
                  Tobramycin can be detected in tissues and body fluids after parenteral administration. Concentrations in bile and stools ordinarily have been low, which suggests minimum biliary excretion. Tobramycin has appeared in low concentration in the cerebrospinal fluid following parenteral administration, and concentrations are dependent on dose, rate of penetration, and degree of meningeal inflammation. It has also been found in sputum, peritoneal fluid, synovial fluid, and abscess fluids, and it crosses the placental membranes. Concentrations in the renal cortex are several times higher than the usual serum levels.
                  Probenecid does not affect the renal tubular transport of tobramycin.
                  
                     
                        Microbiology 
                     
                  
                  Tobramycin is an aminoglycoside antibiotic with activity against Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria. 
                  
                     
                        Mechanism of Action
                     
                  
                  Tobramycin acts by inhibiting synthesis of protein in bacterial cells. 
                        In vitro
                      tests demonstrate that tobramycin is bactericidal.
                  
                     
                        Interactions with Other Antibiotics
                     
                  
                  Although most strains of enterococci demonstrate 
                        in vitro
                      resistance, some strains in this group are susceptible. 
                        In vitro
                      studies have shown that an aminoglycoside combined with an antibiotic that interferes with cell-wall synthesis affects some enterococcal strains synergistically. The combination of penicillin G and tobramycin results in a synergistic bactericidal effect 
                        in vitro
                      against certain strains of 
                        Enterococcus faecalis
                     . However, this combination is not synergistic against other closely related organisms, e.g. 
                        Enterococcus faecium
                     . Speciation of enterococci alone cannot be used to predict susceptibility. Susceptibility testing and tests for antibiotic synergism are emphasized.
                  
                     
                        Cross-Resistance
                     
                  
                  Cross-resistance between aminoglycosides may occur.
                  Tobramycin has been shown to be active against most strains of the following organisms both 
                        in vitro
                      and in clinical infections (see 
                        INDICATIONS AND USAGE
                     ): 
                  
                     
                        Aerobic and facultative Gram-positive microorganisms
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Staphylococcus aureus
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Aerobic and facultative Gram-negative microorganisms
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Citrobacter 
                     sp                              
                        Pseudomonas aeruginosa
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Enterobacter
                      sp                           
                        Proteus mirabilis
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Escherichia coli
                                                
                        Proteus vulgaris
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Klebsiella
                      sp                                
                        Providencia 
                     sp
                  
                     
                        Morganella morganii
                                       
                        Serratia 
                     sp
                  Aminoglycosides have a low order of activity against most Gram-positive organisms, including 
                        Streptococcus pyogenes, Streptococcus pneumoniae
                     , and enterococci.
                  
                     
                        Susceptibility Tests
                     
                  
                  When available, the clinical microbiology laboratory should provide cumulative results of the 
                        in vitro
                      susceptibility test results for antimicrobial drugs used in resident hospitals to the physician as periodic reports that describe the susceptibility profile of nosocomial and community-acquired pathogens. These reports should aid the physician in selecting the most effective antimicrobial.
                  
                     
                        Dilution Techniques
                     
                  
                  Quantitative methods are used to determine antimicrobial minimum inhibitory concentrations (MICs). These MICs provide estimates of the susceptibility of bacteria to antimicrobial compounds. The MICs should be determined using a standardized procedure. Standardized procedures are based on a dilution method (broth or agar)1 or equivalent with standardized inoculum concentrations and standardized concentrations of tobramycin powder. The MIC values should be interpreted according to the criteria provided in Table 1.
                  
                     
                        Diffusion Technique
                     
                  
                  Quantitative methods that require measurement of zone diameters also provide reproducible estimates of the susceptibility of bacteria to antimicrobial compounds. One such standardized procedure2 requires the use of standardized inoculum concentrations. This procedure uses paper disks impregnated with 10 mcg of tobramycin to test the susceptibility of microorganisms to tobramycin. The disk diffusion interpretive criteria are provided in Table 1. 
                  


                  


A report of 
                        Susceptible
                      indicates that the antimicrobial is likely to inhibit growth of the pathogen if the antimicrobial compound in the blood reaches the concentrations usually achievable. A report of 
                        Intermediate
                      indicates that the result should be considered equivocal, and, if the microorganism is not fully susceptible to alternative, clinically feasible drugs, the test should be repeated. This category implies possible clinical applicability in body sites where the drug is physiologically concentrated or in situations where a high dosage of drug can be used. This category also provides a buffer zone, which prevents small, uncontrolled technical factors from causing major discrepancies in interpretation. A report of 
                        Resistant
                      indicates that the antimicrobial is not likely to inhibit growth of the pathogen if the antimicrobial compound in the blood reaches the concentrations usually achievable and other therapy should be selected.
                  
                     
                        Quality Control
                     
                  
                  Standardized susceptibility test procedures require the use of quality control microorganisms to control the technical aspects of the test procedures3. Standard tobramycin powder should provide the following range of values noted in Table 2.
                  


