
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY:
               
                  
                     Systemic Absorption: A systemic absorption study was performed in which Ciprofloxacin Ophthalmic Solution was administered in each eye every two hours while awake for two days followed by every four hours while awake for an additional 5 days. The maximum reported plasma concentration of ciprofloxacin was less than 5 ng/mL. The mean concentration was usually less than 2.5 ng/mL.
                  
                     Microbiology: Ciprofloxacin has in vitro activity against a wide range of gram-negative and gram-positive organisms. The bactericidal action of ciprofloxacin results from interference with the enzyme DNA gyrase which is needed for the synthesis of bacterial DNA. Ciprofloxacin has been shown to be active against most strains of the following microorganisms both in vitro and in clinical infections (SEE INDICATIONS AND USAGE section):
                  
                     Gram-Positive:
                  
                  
                     Staphylococcus aureus
                  
                  
                     Staphylococcus epidermidis
                  
                  
                     Streptococcus pneumoniae
                  
                  
                     Streptococcus (Viridans Group)
                  
                     Gram-Negative:
                  
                  
                     Haemophilus influenzae
                  
                  
                     Pseudomonas aeruginosa
                  
                  
                     Serratia marcescens
                  
                  Ciprofloxacin has been shown to be active in vitro against most strains of the following organisms, however, the clinical significance of these data is unknown:
                  
                  
                     Gram-Positive:
                  
                  
                     Enterococcus faecalis (Many strains are only moderately susceptible)
                  
                     Staphylococcus haemolyticus
                  
                  
                     Staphylococcus hominis
                  
                  
                     Staphylococcus saprophyticus
                  
                  
                     Streptococcus pyogenes
                  
                  
                     Gram-Negative 
                  
                  
                     Acinetobacter calcoaceticus Escherichia coli Proteus mirabilis
                  
                  
                     subsp. anitratus Haemophilus ducreyi Proteus vulgaris 
                  
                  
                     Aeromonas caviae Haemophilus parainfluenzae Providencia rettgeri
                  
                  
                     Aeromonas hydrophila Kiebsiella pneumoniae Providencia stuartii
                  
                  
                     Brucella melitensis Kiebsiella oxytoca Salmonella enteritidis
                  
                  
                     Campylobacter coli Legionella pneumophila Salmonella typhi
                  
                  
                     Campylobacter jejuni Moraxella (Branhamella) Shigella sonneii
                  
                  
                     Citrobacter diversus catarrhalis Shigella flexneri
                  
                  
                     Citrobacter freundii Morganella morganii Vibrio cholerae
                  
                  
                     Edwardsiella tarda Neisseria gonorrhoeae Vibrio parahaemolyticus
                  
                  
                     Enterobacter aerogenes Neisseria meningitidis Vibrio vulnificus
                  
                  
                     Enterobacter cloacae Pasteurella multocida Yersinia enterocolitica
                  
                  
                     Other Organisms: 
                     Chlamydia trachomatis (only moderately susceptible) and Mycobacterium tuberculosis (only moderately susceptible).
                  Most strains of Pseudomonas cepacia and some strains of Pseudomonas maltophilia are resistant to ciprofloxacin as are most anaerobic bacteria, including Bacteroides fragilis and Clostridium difficile. The minimal bactericidal concentration (MBC) generally does not exceed the minimal inhibitory concentration (MIC) by more than a factor of 2. Resistance to ciprofloxacin in vitro usually develops slowly (multiple-step mutation).
                  Ciprofloxacin does not cross-react with other antimicrobial agents such as beta-lactams or aminoglycosides; therefore, organisms resistant to these drugs may be susceptible to ciprofloxacin.
                  
                     Clinical Studies: Following therapy with Ciprofloxacin Ophthalmic Solution, 76% of the patients with corneal ulcers and positive bacterial cultures were clinically cured and complete re-epithelialization occurred in about 92% of the ulcers. In 3 and 7 day multicenter clinical trials, 52% of the patients with conjunctivitis and positive conjunctival cultures were clinically cured and 70-80% had all causative pathogens eradicated by the end of treatment.
               
               
            
         