
               
               
               
                  CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     Pharmacodynamics
                  
                  Methylphenidate hydrochloride is a mild central nervous system stimulant.
                  The mode of action in man is not completely understood, but methylphenidate hydrochloride presumably activates the brain stem arousal system and cortex to produce its stimulant effect.
                  There is neither specific evidence which clearly establishes the mechanism whereby methylphenidate hydrochloride produces its mental and behavioral effects in children, nor conclusive evidence regarding how these effects relate to the condition of the central nervous system.
                  
                     Effects on QT Interval
                  
                  The effect of Focalin® XR (dexmethylphenidate, the pharmacologically active d-enantiomer of methylphenidate) on the QT interval was evaluated in a double-blind, placebo- and open label active (moxifloxacin)-controlled study following single doses of Focalin XR 40 mg in 75 healthy volunteers. ECGs were collected up to 12 hours postdose. Frederica’s method for heart rate correction was employed to derive the corrected QT interval (QTcF). The maximum mean prolongation of QTcF intervals was <5 ms, and the upper limit of the 90% confidence interval was below 10 ms for all time matched comparisons versus placebo. This was below the threshold of clinical concern and there was no evident-exposure response relationship.
                  
                     Pharmacokinetics
                  
                   Methylphenidate hydrochloride in the sustained-release tablets is more slowly but as extensively absorbed as in the regular tablets. Relative bioavailability of the sustained-release tablet compared to the methylphenidate hydrochloride tablet, measured by the urinary excretion of methylphenidate hydrochloride  major metabolite (α-phenyl-2-piperidine acetic acid) was 105% (49%-168%) in children and 101% (85%-152%) in adults. The time to peak rate in children was 4.7 hours (1.3-8.2 hours) for the sustained-release tablets and 1.9 hours (0.3-4.4 hours) for the tablets.  An average of 67% of sustained-release tablet dose was excreted in children as compared to 86% in adults.
                  In a clinical study involving adult subjects who received sustained-release tablets, plasma concentrations of methylphenidate hydrochloride’s major metabolite appeared to be greater in females than in males. No gender differences were observed for methylphenidate hydrochloride  plasma concentration in the same subjects.
               
               
            
         