
               
               
               
                  
                     CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
                     
    The most clinically relevant mechanism of allergenic response begins with cross-linking of plasma membrane receptor-bound IgE molecules by specific antigens causing mast cell mediator release.  In vitro, this process is temperature dependent, requires the presence of divalent cations, and activation of a cell membrane-associated serine esterase.  Another immunologic mechanism for mast cell degranulation is mediated by complement-derived anaphylatoxins C3a, C4a and C5a.  These low molecular weight peptides presumably stimulate degranulation of mast cells by binding to distinct plasma membrane receptor(s) and are active mast cell secretagogues in human skin in vivo.  Several naturally occurring and exogenous agents are capable of degranulating and/or stimulating mast cells by nonimmunologic mechanisms.
    Stimulation of mast cells leads to the release and generation of pharmacologically active soluble factors that produce immediate hypersensitivity reactions.  Some mediators are rapidly liberated from mast cells granules (e.g., histamine), others remain granule-associated after release from the cell (e.g., heparin).  Products of arachidonic acid metabolism are rapidly produced and released from mast cells following stimulation.  Select patients demonstrate later reactions (i.e., late-phase reactions) at sites of mast cell degranulation.  These reactions begin 2 to 8 hours after mediator release and are characterized by granulocyte-rich infiltrates that are followed by accumulations of mononuclear cells.  Clinically these late-phase reactions present as inflammatory, infiltrated plaques or nodules.15
                     
    Patients who react to a small quantity of antigen by skin testing, or have a high RAST score, are classified as highly sensitive.  Those who react only to large quantities of antigen, or have a low RAST score, are classified as less sensitive.  It appears there is at least a 50,000-fold range between the most and least sensitive individuals.  Certain patients who do not have elevated quantities of allergen specific IgE, and are RAST negative, do have positive skin tests and have symptoms of allergic rhinitis.  These patients are considerably less sensitive than patients with detectable levels of specific IgE antibody.2
                     
    The mode of action of immunotherapy with allergenic extracts is still under investigation.  Increasing subcutaneous injection doses of allergenic extract into patients with allergenic disease has shown to result in both humoral and cellular changes.  These include production of allergen specific IgG antibodies, suppression of histamine release from target cells, decrease in circulating levels of antigen specific IgE antibody over long periods of time and suppression of peripheral blood T-lymphocyte cell response to antigen.5, 9, 10
                     

                     

                  
               
               
            
         