
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  ORACEA capsules are not bioequivalent to other doxycycline products. The 
pharmacokinetics of doxycycline following oral administration of ORACEA was 
investigated in 2 volunteer studies involving 61 adults. Pharmacokinetic 
parameters for ORACEA following single oral doses and at steady-state in healthy 
subjects are presented in Table 1.
                  

*      Mean



**    Median
***  Day 7

                  

                  

                  

                  AbsorptionIn a single-dose food-effect study involving administration of 
ORACEA to healthy volunteers, concomitant administration with a 1000 calorie, 
high-fat, high-protein meal that included dairy products, resulted in a decrease 
in the rate and extent of absorption (Cmax and AUC) by about 45% and 22%, 
respectively, compared to dosing under fasted conditions. This decrease in 
systemic exposure can be clinically significant, and therefore if ORACEA is 
taken close to meal times, it is recommended that it be taken at least one hour 
prior to or two hours after meals.
                  
                  DistributionDoxycycline is greater than 90% bound to plasma proteins.
                  
                  MetabolismMajor metabolites of doxycycline have not been identified. 
However, enzyme inducers such as barbiturates, carbamazepine, and phenytoin 
decrease the half-life of doxycycline.
                  
                  ExcretionDoxycycline is excreted in the urine and feces as unchanged drug. 
It is reported that between 29% and 55.4% of an administered dose can be 
accounted for in the urine by 72 hours. Terminal half-life averaged 21.2 hours 
in subjects receiving a single dose of ORACEA.
                  
                  Special Populations
                  GeriatricDoxycycline pharmacokinetics have not been evaluated in geriatric 
patients.
                  
                  PediatricDoxycycline pharmacokinetics have not been evaluated in pediatric 
patients (see 
                        WARNINGS
                      
section).
                  
                  GenderThe pharmacokinetics of ORACEA were compared in 16 male and 14 
female subjects under fed and fasted conditions. While female subjects had a 
higher Cmax and AUC than male subjects, these differences were thought to be due 
to differences in body weight/lean body mass.
                  
                  RaceDifferences in doxycycline pharmacokinetics among racial groups 
have not been evaluated.
                  
                  Renal InsufficiencyStudies have shown no significant difference in serum half-life 
of doxycycline in patients with normal and severely impaired renal function. 
Hemodialysis does not alter the serum half-life of doxycycline.
                  
                  Hepatic InsufficiencyDoxycycline pharmacokinetics have not been evaluated in patients 
with hepatic insufficiency.
                  
                  Gastric InsufficiencyIn a study in healthy volunteers (N=24) the bioavailability of 
doxycycline is reported to be reduced at high pH. This reduced bioavailability 
may be clinically significant in patients with gastrectomy, gastric bypass 
surgery or who are otherwise deemed achlorhydric.
                  
                  Drug Interactions(see 
                        PRECAUTIONS
                      section)
               
               
            
         