
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  Isolyte® P in 5% Dextrose provides electrolytes and calories, and is a source of water for hydration. It is capable of inducing diuresis depending on the clinical condition of the patient.
                  Sodium, the major cation of the extracellular fluid, functions primarily in the control of water distribution, fluid balance, and osmotic pressure of body fluids. Sodium is also associated with chloride and bicarbonate in the regulation of the acid-base equilibrium of body fluid. 
                  Potassium, the principal cation of intracellular fluid, participates in carbohydrate utilization and protein synthesis, and is critical in the regulation of nerve conduction and muscle contraction, particularly in the heart.
                  Chloride, the major extracellular anion, closely follows the metabolism of sodium, and changes in the acid-base balance of the body are reflected by changes in the chloride concentration.
                  Magnesium, a principal cation of soft tissue, is primarily involved in enzyme activity associated with the metabolism of carbohydrates and protein. Magnesium is also involved in neuromuscular irritability.
                  Phosphate is a major intracellular anion which participates in providing energy for metabolism of substrates and contributes to significant metabolic and enzymatic reactions in almost all organs and tissues. It exerts a modifying influence on calcium levels, a buffering effect on acid-base equilibrium and has a primary role in the renal excretion of hydrogen ions.
                  Acetate is an organic ion which is a hydrogen ion acceptor and contributes bicarbonate during its metabolism to carbon dioxide and water, and in sufficient quantities may serve as an alkalinizing agent.
                  Dextrose provides a source of calories. Dextrose is readily metabolized, may decrease losses of body protein and nitrogen, promotes glycogen deposition and decreases or prevents ketosis if sufficient doses are provided.
               
               
            
         