
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Azelastine hydrochloride, a phthalazinone derivative, exhibits histamine H1-receptor antagonist activity in isolated tissues, animal models, and humans. Azelastine hydrochloride nasal spray is administered as a racemic mixture with no difference in pharmacologic activity noted between the enantiomers in in vitro studies. The major metabolite, desmethylazelastine, also possesses H1-receptor antagonist activity.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        
                           Cardiac Electrophysiology
                           
In a placebo-controlled study (95 subjects with allergic rhinitis), there was no evidence of an effect of azelastine hydrochloride nasal spray (2 sprays per nostril twice daily for 56 days) on cardiac repolarization as represented by the corrected QT interval (QTc) of the electrocardiogram. Following multiple dose oral administration of azelastine 4 mg or 8 mg twice daily, the mean change in QTc was 7.2 msec and 3.6 msec, respectively.
                        Interaction studies investigating the cardiac repolarization effects of concomitantly administered oral azelastine hydrochloride and erythromycin or ketoconazole were conducted. These drugs had no effect on QTc based on analysis of serial electrocardiograms. At a dose approximately 8 times the maximum recommended dose, azelastine hydrochloride does not prolong the QTc interval to any clinically relevant extent.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        
                           Absorption 
                           
After intranasal administration, the systemic bioavailability of azelastine hydrochloride is approximately 40%. Maximum plasma concentrations (Cmax) are achieved in 2­ - 3 hours.
                        Azelastine hydrochloride administered intranasally at doses above two sprays per nostril twice daily for 29 days resulted in greater than proportional increases in Cmax and area under the curve (AUC) for azelastine.
                        
                           Distribution
                           
Based on intravenous and oral administration, the steady-state volume of distribution is 14.5 L/kg. In vitro studies with human plasma indicate that the plasma protein binding of azelastine and its metabolite, desmethylazelastine, are approximately 88% and 97%, respectively.
                        
                           Metabolism
                           
Azelastine is oxidatively metabolized to the principal active metabolite, desmethylazelastine, by the cytochrome P450 enzyme system. The specific P450 isoforms responsible for the biotransformation of azelastine have not been identified. After intranasal dosing of azelastine hydrochloride to steady-state, plasma concentrations of desmethylazelastine range from 20 to 50% of azelastine concentrations. Limited data indicate that the metabolite profile is similar when azelastine hydrochloride is administered via the intranasal or oral route.
                        
                           Elimination 
                           
Based on intravenous and oral administration, the elimination half-life and plasma clearance are 22 hours and 0.5 L/h/kg, respectively. Approximately 75% of an oral dose of radiolabeled azelastine hydrochloride was excreted in the feces with less than 10% as unchanged azelastine.
                        
                           Special Populations
                           

                           Hepatic Impairment
                           
Following oral administration, pharmacokinetic parameters were not influenced by hepatic impairment.
                        
                           Renal Impairment 
                           
Based on oral, single-dose studies, renal insufficiency (creatinine clearance <50 mL/min) resulted in a 70 to 75% higher Cmax and AUC compared to normal subjects. Time to maximum concentration was unchanged.
                        
                           Age
                           
Following oral administration, pharmacokinetic parameters were not influenced by age.
                        
                           Gender
                           
Following oral administration, pharmacokinetic parameters were not influenced by gender.
                        
                           Race
                           
The effect of race has not been evaluated. 
                        
                           Drug-Drug Interactions
                           

                           Erythromycin
                           
No significant pharmacokinetic interaction was observed with the co­-administration of orally administered azelastine (4 mg twice daily) with erythromycin (500 mg three times daily for 7 days). In this study, co-administration of orally administered azelastine with erythromycin resulted in Cmax of 5.36 ± 2.6 ng/mL and AUC of 49.7 ± 24 ng•h/mL for azelastine, whereas, administration of azelastine alone resulted in Cmax of 5.57 ± 2.7 ng/mL and AUC of 48.4 ± 24 ng•h/mL for azelastine.
                        
                           Cimetidine and Ranitidine
                           
In a multiple-dose, steady-state drug interaction trial in healthy subjects, cimetidine (400 mg twice daily) increased orally administered mean azelastine (4 mg twice daily) concentrations by approximately 65%. No pharmacokinetic interaction was observed with co-administration of orally administered azelastine (4 mg twice daily) with ranitidine hydrochloride (150 mg twice daily). Oral co-administration of azelastine with ranitidine resulted in Cmax of 8.89 ±3.28 ng/mL and AUC of 88.22 ± 40.43 ng•h/mL for azelastine, whereas, azelastine when administered alone resulted in Cmax of 7.83 ± 4.06 ng/mL and AUC of 80.09 ± 43.55 ng•h/mL for azelastine.
                        
                           Theophylline 
                           
No significant pharmacokinetic interaction was observed with the co­-administration of an oral 4 mg dose of azelastine hydrochloride twice daily and theophylline 300 mg or 400 mg twice daily.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         