
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Campath binds to CD52, an antigen present on the surface of B and T lymphocytes, a majority of monocytes, macrophages, NK cells, and a subpopulation of granulocytes. A proportion of bone marrow cells, including some CD34+ cells, express variable levels of CD52. The proposed mechanism of action is antibody-dependent cellular-mediated lysis following cell surface binding of Campath to the leukemic cells.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                    Cardiac Electrophysiology
                                 
                              
                              The effect of multiple doses of alemtuzumab (12 mg/day for 5 days) on the QTc interval was evaluated in a single-arm study in 53 patients without malignancy. No large changes in the mean QTc interval (i.e., > 20 ms) were detected in the study. A mean increase in heart rate of 22 to 26 beats/min was observed for at least 2 hours following the initial infusion of alemtuzumab. This increase in heart rate was not observed with subsequent doses.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        Campath pharmacokinetics were characterized in a study of 30 previously treated B-CLL patients in whom Campath was administered at the recommended dose and schedule. Campath pharmacokinetics displayed nonlinear elimination kinetics. After the last 30 mg dose, the mean volume of distribution at steady-state was 0.18 L/kg (range 0.1 to 0.4 L/kg). Systemic clearance decreased with repeated administration due to decreased receptor-mediated clearance (i.e., loss of CD52 receptors in the periphery). After 12 weeks of dosing, patients exhibited a seven-fold increase in mean AUC. Mean half-life was 11 hours (range 2 to 32 hours) after the first 30 mg dose and was 6 days (range 1 to 14 days) after the last 30 mg dose.
                        Comparisons of AUC in patients ≥ 65 years (n=6) versus patients < 65 years (n=15) suggested that no dose adjustments are necessary for age. Comparisons of AUC in female patients (n=4) versus male patients (n=17) suggested that no dose adjustments are necessary for gender.
                        The pharmacokinetics of Campath in pediatric patients have not been studied. The effects of renal or hepatic impairment on the pharmacokinetics of Campath have not been studied.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         