
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY

               
                  Trimethoprim is a synthetic antibacterial drug active against a wide variety of aerobic gram-positive and gram-negative ophthalmic pathogens. Trimethoprim blocks the production of tetrahydrofolic acid from dihydrofolic acid by binding to and reversibly inhibiting the enzyme dihydrofolate reductase. This binding is very much stronger for the bacterial enzyme than for the corresponding mammalian enzyme. For that reason, trimethoprim selectively interferes with bacterial biosynthesis of nucleic acids and proteins.

                  Polymyxin B, a cyclic lipopeptide antibiotic, is rapidly bactericidal for a variety of gram-negative organisms, especially Pseudomonas aeruginosa. It increases the permeability of the bacterial cell membrane by interacting with the phospholipid components of the membrane.

                  When used topically, trimethoprim and polymyxin B absorption through intact skin and mucous membranes is insignificant.

                  Blood samples were obtained from 11 human volunteers at 20 minutes, 1 hour and 3 hours following instillation in the eye of 2 drops of ophthalmic solution containing 1 mg trimethoprim and 10,000 units polymyxin B per mL. Peak serum concentrations were approximately 0.03 mcg/mL trimethoprim and 1 unit/mL polymyxin B.

               
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           Microbiology:

                           In vitro studies have demonstrated that the anti-infective components of Trimethoprim and Polymyxin B Sulfate Ophthalmic Solution are active against the following bacterial pathogens that are capable of causing external infections of the eye:

                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Trimethoprim:

                                 Staphylococcus aureus and Staphylococcus epidermidis, Streptococcus pyogenes, Streptococcus faecalis, Streptococcus pneumoniae, Haemophilus influenzae, Haemophilus aegyptius, Escherichia coli, Klebsiella pneumoniae, Proteus mirabilis (indole-negative), Proteus vulgaris (indole-positive), Enterobacter aerogenes, and Serratia marcescens.
                              
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Polymyxin B:

                                 Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Escherichia coli, Klebsiella pneumoniae, Enterobacter aerogenes and Haemophilus influenzae.
                              
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         