
                     
                     
                     Drug Interactions
                     
                        If estazolam is given concomitantly with other drugs acting on the central nervous system, careful consideration should be given to the pharmacology of all agents. The action of the benzodiazepines may be potentiated by anticonvulsants, antihistamines, alcohol, barbiturates, monoamine oxidase inhibitors, narcotics, phenothiazines, psychotropic medications, or other drugs that produce CNS depression. Smokers have an increased clearance of benzodiazepines as compared to nonsmokers; this was seen in studies with estazolam (see CLINICAL 
                           PHARMACOLOGY).
                        While no in vivo drug-drug interaction studies were conducted between estazolam and inducers of CYP3A, compounds that are potent CYP3A inhibitors (such as carbamazepine, phenytoin, rifampin, and barbiturates) would be expected to decrease estazolam concentrations. 
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Estazolam Interaction With Drugs That Inhibit Metabolism via Cytochrome P450 3A (CYP3A)
                           
                              The metabolism of estazolam to the major circulating metabolite 4-hydroxy-estazolam and the metabolism of other triazolobenzodiazepines is catalyzed by CYP3A. Consequently, estazolam should be avoided in patients receiving ketoconazole and itraconazole, which are very potent inhibitors of CYP3A (see CONTRAINDICATIONS). With drugs inhibiting CYP3A to a lesser, but still significant degree, estazolam should be used only with caution and consideration of appropriate dosage reduction. The following are examples of drugs known to inhibit the metabolism of other related benzodiazepines, presumably through inhibition of CYP3A: nefazodone, fluvoxamine, cimetidine, diltiazem, isoniazide, and some macrolide antibiotics. 
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Drug interaction with fluoxetine
                                 
                                    A multiple-dose study was conducted to assess the effect of fluoxetine 20 mg BID on the pharmacokinetics of estazolam 2 mg QHS after seven days. The pharmacokinetics of estazolam (Cmax and AUC) were not affected during multiple-dose fluoxetine, suggesting no clinically significant pharmacokinetic interaction. 
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Estazolam Interaction With Other Drugs That are Metabolized by Cytochrome P450 (CYP)
                           
                              At clinically relevant concentrations, in vitro studies indicate that estazolam (0.6µM) was not inhibitory towards the major cytochrome P450 isoforms CYP1A2, CYP2A6, CYP2C9, CYP2C19, CYP2D6, CYP2E1, and CYP3A. Therefore, based on these in vitro data, estazolam is very unlikely to inhibit the biotransformation of other drugs metabolized by these CYP isoforms. 
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               