
               
               
               Drug Interactions
               
                  
                     Catecholamine-Depleting Drugs
                  
                  Catecholamine-depleting drugs (e.g., reserpine) may have an additive effect when given with beta-blocking agents or monoamine oxidase (MAO) inhibitors. Observe patients treated with metoprolol plus a catecholamine depletor for evidence of hypotension or marked bradycardia, which may produce vertigo, syncope, or postural hypotension. In addition, possibly significant hypertension may theoretically occur up to 14 days following discontinuation of the concomitant administration with an irreversible MAO inhibitor.
                  
                     Digitalis Glycosides and Beta-Blockers
                  
                  Both digitalis glycosides and beta-blockers slow atrioventricular conduction and decrease heart rate. Concomitant use can increase the risk of bradycardia. Monitor heart rate and PR interval.
                  
                     Calcium Channel Blockers
                  
                  Concomitant administration of a beta-adrenergic antagonist with a calcium channel blocker may produce an additive reduction in myocardial contractility because of negative chronotropic and inotropic effects.
                  
                     CYP2D6 Inhibitors
                  
                  Potent inhibitors of the CYP2D6 enzyme may increase the plasma concentration of metoprolol which would mimic the pharmacokinetics of CYP2D6 poor metabolizer (see CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY: Pharmacokinetics). Increase in plasma concentrations of metoprolol would decrease the cardioselectivity of metoprolol. Known clinically significant potent inhibitors of CYP2D6 are antidepressants such as fluvoxamine, fluoxetine, paroxetine, sertraline, bupropion, clomipramine and desipramine; antipsychotics such as chlorpromazine, fluphenazine, haloperidol and thioridazine; antiarrhythmics such as quinidine or propafenone; antiretrovirals such as ritonavir; antihistamines such as diphenhydramine; antimalarials such as hydroxychloroquine or quinidine; antifungals such as terbinafine.
                  
                     Hydralazine
                  
                  Concomitant administration of hydralazine may inhibit presystemic metabolism of metoprolol leading to increased concentrations of metoprolol.
                  
                     Alpha-Adrenergic Agents
                  
                  Antihypertensive effect of alpha-adrenergic blockers such as guanethidine, betanidine, reserpine, alpha-methyldopa or clonidine may be potentiated by beta-blockers including metoprolol. Beta- adrenergic blockers may also potentiate the postural hypotensive effect of the first dose of prazosin, probably by preventing reflex tachycardia. On the contrary, beta-adrenergic blockers may also potentiate the hypertensive response to withdrawal of clonidine in patients receiving concomitant clonidine and beta-adrenergic blocker. If a patient is treated with clonidine and metoprolol concurrently, and clonidine treatment is to be discontinued, stop metoprolol several days before clonidine is withdrawn. Rebound hypertension that can follow withdrawal of clonidine may be increased in patients receiving concurrent beta-blocker treatment.
                  
                     Ergot Alkaloid
                  
                  Concomitant administration with beta-blockers may enhance the vasoconstrictive action of ergot alkaloids.
                  
                     Dipyridamole
                  
                  In general, administration of a beta-blocker should be withheld before dipyridamole testing, with careful monitoring of heart rate following the dipyridamole injection.
               
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Carcinogenesis, Mutagenesis, Impairment of Fertility
                     
                        Long-term studies in animals have been conducted to evaluate carcinogenic potential. In a 2-year study in rats at three oral dosage levels of up to 800 mg/kg per day, there was no increase in the development of spontaneously occurring benign or malignant neoplasms of any type. The only histologic changes that appeared to be drug-related were an increased incidence of generally mild focal accumulation of foamy macrophages in pulmonary alveoli and a slight increase in biliary hyperplasia. In a 21-month study in Swiss albino mice at three oral dosage levels of up to 750 mg/kg per day, benign lung tumors (small adenomas) occurred more frequently in female mice receiving the highest dose than in untreated control animals. There was no increase in malignant or total (benign plus malignant) lung tumors, or in the overall incidence of tumors or malignant tumors. This 21-month study was repeated in CD-1 mice, and no statistically or biologically significant differences were observed between treated and control mice of either sex for any type of tumor.
                        All mutagenicity tests performed (a dominant lethal study in mice, chromosome studies in somatic cells, a Salmonella/mammalian-microsome mutagenicity test, and a nucleus anomaly test in somatic interphase nuclei) were negative.
                        Reproduction toxicity studies in mice, rats and rabbits did not indicate teratogenic potential for metoprolol. Embryotoxicity and/or fetotoxicity in rats and rabbits were noted starting at doses of 50 mg/kg in rats and 25 mg/kg in rabbits, as demonstrated by increases in preimplantation loss, decreases in the number of viable fetuses per dose and/or decreases in neonatal survival. High doses were associated with some maternal toxicity, and growth delay of the offspring in utero, which was reflected in minimally lower weights at birth. The oral NOAELs for embryo-fetal development in mice, rats and rabbits were considered to be 25, 200, and 12.5 mg/kg. This corresponds to dose levels that are approximately 0.3 times, 4 times, and 0.5 times, respectively, when based on surface area, the maximum human oral dose (8 mg/kg/day) of metoprolol. Metoprolol has been associated with reversible adverse effects on spermatogenesis starting at oral dose levels of 3.5 mg/kg in rats (a dose that is only 0.1 times the human dose, when based on surface area), although other studies have shown no effect of metoprolol on reproductive performance in male rats.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Pregnancy
                     
                        
                           Teratogenic Effects Pregnancy Category C
                        
                        Upon confirming the diagnosis of pregnancy, women should immediately inform the doctor. Metoprolol has been shown to increase postimplantation loss and decrease neonatal survival in rats at doses up to 11 times the maximum daily human dose of 450 mg, when based on surface area. Distribution studies in mice confirm exposure of the fetus when metoprolol is administered to the pregnant animal. These limited animal studies do not indicate direct or indirect harmful effects with respect to teratogenicity (see PRECAUTIONS: Carcinogenesis, Mutagenesis, Impairment of Fertility).
                        There are no adequate and well controlled studies in pregnant women. The amount of data on the use of metoprolol in pregnant women is limited. The risk to the fetus/mother is unknown. Because animal reproduction studies are not always predictive of human response, this drug should be used during pregnancy only if clearly needed.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Nursing Mothers
                     
                        Metoprolol is excreted in breast milk in a very small quantity. An infant consuming one liter of breast milk daily would receive a dose of less than 1 mg of the drug.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Fertility
                     
                        The effects of metoprolol on the fertility of human have not been studied.
Metoprolol showed effects on spermatogenesis in male rats at a therapeutic dose level, but had no effect on rates of conception at higher doses in animal fertility studies (see PRECAUTIONS: Carcinogenesis, Mutagenesis, Impairment of Fertility). 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Pediatric Use
                     
                        Safety and effectiveness in pediatric patients have not been established.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Geriatric Use
                     
                        Clinical trials of metoprolol in hypertension did not include sufficient numbers of elderly patients to determine whether patients over 65 years of age differ from younger subjects in their response to metoprolol. Other reported clinical experience in elderly hypertensive patients has not identified any difference in response from younger patients.
In worldwide clinical trials of metoprolol in myocardial infarction, where approximately 478 patients were over 65 years of age (0 over 75 years of age), no age related differences in safety and effectiveness were found. Other reported clinical experience in myocardial infarction has not identified differences in response between the elderly and younger patients. However, greater sensitivity of some elderly individuals taking metoprolol cannot be categorically ruled out. Therefore, in general, it is recommended that dosing proceed with caution in this population.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         