
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Fluticasone furoate is a synthetic trifluorinated corticosteroid with anti‑inflammatory activity. Fluticasone furoate has been shown in vitro to exhibit a binding affinity for the human glucocorticoid receptor that is approximately 29.9 times that of dexamethasone and 1.7 times that of fluticasone propionate. The clinical relevance of these findings is unknown.
                        The precise mechanism of corticosteroid action on asthma is not known. Inflammation is an important component in the pathogenesis of asthma. Corticosteroids have been shown to have a wide range of actions on multiple cell types (e.g., mast cells, eosinophils, neutrophils, macrophages, lymphocytes) and mediators (e.g., histamine, eicosanoids, leukotrienes, cytokines) involved in inflammation. These anti-inflammatory actions of corticosteroids contribute to their efficacy in asthma.
                        Though effective for the treatment of asthma, corticosteroids may not affect symptoms immediately. Individual patients will experience a variable time to onset and degree of symptom relief. Maximum benefit may not be achieved for 1 to 2 weeks or longer after starting treatment. When corticosteroids are discontinued, asthma stability may persist for several days or longer.
                        Trials in subjects with asthma have shown a favorable ratio between topical anti-inflammatory activity and systemic corticosteroid effects with recommended doses of orally inhaled fluticasone furoate. This is explained by a combination of a relatively high local anti-inflammatory effect, negligible oral systemic bioavailability (approximately 1.3%), and the minimal pharmacological activity of the metabolites detected in man.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        The pharmacodynamics of fluticasone furoate were characterized in trials of fluticasone furoate given as a single component and also in trials of fluticasone furoate given in combination with vilanterol.
                        
                           HPA Axis Effects:
                            Healthy Subjects: Inhaled fluticasone furoate at repeat doses up to 400 mcg was not associated with statistically significant decreases in serum or urinary cortisol in healthy subjects. Decreases in serum and urine cortisol levels were observed at fluticasone furoate exposures several-fold higher than exposures observed at the therapeutic dose.
                        
                           Subjects with Asthma: A randomized, double-blind, parallel-group trial in 185 subjects with asthma showed no difference between once-daily treatment with fluticasone furoate/vilanterol 100 mcg/25 mcg or fluticasone furoate/vilanterol 200 mcg/25 mcg compared with placebo on serum cortisol weighted mean (0 to 24 hours), serum cortisol AUC(0-24), and 24-hour urinary cortisol after 6 weeks of treatment, whereas prednisolone 10 mg given once daily for 7 days resulted in significant cortisol suppression.
                        
                           Cardiac Effects: A QT/QTc trial did not demonstrate an effect of fluticasone furoate administration on the QTc interval. The effect of a single dose of 4,000 mcg of orally inhaled fluticasone furoate on the QTc interval was evaluated over 24 hours in 40 healthy male and female subjects in a placebo- and positive-controlled (a single dose of 400 mg oral moxifloxacin) cross-over trial. The QTcF maximal mean change from baseline following fluticasone furoate was similar to that observed with placebo with a treatment difference of 0.788 msec (90% CI: -1.802, 3.378). In contrast, moxifloxacin given as a 400-mg tablet resulted in prolongation of the QTcF maximal mean change from baseline compared with placebo with a treatment difference of 9.929 msec (90% CI: 7.339, 12.520).
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        The pharmacokinetics of fluticasone furoate were characterized in trials of fluticasone furoate given as a single component and also in trials of fluticasone furoate given in combination with vilanterol. Linear pharmacokinetics were observed for fluticasone furoate (200 to 800 mcg). On repeated once-daily inhalation administration, steady state of fluticasone furoate plasma concentration was achieved after 6 days, and the accumulation was up to 2.6-fold as compared with single dose.
                        
                           Absorption: Fluticasone furoate plasma levels may not predict therapeutic effect. Peak plasma concentrations are reached within 0.5 to 1 hour. Absolute bioavailability of fluticasone furoate when administrated by inhalation was 13.9%, primarily due to absorption of the inhaled portion of the dose delivered to the lung. Oral bioavailability from the swallowed portion of the dose is low (approximately 1.3%) due to extensive first-pass metabolism. Systemic exposure (AUC) in subjects with asthma was 26% lower than observed in healthy subjects.
                        
                           Distribution: Following intravenous administration to healthy subjects, the mean volume of distribution at steady state was 661 L. Binding of fluticasone furoate to human plasma proteins was high (99.6%).
                        
                           Metabolism: Fluticasone furoate is cleared from systemic circulation principally by hepatic metabolism via CYP3A4 to metabolites with significantly reduced corticosteroid activity. There was no in vivo evidence for cleavage of the furoate moiety resulting in the formation of fluticasone.
                        
                           Elimination: Fluticasone furoate and its metabolites are eliminated primarily in the feces, accounting for approximately 101% and 90% of the orally and intravenously administered doses, respectively. Urinary excretion accounted for approximately 1% and 2% of the orally and intravenously administered doses, respectively. Following repeat-dose inhaled administration, the plasma elimination phase half-life averaged 24 hours.
                        
                           Special Populations: The effect of renal and hepatic impairment and other intrinsic factors on the pharmacokinetics of fluticasone furoate is shown in Figure 1.
                        
                           Figure 1. Impact of Intrinsic Factors on the Pharmacokinetics (PK) of Fluticasone Furoate (FF)
                        
                        
                        
                           
                               
                              a	Age, gender, and ethnicity comparison for ARNUITY ELLIPTA in subjects with asthma.
                           
                               
                              b	Renal groups (fluticasone furoate/vilanterol 200 mcg/25 mcg) and hepatic groups (fluticasone furoate/vilanterol 200 mcg/25 mcg or fluticasone furoate/vilanterol 100 mcg/12.5 mcg) compared with healthy control group.
                        
                        
                           Race: Systemic exposure (AUC(0-24)) to inhaled fluticasone furoate 200 mcg was 27% to 49% higher in healthy subjects of Japanese, Korean, and Chinese heritage compared with Caucasian subjects. Similar differences were observed for subjects with asthma (Figure 1). There is no evidence that this higher exposure to fluticasone furoate results in clinically relevant effects on urinary cortisol excretion or on efficacy in these racial groups. 
                        
                           Hepatic Impairment: Following repeat dosing of fluticasone furoate/vilanterol 200 mcg/25 mcg (100 mcg/12.5 mcg in the severe impairment group) for 7 days, fluticasone furoate systemic exposure (AUC) increased 34%, 83%, and 75% in subjects with mild, moderate, and severe hepatic impairment, respectively, compared with healthy subjects (see Figure 1). 
                        In subjects with moderate hepatic impairment receiving fluticasone furoate/vilanterol 200 mcg/25 mcg, mean serum cortisol (0 to 24 hours) was reduced by 34% (90% CI: 11%, 51%) compared with healthy subjects. In subjects with severe hepatic impairment receiving fluticasone furoate/vilanterol 100 mcg/12.5 mcg, mean serum cortisol (0 to 24 hours) was increased by 14% (90% CI: -16%, 55%) compared with healthy subjects. Patients with moderate to severe hepatic disease should be closely monitored. 
                        
                           Renal Impairment: Fluticasone furoate systemic exposure was not increased in subjects with severe renal impairment compared with healthy subjects (see Figure 1). There was no evidence of greater corticosteroid class-related systemic effects (assessed by serum cortisol) in subjects with severe renal impairment compared with healthy subjects. 
                        
                           Drug Interactions: The potential for fluticasone furoate to inhibit or induce metabolic enzymes and transporter systems is negligible at low inhalation doses. 
                        
                           Inhibitors of Cytochrome P450 3A4: The exposure (AUC) of fluticasone furoate was 36% higher after single and repeated doses when coadministered with ketoconazole 400 mg compared with placebo (see Figure 2). The increase in fluticasone furoate exposure was associated with a 27% reduction in weighted mean serum cortisol (0 to 24 hours). 
                        
                           Figure 2. Impact of Coadministered Ketoconazolea on the Pharmacokinetics (PK) of Fluticasone Furoate 
                        
                        
                        
                           
                               
                              a	Compared with placebo group.
                        
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           Figure 1. Impact of Intrinsic Factors on the Pharmacokinetics (PK) of Fluticasone Furoate (FF)
                           
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           Figure 2. Impact of Coadministered Ketoconazolea on the Pharmacokinetics (PK) of Fluticasone Furoate 
                           
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         