
                     
                     
                     Drug Interactions
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Aminoglutethimide
                           
                              Aminoglutethimide may lead to a loss of corticosteroid-induced adrenal suppression.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Amphotericin B Injection and Potassium-depleting Agents
                           
                              When corticosteroids are administered concomitantly with potassium-depleting agents (e.g., amphotericin B, diuretics), patients should be observed closely for development of hypokalemia. There have been cases reported in which concomitant use of amphotericin B and hydrocortisone was followed by cardiac enlargement and congestive heart failure.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Antibiotics
                           
                              Macrolide antibiotics have been reported to cause significant decrease in corticosteroid clearance (see 
                                    Drug Interactions: 
                                    
                                       Hepatic Enzyme Inhibitors
                                    
                                 ).
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Anticholinesterases
                           
                              Concomitant use of anticholinesterase agents and corticosteroids may produce severe weakness in patients with myasthenia gravis. If possible, anticholinesterase agents should be withdrawn at least 24 hours before initiating corticosteroid therapy.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Anticoagulants, Oral
                           
                              Coadministration of corticosteroids and warfarin usually results in inhibition of response to warfarin, although there have been some conflicting reports. Therefore, coagulation indices should be monitored frequently to maintain the desired anticoagulant effect.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Antidiabetics
                           
                              Because corticosteroids may increase blood glucose concentrations, dosage adjustments of antidiabetic agents may be required.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Antitubercular Drugs
                           
                              Serum concentrations of isoniazid may be decreased.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Cholestyramine
                           
                              Cholestyramine may increase the clearance of oral corticosteroids.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Cyclosporine
                           
                              Increased activity of both cyclosporine and corticosteroids may occur when the two are used concurrently. Convulsions have been reported with concurrent use.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Digitalis Glycosides
                           
                              Patients on digitalis glycosides may be at increased risk of arrhythmias due to hypokalemia.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Estrogens, including Oral Contraceptives
                           
                              Estrogens may decrease the hepatic metabolism of certain corticosteroids, thereby increasing their effect.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Hepatic Enzyme Inducers (e.g., barbiturates, phenytoin, carbamazepine, rifampin)
                           
                              Drugs which induce cytochrome P450 3A4 enzyme activity may enhance the metabolism of corticosteroids and require that the dosage of corticosteroid be increased.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Hepatic Enzyme Inhibitors (e.g., ketoconazole, macrolide antibiotics such as erythromycin and troleandomycin)
                           
                              Drugs which inhibit cytochrome P450 3A4 have the potential to result in increased plasma concentrations of corticosteroids.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Ketoconazole
                           
                              Ketoconazole has been reported to significantly decrease the metabolism of certain corticosteroids by up to 60%, leading to an increased risk of corticosteroid side effects.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Non-steroidal Anti-inflammatory Agents (NSAIDs)
                           
                              Concomitant use of aspirin (or other non-steroidal anti-inflammatory agents) and corticosteroids increases the risk of gastrointestinal side-effects. Aspirin should be used cautiously in conjunction with concurrent use of corticosteroids in hypoprothrombinemia. The clearance of salicylates may be increased with concurrent use of corticosteroids.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Skin Tests
                           
                              Corticosteroids may suppress reactions to skin tests.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Vaccines
                           
                              Patients on prolonged corticosteroid therapy may exhibit a diminished response to toxoids and live or attenuated vaccines due to inhibition of antibody response. Corticosteroids may also potentiate the replication of some organisms contained in live attenuated vaccines. Routine administration of vaccines or toxoids should be deferred until corticosteroid therapy is discontinued if possible. (See 
                                    WARNINGS: Infections: 
                                    
                                       Vaccinations
                                    
                                 .)
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               