
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
                  The intravaginal administration of a single dose of NUVESSA results in lower systemic exposure to metronidazole that is approximately 2% to 4% of that achieved following oral administration of 500 mg metronidazole tablets [see Clinical​​​​ 
                     Pharmacology (12.3)​]. The following drug interactions were reported for oral metronidazole.
               
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           Warfarin and other coumarin anticoagulants: Prolonged anticoagulant effects of warfarin and other coumarin anticoagulants have been reported with co-administration of oral metronidazole. (7.3)
                           Lithium: Elevated plasma lithium concentrations have been reported with oral metronidazole. (7.4)
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 Disulfiram
                     
                        Use of oral metronidazole has been associated with psychotic reactions in alcoholic patients who are using disulfiram concurrently. NUVESSA should not be used by patients who have taken disulfiram within the last two weeks [see​​​​​ 
                           Contraindications (4.2)​].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 Alcoholic Beverages
                     
                        Use of oral metronidazole has been associated with a disulfiram-like reaction (abdominal cramps, nausea, vomiting, headaches, and flushing) to alcohol. Alcoholic beverages and preparations containing ethanol or propylene glycol should not be consumed during and for at least 24 hours after NUVESSA therapy [see Contraindications (4.3)].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3 Coumarin and Other Oral Anticoagulants
                     
                        Use of oral metronidazole has been reported to potentiate the anticoagulant effect of warfarin and other coumarin anticoagulants, resulting in a prolongation of prothrombin time. This possible drug interaction should be considered when NUVESSA is prescribed for patients on this type of anticoagulant therapy.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4 Lithium
                     
                        Short-term use of oral metronidazole has been associated with elevation of plasma lithium concentrations and, in a few cases, signs of lithium toxicity in patients stabilized on relatively high doses of lithium.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.5 Cimetidine
                     
                        Use of oral metronidazole with cimetidine may prolong the half-life and decrease plasma clearance of metronidazole. No dose adjustment of NUVESSA is necessary.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         