
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Corticosteroids play a role in cellular signaling, immune function, inflammation, and protein regulation; however, the precise mechanism of action in corticosteroid-responsive dermatoses is unknown.
                        The contribution to efficacy by individual components of the vehicle has not been established.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        In a trial evaluating the potential for HPA axis suppression using the cosyntropin stimulation test, clobetasol propionate foam, 0.05% (emulsion) demonstrated reversible adrenal suppression after 2 weeks of twice-daily use in subjects with atopic dermatitis of at least 30% body surface area (BSA). The proportion of subjects aged 12 years and older demonstrating HPA axis suppression was 16.2% (6 out of 37). In this trial HPA axis suppression was defined as serum cortisol level ≤18 mcg/dL 30 minutes post cosyntropin stimulation. The laboratory suppression was transient; in all subjects serum cortisol levels returned to normal when tested 4 weeks post treatment [see Warnings and Precautions (5.1), Use In Specific Populations (8.4)].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        Topical corticosteroids can be absorbed from intact healthy skin. The extent of percutaneous absorption of topical corticosteroids is determined by many factors, including the product formulation and the integrity of the epidermal barrier. Occlusion, inflammation, and/or other disease processes in the skin may increase percutaneous absorption. The use of pharmacodynamic endpoints for assessing the systemic exposure of topical corticosteroids may be necessary due to the fact that circulating levels are often below the level of detection.
                        Once absorbed through the skin, topical corticosteroids are metabolized, primarily in the liver and are then excreted by the kidneys. Some corticosteroids and their metabolites are also excreted in the bile.
                        Following twice-daily application of clobetasol propionate foam, 0.05% (emulsion) for 1 week to 32 adult subjects with mild to moderate plaque-type psoriasis, mean peak plasma concentrations (±SD) of 59 ± 36 pg/mL of clobetasol were observed at around 5 hours post dose on Day 8.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         