
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  BEBULIN VH is a combination of vitamin K-dependent clotting factors found in normal plasma. The administration of BEBULIN VH provides an increase in plasma levels of Factor IX and can temporarily correct the coagulation defect of patients with Factor IX deficiency. Plasma levels of Factors II and X will also be increased. However, no clinical studies have been conducted to show benefit from this product for treating deficiencies other than Factor IX deficiency.
                  
                     In vivo recovery of BEBULIN VH was determined by investigators in Germany, Japan, and the United States using the former International Standard, WHO 72/32 and was found to be 53.3% ±9.6%, 57.5% ±21.8%, and 53.24% ±16.95%, respectively. In the same studies, using different methodologies, half-lives were determined to be 19.4 hrs ±3.8 hrs, 24.6 hrs ±3.2 hrs, and 19.97 hrs ±8.24 hrs, respectively 1,2,3.
                  During the manufacture BEBULIN VH is subjected to virus inactivation by two-step vapor heating at 60°C and 80°C4, where BEBULIN VH intermediate bulk is heated for a total of 10 hours at >60°C and 1 hour at 80°C. Reduction factor for Parvovirus B19 claimed for the Lyophilization and Vapor Heat Treatment step is based on results derived from experimental infectivity and titration assays. The effectiveness of vapor heating was evaluated in vitro using human immunodeficiency virus (HIV-1) as a relevant blood-borne pathogen as well as hepatitis A virus (HAV) and human parvovirus B19 (B19V) as relevant non-enveloped RNA and DNA viruses, respectively. Furthermore, model viruses have been used to evaluate the virus inactivation capacity of vapor heat treatment: Bovine viral diarrhea virus (BVDV) as a model for lipid enveloped RNA viruses such as hepatitis C virus and pseudorabies virus (PRV) was included as a model for enveloped DNA viruses. MMV was employed as a model for non-enveloped DNA viruses less heat sensitive than B19V5-7. These studies indicate that this specific step during the manufacture of BEBULIN VH is capable of eliminating/ inactivating a wide range of relevant target and model viruses exhibiting diverse physicochemical properties. The in vitro viral reduction studies performed on BEBULIN VH are summarized in Table 1.
                  


                  


 In the context of two prospective clinical studies 8,9 and a retrospective survey 10, BEBULIN VH was followed up for the risk of transfusion-transmitted viral infections. All patients received blood products for the first time. Using criteria established by the ICTH, 16 patients could be followed up for non-A, non-B hepatitis, 9 for HCV seroconversion, 3 for hepatitis B, and 24 for HIV seroconversion. None tested positive for any of these infections. An additional 3 patients with 2 or more consecutive test samples missing tested negative for non-A, non-B hepatitis for all samples available. Three studies using ICTH criteria for testing 8-10, a retrospective survey 11 and a case report 12 on other vapor heated factors of the prothrombin complex that were subjected to the same inactivation process as BEBULIN VH, gave the following results: 27 patients tested negative for non-A, non-B hepatitis, 15 for HCV seroconversion, 25 for hepatitis B, and 75 for HIV seroconversion.
               
               
            
         