
               
               
               7	DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
                  No clinically significant drug interactions have been observed in studies of azilsartan medoxomil or azilsartan given with amlodipine, antacids, chlorthalidone, digoxin, fluconazole, glyburide, ketoconazole, metformin, pioglitazone, and warfarin. Therefore, Edarbi may be used concomitantly with these medications.
                  
               
               
               
                  
                     
                        Dual inhibition of the renin-angiotensin system: Increased risk of renal impairment, hypotension, and hyperkalemia. (7)
                        Lithium: Increases in serum lithium concentrations and lithium toxicity.(7)
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           Non-steroidal Anti-Inflammatory Agents, including Selective Cyclooxygenase-2 Inhibitors (COX-2 Inhibitors)
                        
                        In patients who are elderly, volume-depleted (including those on diuretic therapy), or who have compromised renal function, coadministration of NSAIDs, including selective COX-2 inhibitors, with angiotensin II receptor antagonists, including azilsartan, may result in deterioration of renal function, including possible acute renal failure. These effects are usually reversible. Monitor renal function periodically in patients receiving azilsartan and NSAID therapy.
                        The antihypertensive effect of angiotensin II receptor antagonists, including azilsartan, may be attenuated by NSAIDs, including selective COX-2 inhibitors.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           Dual Blockade of the Renin-Angiotensin System (RAS)
                        
                        Dual blockade of the RAS with angiotensin receptor blockers, ACE inhibitors, or aliskiren is associated with increased risks of hypotension, hyperkalemia, and changes in renal function (including acute renal failure) compared to monotherapy. Most patients receiving the combination of two RAS inhibitors do not obtain any additional benefit compared to monotherapy. In general, avoid combined use of RAS inhibitors. Closely monitor blood pressure, renal function and electrolytes in patients on Edarbi and other agents that affect the RAS.
                        Do not coadminister aliskiren with Edarbi in patients with diabetes. Avoid use of aliskiren with Edarbi in patients with renal impairment (GFR <60 mL/min).
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           Lithium
                        
                        Increases in serum lithium concentrations and lithium toxicity have been reported during concomitant administration of lithium with angiotensin II receptor agonists. Monitor serum lithium levels during concomitant use.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         