
               
               
               
                  CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        Pharmacology
                     
                     
                        Sufentanil is an opioid analgesic. When used in balanced general anesthesia, sufentanil has been reported to be as much as 10 times as potent as fentanyl. When administered intravenously as a primary anesthetic agent with 100% oxygen, sufentanil is approximately 5 to 7 times as potent as fentanyl.
                        Assays of histamine in patients administered sufentanil citrate have shown no elevation in plasma histamine levels and no indication of histamine release.
                        (See dosage chart for more complete information on the intravenous use of Sufentanil Citrate Injection.)
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        Pharmacodynamics
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Intravenous Use
                           
                              At intravenous doses up to 8 mcg/kg, sufentanil is an analgesic component of general anesthesia; at intravenous doses ≥ 8 mcg/kg, sufentanil produces a deep level of anesthesia. Sufentanil produces a dose-related attenuation of catecholamine release, particularly norepinephrine.
                              At intravenous dosages ≥ 8 mcg/kg, sufentanil produces hypnosis and anesthesia without the use of additional anesthetic agents. A deep level of anesthesia is maintained at these dosages, as demonstrated by EEG patterns. Dosages of up to 25 mcg/kg attenuate the sympathetic response to surgical stress. The catecholamine response, particularly norepinephrine, is further attenuated at doses of sufentanil of 25-30 mcg/kg, with hemodynamic stability and preservation of favorable myocardial oxygen balance.
                              Sufentanil has an immediate onset of action with relatively limited accumulation. Rapid elimination from tissue storage sites allows for relatively more rapid recovery as compared with equipotent dosages of fentanyl. At dosages of 1-2 mcg/kg, recovery times are comparable to those observed with fentanyl; at dosages > 2-6 mcg/kg, recovery times are comparable to enﬂurane, isoﬂurane and fentanyl. Within the anesthetic dosage range of 8-30 mcg/kg of sufentanil, recovery times are more rapid compared to equipotent fentanyl dosages.
                              The vagolytic effects of pancuronium may produce a dose-dependent elevation in heart rate during sufentanil-oxygen anesthesia. Moderate doses of pancuronium or of a less vagolytic neuromuscular blocking agent may be used to maintain a stable lower heart rate and blood pressure during sufentanil-oxygen anesthesia. The vagolytic effects of pancuronium may be reduced in patients administered nitrous oxide with sufentanil.
                              Preliminary data suggest that in patients administered high doses of sufentanil, initial dosage requirements for neuromuscular blocking agents are generally lower as compared to patients given fentanyl or halothane, and comparable to patients given enﬂurane.
                              Bradycardia is infrequently seen in patients administered sufentanil-oxygen anesthesia. The use of nitrous oxide with high doses of sufentanil may decrease mean arterial pressure, heart rate and cardiac output.
                              Sufentanil at 20 mcg/kg has been shown to provide more adequate reduction in intracranial volume than equivalent doses of fentanyl, based upon requirements for furosemide and anesthesia supplementation in one study of patients undergoing craniotomy. During carotid endarterectomy, sufentanil-nitrous oxide/oxygen produced reductions in cerebral blood ﬂow comparable to those of enﬂurane-nitrous oxide/oxygen. During cardiovascular surgery, sufentanil-oxygen produced EEG patterns similar to fentanyl-oxygen; these EEG changes were judged to be compatible with adequate general anesthesia.
                              The intraoperative use of sufentanil at anesthetic dosages maintains cardiac output, with a slight reduction in systemic vascular resistance during the initial postoperative period. The incidence of postoperative hypertension, need for vasoactive agents and requirements for postoperative analgesics are generally reduced in patients administered moderate or high doses of sufentanil as compared to patients given inhalation agents.
                              Skeletal muscle rigidity is related to the dose and speed of administration of sufentanil. This muscular rigidity may occur unless preventative measures are taken (see 
                                    WARNINGS
                                  ).
                              Decreased respiratory drive and increased airway resistance occur with sufentanil. The duration and degree of respiratory depression are dose related when sufentanil is used at sub-anesthetic dosages. At high doses, a pronounced decrease in pulmonary exchange and apnea may be produced.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Epidural Use In Labor And
                    Delivery
                           
                              Onset of analgesic
                      effect occurs within approximately 10 minutes of administration of epidural
                      doses of sufentanil and bupivacaine. Duration of analgesia following a single
                      epidural injection of 10-15 mcg sufentanil and bupivacaine 0.125% averaged 1.7
                      hours.
                              During labor and
                      vaginal delivery, the addition of 10-15 mcg sufentanil to 10 mL 0.125%
                      bupivacaine provides an increase in the duration of analgesia compared to
                      bupivacaine without an opioid. Analgesia from 15 mcg sufentanil plus 10 mL
                      0.125% bupivacaine is comparable to analgesia from 10 mL of 0.25% bupivacaine
                      alone. Apgar scores of neonates following epidural administration of both
                      drugs to women in labor were comparable to neonates whose mothers received
                      bupivacaine without an opioid epidurally.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Pharmacokinetics
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Intravenous Use
                           
                              The pharmacokinetics of
                      intravenous sufentanil can be described as a three-compartment model with a                distribution time of 1.4 minutes, redistribution of 17.1 minutes and an
                      elimination half-life of 164 minutes in adults. The elimination half-life of
                      sufentanil is shorter (e.g. 97 ± 42 minutes) in infants and children, and
                      longer in neonates (e.g. 434 ± 160 minutes) compared to that of adolescents
                      and adults. The liver and small intestine are the major sites of
                      biotransformation. Approximately 80% of the administered dose is excreted
                      within 24 hours and only 2% of the dose is eliminated as unchanged drug.
                      Plasma protein binding of sufentanil, related to the alpha1 acid
                      glycoprotein concentration, was approximately 93% in healthy males, 91% in
                      mothers and 79% in neonates.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Epidural Use In Labor And
                    Delivery
                           
                              After epidural
                      administration of incremental doses totaling 5-40 mcg sufentanil during labor
                      and delivery, maternal and neonatal sufentanil plasma concentrations were at
                      or near the 0.05-0.1 ng/mL limit of detection, and were slightly higher in
                      mothers than in their infants.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        Clinical Studies
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Epidural Use In Labor And
                    Delivery
                           
                              Epidural sufentanil was
                      tested in 340 patients in two (one single-center and one multi-center)
                      double-blind, parallel studies. Doses ranged from 10 to 15 mcg sufentanil and
                      were delivered in a 10 mL volume of 0.125% bupivacaine with and without
                      epinephrine 1:200,000. In all cases, sufentanil was administered following a
                      dose of local anesthetic to test proper catheter placement. Since epidural
                      opioids and local anesthetics potentiate each other, these results may not
                      reﬂect the dose or efﬁcacy of epidural sufentanil by itself.
                              Individual doses of
                      10-15 mcg sufentanil plus bupivacaine 0.125% with epinephrine provided
                      analgesia during the ﬁrst stage of labor with a duration of 1-2 hours. Onset
                      was rapid (within 10 minutes). Subsequent doses (equal dose) tended to have
                      shorter duration. Analgesia was profound (complete pain relief) in 80% to 100%
                      of patients and a 25% incidence of pruritus was observed. The duration of
                      initial doses of sufentanil plus bupivacaine with epinephrine is approximately
                      95 minutes, and of subsequent doses, 70 minutes.
                              There are insufﬁcient
                      data to critically evaluate neonatal neuromuscular and adaptive capacity
                      following recommended doses of maternally administered epidural sufentanil
                      with bupivacaine. However, if larger than recommended doses are used for
                      combined local and systemic analgesia, e.g., after administration of a single
                      dose of 50 mcg epidural sufentanil during delivery, then impaired neonatal
                      adaption to sound and light can be detected for 1 to 4 hours and if a dose of
                      80 mcg is used, impaired neuromuscular coordination can be detected for more
                      than 4 hours.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         