
                     
                     
                     Drug Interactions
                     
                        There has been a report of a patient who passed an orange rubbery precipitate in his stool the day after ingesting carbamazepine suspension immediately followed by Thorazine® (chlorpromazine hydrochloride) solution. Subsequent testing has shown that mixing carbamazepine suspension and chlorpromazine solution (both generic and brand name) as well as carbamazepine suspension and liquid Mellaril® (thioridizine) resulted in the occurrence of this precipitate. Because the extent to which this occurs with other liquid medications is not known, carbamazepine suspension should not be administered simultaneously with other liquid medicinal agents or diluents. (See 
                              DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION
                           ).
                        Clinically meaningful drug interactions have occurred with concomitant medications and include, but are not limited to, the following:
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Agents That May Affect Carbamazepine Plasma Levels
                           
                              CYP 3A4 inhibitors inhibit carbamazepine metabolism and can thus increase plasma carbamazepine levels. Drugs that have been shown, or would be expected, to increase plasma carbamazepine levels include:
                              
                                 
                                     cimetidine, danazol, diltiazem, macrolides, erythromycin, troleandomycin, clarithromycin, fluoxetine, fluvoxamine, nefazodone, loratadine, terfenadine, isoniazid, niacinamide, nicotinamide, propoxyphene, azoles (e.g., ketoconazole intraconazole, fluconazole), acetazolamide, verapamil, grapefruit juice, protease inhibitors, valproate.
                                       increased levels of the active 10,11-epoxide
                                    
                                 
                              
                              CYP 3A4 inducers can increase the rate of carbamazepine metabolism. Drugs that have been shown, or that would be expected, to decrease plasma carbamazepine levels include:
                              
                                 
                                     cisplatin, doxorubicin HCl, felbamate
                                       decreased levels of carbamazepine and increased levels of the 10,11-epoxide
                                    , rifampin, phenobarbital, phenytoin, primidone, methsuximide, theophylline.
                              
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Effect of Carbamazepine on Plasma Levels of Concomitant Agents
                           
                              Increased levels: clomipramine HCl, phenytoin, primidone.
                              Carbamazepine induces hepatic CYP activity. Carbamazepine causes, or would be expected to cause, decreased levels of the following:
                              acetaminophen, alprazolam, dihydropyridine calcium channel blockers (e.g., felodipine), cyclosporine, corticosteroids (e.g., prednisolone, dexamethasone), clonazepam, clozapine, dicumarol, doxycycline, ethosuximide, haloperidol, itraconazole, lamotrigine, levothyroxine, methadone, methsuximide, midazolam, oral and other hormonal contraceptives, oxcarbazepine, phensuximide, phenytoin, praziquantel, protease inhibitors, risperidone, theophylline, tiagabine, topiramate, tramadol, tricyclic antidepressants (e.g., imipramine, amitriptyline, nortriptyline), valproate, warfarin, ziprasidone, zonisamide.
                              Concomitant administration of carbamazepine and lithium may increase the risk of neurotoxic side effects.
                              Alterations of thyroid function have been reported in combination therapy with other anticonvulsant medications.
                              Concomitant use of carbamazepine with hormonal contraceptive products (e.g. oral, and levonorgestrel subdermal implant contraceptives) may render the contraceptives less effective because the plasma concentrations of the hormones may be decreased. Breakthrough bleeding and unintended pregnancies have been reported. Alternative or back-up methods of contraception should be considered.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               