
               
               
               7	DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              •May impact absorption of orally administered medications (7.1, 12.3).
                           
                              •Warfarin: Postmarketing reports of increased INR sometimes associated with bleeding. Monitor INR frequently until stable upon initiation or alteration of BYETTA therapy (6.2, 7.2).
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1	Orally Administered Drugs
                     
                        The effect of BYETTA to slow gastric emptying can reduce the extent and rate of absorption of orally administered drugs. BYETTA should be used with caution in patients receiving oral medications that have narrow therapeutic index or require rapid gastrointestinal absorption [see
                               Adverse Reactions (6.2)
                           ]. For oral medications that are dependent on threshold concentrations for efficacy, such as contraceptives and antibiotics, patients should be advised to take those drugs at least 1 hour before BYETTA injection. If such drugs are to be administered with food, patients should be advised to take them with a meal or snack when BYETTA is not administered [see
                               Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)
                           ].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2	Warfarin
                     
                        There are postmarketing reports of increased INR sometimes associated with bleeding, with concomitant use of warfarin and BYETTA [see
                               Adverse Reactions (6.2)
                           ]. In a drug interaction study, BYETTA did not have a significant effect on INR [see
                               Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)
                           ]. In patients taking warfarin, prothrombin time should be monitored more frequently after initiation or alteration of BYETTA therapy. Once a stable prothrombin time has been documented, prothrombin times can be monitored at the intervals usually recommended for patients on warfarin.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         