
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
                  
               
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           Do not exceed doses greater than 20 mg daily of simvastatin. (7.2)
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                      7.1 Impact of Other Drugs on Amlodipine
                     
                        
                           CYP3A Inhibitors
                           
Co-administration with CYP3A inhibitors (moderate and strong) results in increased systemic exposure to amlodipine and may require dose reduction. Monitor for symptoms of hypotension and edema when amlodipine is co-administered with CYP3A inhibitors to determine the need for dose adjustment [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                        
                           CYP3A Inducers
                           
No information is available on the quantitative effects of CYP3A inducers on amlodipine. Blood pressure should be closely monitored when amlodipine is co-administered with CYP3A inducers.
                        
                           Sildenafil
                           
Monitor for hypotension when sildenafil is co-administered with amlodipine [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.2)].
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                      7.2 Impact of Amlodipine on Other Drugs
                     
                        
                           Simvastatin
                           
Co-administration of simvastatin with amlodipine increases the systemic exposure of simvastatin. Limit the dose of simvastatin in patients on amlodipine to 20 mg daily [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                        
                        
                           Immunosuppressants
                           
Amlodipine may increase the systemic exposure of cyclosporine or tacrolimus when co-administered. Frequent monitoring of trough blood levels of cyclosporine and tacrolimus is recommended and adjust the dose when appropriate [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         