
                     
                     
                     Drug Interactions
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           ACE-inhibitors
                           
                              Reports suggest that NSAIDs may diminish the antihypertensive effect of ACE-inhibitors. This interaction should be given consideration in patients taking hydrocodone bitartrate and ibuprofen tablets concomitantly with ACE-inhibitors.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Anticholinergics
                           
                              The concurrent use of anticholinergics with hydrocodone preparations may produce paralytic ileus.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Antidepressants
                           
                              The use of Monoamine Oxidase Inhibitors (MAOIs) or tricyclic antidepressants with hydrocodone bitartrate and ibuprofen tablets may increase the effect of either the antidepressant or hydrocodone.
                              MAOIs have been reported to intensify the effects of at least one opioid drug causing anxiety, confusion and significant depression of respiration or coma. The use of hydrocodone is not recommended for patients taking MAOIs or within 14 days of stopping such treatment.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Aspirin
                           
                              When hydrocodone bitartrate and ibuprofen tablets are administered with aspirin, the protein binding of aspirin is reduced, although the clearance of free hydrocodone bitartrate and ibuprofen is not altered. The clinical significance of this interaction is not known; however, as with other NSAID-containing products, concomitant administration of hydrocodone bitartrate and ibuprofen tablets and aspirin is not generally recommended because of the potential of increased adverse effects.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           CNS Depressants
                           
                              Patients receiving other opioids, antihistamines, antipsychotics, antianxiety agents, or other CNS depressants (including alcohol) concomitantly with hydrocodone bitartrate and ibuprofen tablets may exhibit an additive CNS depression. When combined therapy is contemplated, the dose of one or both agents should be reduced.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Diuretics
                           
                              Ibuprofen has been shown to reduce the natriuretic effect of furosemide and thiazides in some patients. This response has been attributed to inhibition of renal prostaglandin synthesis. During concomitant therapy with hydrocodone bitartrate and ibuprofen tablets, the patient should be observed closely for signs of renal failure (see WARNINGS, Renal Effects), as well as diuretic efficacy.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Lithium
                           
                              Ibuprofen has been shown to elevate plasma lithium concentration and reduce renal lithium clearance. The mean minimum lithium concentration increased 15% and the renal clearance was decreased by approximately 20%. This effect has been attributed to inhibition of renal prostaglandin synthesis by ibuprofen. Thus, when hydrocodone bitartrate and ibuprofen tablets and lithium are administered concurrently, patients should be observed for signs of lithium toxicity.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Methotrexate
                           
                              Ibuprofen, as well as other NSAIDs, has been reported to competitively inhibit methotrexate accumulation in rabbit kidney slices. This may indicate that ibuprofen could enhance the toxicity of methotrexate. Caution should be used when hydrocodone bitartrate and ibuprofen tablets are administered concomitantly with methotrexate.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Mixed Agonist/Antagonist Opioid Analgesics
                           
                              Agonist/antagonist analgesics (i.e., pentazocine, nalbuphine, butorphanol and buprenorphine) should be administered with caution to patients who have received or are receiving a course of therapy with a pure opioid agonist analgesic such as hydrocodone. In this situation, mixed agonist/antagonist analgesics may reduce the analgesic effect of hydrocodone and/or may precipitate withdrawal symptoms in these patients.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Neuromuscular Blocking Agents
                           
                              Hydrocodone, as well as other opioid analgesics, may enhance the neuromuscular blocking action of skeletal muscle relaxants and produce an increased degree of respiratory depression.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Warfarin
                           
                              The effects of warfarin and NSAIDs on GI bleeding are synergistic, such that users of both drugs together have a risk of serious GI bleeding higher than users of either drug alone.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               