
               
               
               DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
                  Lisinopril

                  
                  

                  Hypotension

                  
                  

                  Patients on Diuretic Therapy:

                  Patients on diuretics, and especially those in whom diuretic therapy was recently instituted, may occasionally experience an excessive reduction of blood pressure after initiation of therapy with lisinopril. The possibility of hypotensive effects with lisinopril can be minimized by either discontinuing the diuretic or increasing the salt intake prior to initiation of treatment with lisinopril. If it is necessary to continue the diuretic, initiate therapy with lisinopril at a dose of 5 mg daily, and provide close medical supervision after the initial dose for at least two hours and until blood pressure has stabilized for at least an additional hour. (See WARNINGS, and DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION.) When a diuretic is added to the therapy of a patient receiving lisinopril, an additional antihypertensive effect is usually observed. (See DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION.)

                  

                  Non-Steroidal Anti-inflammatory Agents:

                  In some patients with compromised renal function who are being treated with non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, the co-administration of lisinopril may result in a further deterioration of renal function. These effects are usually reversible.
Reports suggest that NSAIDs may diminish the antihypertensive effect of ACE-inhibitors, including lisinopril. The interaction should be given consideration in patients taking NSAIDs concomitantly with ACE-inhibitors.

                  

                  Other Agents:

                  Lisinopril has been used concomitantly with nitrates and/or digoxin without evidence of clinically significant adverse interactions. No meaningful clinically important pharmacokinetic interactions occurred when lisinopril was used concomitantly with propranolol, digoxin, or hydrochlorothiazide. The presence of food in the stomach does not alter the bioavailability of lisinopril.

                  

                  Agents Increasing Serum Potassium:

                  Lisinopril attenuates potassium loss caused by thiazide-type diuretics. Use of lisinopril with potassium-sparing diuretics (e.g., spironolactone, triamterene, or amiloride), potassium supplements, or potassium-containing salt substitutes may lead to significant increases in serum potassium. Therefore, if concomitant use of these agents is indicated, because of demonstrated hypokalemia, they should be used with caution and with frequent monitoring of serum potassium.

                  

                  Lithium:

                  Lithium toxicity has been reported in patients receiving lithium concomitantly with drugs which cause elimination of sodium, including ACE inhibitors. Lithium toxicity was usually reversible upon discontinuation of lithium and the ACE inhibitor. It is recommended that serum lithium levels be monitored frequently if lisinopril is administered concomitantly with lithium.

                  

                  Hydrochlorothiazide

                  When administered concurrently the following drugs may interact with thiazide diuretics.

                  

                  Alcohol, barbiturates, or narcotics -

                  potentiation of orthostatic hypotension may occur.

                  

                  Antidiabetic drugs (oral agents and insulin) -

                  dosage adjustment of the antidiabetic drug may be required.

                  

                  Other antihypertensive drugs -

                  additive effect or potentiation.

                  

                  Cholestyramine and colestipol resins -

                  Absorption of hydrochlorothiazide is impaired in the presence of anionic exchange resins. Single doses of either cholestyramine or colestipol resins bind the hydrochlorothiazide and reduce its absorption from the gastrointestinal tract by up to 85 and 43 percent, respectively.

                  

                  Corticosteroids, ACTH -

                  intensified electrolyte depletion, particularly hypokalemia.

                  

                  Pressor amines (e.g., norepinephrine) -

                  possible decreased response to pressor amines but not sufficient to preclude their use.

                  

                  Skeletal muscle relaxants, nondepolarizing (e.g., tubocurarine)-

                  possible increased responsiveness to the muscle relaxant.

                  

                  Lithium-

                  should not generally be given with diuretics. Diuretic agents reduce the renal clearance of lithium and add a high risk of lithium toxicity. Refer to the package insert for lithium preparation before use of such preparations with lisinopril-hydrochlorothiazide tablets.

                  

                  Non-Steroidal Anti-inflammatory Drugs -

                  In some patients, the administration of a non-steroidal anti-inflammatory agent can reduce the diuretic, natriuretic, and antihypertensive effects of loop, potassium-sparing and thiazide diuretics. Therefore, when lisinopril-hydrochlorothiazide and non-steroidal anti-inflammatory agents are used concomitantly, the patient should be observed closely to determine if the desired effect of lisinopril-hydrochlorothiazide tablets is obtained.

                  

               
               
            
         