
                     
                     
                     Drug Interactions
                     
                        Interactions with Substrates, Inhibitors or Inducers of Cytochrome P-450 Enzymes 
                        Because propranolol’s metabolism involves multiple pathways in the cytochrome P-450 system (CYP2D6,1A2, 2C19), coadministration with drugs that are metabolized by, or effect the activity (induction or inhibition) of one or more of these pathways may lead to clinically relevant drug interactions (see 
                              Drug Interactions under PRECAUTIONS).
                        
                        Substrates or Inhibitors of CYP2D6
                        Blood levels and/ or toxicity of propranolol may be increased by coadministration with substrates or inhibitors of CYP2D6, such as amiodarone, cimetidine, delavudin, fluoxetine, paroxetine, quinidine, and ritonavir. No interactions were observed with either ranitidine or lansoprazole.
                        Substrates or Inhibitors of CYP1A2
                        Blood levels and/ or toxicity of propranolol may be increased by coadministration with substrates or inhibitors of CYP1A2, such as imipramine, cimetidine, ciprofloxacin, fluvoxamine, isoniazid, ritonavir, theophylline, zileuton, zolmitriptan, and rizatriptan.
                        Substrates or Inhibitors of CYP2C19
                        Blood levels and/ or toxicity of propranolol may be increased by coadministration with substrates or inhibitors of CYP2C19, such as fluconazole, cimetidine, fluoxetine, fluvoxamine, tenioposide, and tolbutamide. No interaction was observed with omeprazole.
                        Inducers of Hepatic Drug Metabolism
                        Blood levels of propranolol may be decreased by coadministration with inducers such as rifampin, ethanol, phenytoin, and phenobarbital. Cigarette smoking also induces hepatic metabolism and has been shown to increase up to 77% the clearance of propranolol, resulting in decreased plasma concentrations.
                        Cardiovascular Drugs
                        
                           Antiarrhythmics
                        
                        The AUC of propafenone is increased by more than 200% by coadministration of propranolol.
                        The metabolism of propranolol is reduced by coadministration of quinidine, leading to a two-three fold increased blood concentration and greater degrees of clinical beta-blockade.
                        The metabolism of lidocaine is inhibited by coadministration of propranolol, resulting in a 25% increase in lidocaine concentrations.
                        
                           Calcium Channel Blockers
                        
                        The mean Cmax and AUC of propranolol are increased respectively, by 50% and 30% by coadministration of nisoldipine and by 80% and 47%, by coadministration of nicardipine.
                        The mean Cmax and AUC of nifedipine are increased by 64% and 79%, respectively, by coadministration of propranolol.
                        Propranolol does not affect the pharmacokinetics of verapamil and norverapamil. Verapamil does not affect the pharmacokinetics of propranolol.
                        Non-Cardiovascular Drugs
                        
                           Migraine Drugs
                        
                        Administration of zolmitriptan or rizatriptan with propranolol resulted in increased concentrations of zolmitriptan (AUC increased by 56% and Cmax by 37%) or rizatriptan (the AUC and Cmax were increased by 67% and 75%, respectively).
                        
                           Theophylline
                        
                        Coadministration of theophylline with propranolol decreases theophylline oral clearance by 30% to 52%.
                        
                           Benzodiazepines
                        
                        Propranolol can inhibit the metabolism of diazepam, resulting in increased concentrations of diazepam and its metabolites. Diazepam does not alter the pharmacokinetics of propranolol.
                        The pharmacokinetics of oxazepam, triazolam, lorazepam, and alprazolam are not affected by coadministration of propranolol.
                        
                           Neuroleptic Drugs
                        
                        Coadministration of long-acting propranolol at doses greater than or equal to 160mg/day resulted in increased thioridazine plasma concentrations ranging from 55% to 369% and increased thioridazine metabolite (mesoridazine) concentrations ranging from 33% to 209%.
                        Coadministration of chlorpromazine with propranolol resulted in a 70% increase in propranolol plasma level.
                        
                           Anti-Ulcer Drugs
                        
                        Coadministration of propranolol with cimetidine, a non-specific CYP450 inhibitor, increased propranolol AUC and Cmax by 46% and 35%, respectively. Coadministration with aluminum hydroxide gel (1200 mg) may result in a decrease in propranolol concentrations.
                        Coadministration of metoclopramide with the long-acting propranolol did not have a significant effect on propranolol’s pharmacokinetics.
                        
                           Lipid Lowering Drugs
                        
                        Coadministration of cholestyramine or colestipol with propranolol resulted in up to 50% decrease in propranolol concentrations.
                        Coadministration of propranolol with lovastatin or pravastatin, decreased 18% to 23% the AUC of both, but did not alter their pharmacodynamics. Propranolol did not have an effect on the pharmacokinetics of fluvastatin.
                        
                           Warfarin
                        
                        Concomitant administration of propranolol and warfarin has been shown to increase warfarin bioavailability and increase prothrombin time.
                        
                           Alcohol
                        
                        Concomitant use of alcohol may increase plasma levels of propranolol.
                     
                  
               