
               
               
               12     CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
					
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1     Mechanism of Action
                     
                        SIGNIFOR LAR is an injectable cyclohexapeptide, somatostatin analog. Pasireotide exerts its pharmacological activity via binding to somatostatin receptors (SSTR). There are five known human somatostatin receptor subtypes: SSTR 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5. These receptor subtypes are expressed in different tissues under normal physiological conditions. Somatostatin analogs bind to SSTRs with different potencies. Pasireotide binds with high affinity to four of the five SSTRs (see Table 3).
                        


                     



                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2     Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        Somatostatin receptors are expressed in many tissues including neuroendocrine tumors (e.g., growth hormone secreting pituitary adenomas). Pasireotide binds to SSTR2 and SSTR5 subtype receptors which may be relevant for inhibition of GH secretion. In vivo studies show that SIGNIFOR LAR lowers GH and IGF-1 levels in patients with acromegaly.
                        
                           Cardiac Electrophysiology
                        
                        Individually corrected QT (QTcI) interval was evaluated in a randomized, blinded, crossover study in healthy subjects investigating pasireotide subcutaneous doses of 0.6 mg and 1.95 mg twice daily, respectively.  The maximum mean (95% upper confidence bound) placebo-subtracted QTcI change from baseline was 12.7 (14.7) ms and 16.6 (18.6) ms, respectively. Both pasireotide doses decreased heart rate, with a maximum mean (95% lower confidence bound) placebo-subtracted change from baseline of -10.9 (-11.9) beats per minute (bpm) observed at 1.5 hours for pasireotide 0.6 mg twice daily, and -15.2 (-16.5) bpm at 0.5 hours for pasireotide 1.95 mg twice daily.
								
                        The predicted peak concentrations for the SIGNIFOR LAR dose of 60 mg in acromegaly patients are similar to the observed peak concentration (24.3 mg/mL) of the subcutaneous Signifor 0.6 mg twice daily dose and below the observed peak concentration (80.6 ng/mL) of the subcutaneous Signifor 1.95 mg twice daily dose.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3     Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        
                           Absorption and Distribution:
                        
                        No studies have been conducted to evaluate the absolute bioavailability of pasireotide in humans. Food effect is unlikely to occur since SIGNIFOR LAR is administered via a parenteral route.
								
                        In healthy volunteers, pasireotide administered as SIGNIFOR LAR is widely distributed with large apparent volume of distribution (Vz/F >100 L). Distribution between blood and plasma is concentration-independent and shows that pasireotide is primarily located in the plasma (91%). Plasma protein binding is moderate (88%) and independent of concentration.
								
                        Pasireotide has low passive permeability and is likely to be a substrate of P-gp (P-glycoprotein), but the impact of P-gp on the ADME (absorption, distribution, metabolism, excretion) of pasireotide is expected to be low. In clinical testing in healthy volunteers, P-gp inhibition did not affect the rate or extent of pasireotide availability [see Drug Interactions (7.1)]. At therapeutic dose levels, pasireotide is not expected to be a substrate of BCRP (breast cancer resistance protein), OCT1 (organic cation transporter 1), or OATP (organic anion-transporting polypeptides) 1B1, 1B3, or 2B1.
								
                        
                           Metabolism and Excretion:
                        
                        Pasireotide was shown to be highly metabolically stable in human liver and kidney microsomes. In healthy volunteers, pasireotide in its unchanged form is the predominant form found in plasma, urine and feces. Somatropin may increase CYP450 enzymes and, therefore, suppression of growth hormone secretion by somatostatin analogs including pasireotide may decrease the metabolic clearance of compounds metabolized by CYP450 enzymes.
								
                        Pasireotide is eliminated mainly via hepatic clearance (biliary excretion) with a small contribution of the renal route. In a human ADME study with subcutaneous Signifor with a single dose 0.6 mg, 55.9 ± 6.63% of the radioactivity dose was recovered over the first 10 days post dosing, including 48.3 ± 8.16% of the radioactivity in feces and 7.63 ± 2.03% in urine.
                        The apparent clearance (CL/F) of SIGNIFOR LAR in healthy volunteers is on average 4.5–8.5 liters/hour.
								
                        
                           Steady-State Pharmacokinetics:
                        
                        PK steady-state for SIGNIFOR LAR is achieved after three months. Following multiple intramuscular doses every 4 weeks (every 28 days), SIGNIFOR LAR demonstrates approximately dose-proportional PK exposures in the dose range of 20 mg to 60 mg every 4 weeks in patients with acromegaly.
								
                        
                           Special Populations:
                        
                        Population PK analyses of SIGNIFOR LAR suggest that race, gender and body weight do not have clinically relevant influence on circulating levels of pasireotide. No dose adjustment is required for demographics. 
								
                        
                           Pediatric Patients
                        
                        No studies have been performed in pediatric patients [see Use in Specific Populations (8.4)].  
                        
                           Geriatric Patients
                        
                        Age is not a significant covariate in the population PK analysis of patients with acromegaly.  Therefore age is not expected to significantly impact circulating levels of pasireotide.
								
                        Efficacy and safety data on patients with acromegaly older than 65 years are limited [see Use in Specific Populations (8.5)].  
								
                        
                           Hepatic Impairment
                        
                        In a clinical study for a single subcutaneous dose of Signifor in subjects with impaired hepatic function (Child-Pugh A, B and C), subjects with moderate and severe hepatic impairment (Child-Pugh B and C) showed significantly higher exposures than subjects with normal hepatic function. Upon comparing with the control group, AUCinf was increased by 12%, 56%, and 42% and Cmax was increased by 3%, 46%, and 33% respectively, in the mild, moderate, and severe hepatic impairment groups [see Use in Specific Populations (8.6) and Dosage and Administration (2.3)].  
								
                        
                           Renal Impairment
                        
                        Clinical studies have not been performed in patients with renal impairment. However, renal clearance has a minor contribution to the elimination of pasireotide in humans. Renal function (creatinine clearance and estimated glomerular filtration rate) is not a covariate in the population PK analysis. Therefore, renal function is not expected to significantly impact the circulating levels of pasireotide [see Use in Specific Populations (8.7)]. 
								
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         