
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
                  Since tacrolimus is metabolized mainly by CYP3A enzymes, drugs or substances known to inhibit these enzymes may increase tacrolimus whole blood concentrations. Drugs known to induce CYP3A enzymes may decrease tacrolimus whole blood concentrations [see Warnings and Precautions (5.14) and Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)]. Dose adjustments may be needed along with frequent monitoring of tacrolimus whole blood trough concentrations when ASTAGRAF XL is administered with CYP3A inhibitors or inducers.  In addition, patients should be monitored for adverse reactions including changes in renal function and QT prolongation [see Warnings and Precautions (5.9) and (5.15)]. 
               
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              •Mycophenolic Acid Products: Monitor for MPA-related adverse reactions and adjust MMF or MPA-dose as needed (7.1)
                           
                              •CYP3A Inhibitors: Increased tacrolimus concentrations; monitor concentrations and adjust tacrolimus dose as needed with concomitant use (5.14, 7)
                           
                              •CYP3A Inducers: Decreased tacrolimus concentrations; monitor concentrations and adjust tacrolimus dose as needed with concomitant use (5.14, 7)
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 Mycophenolic Acid Products
                     
                        With a given dose of mycophenolic acid (MPA) products, exposure to MPA is higher with ASTAGRAF XL coadministration than with cyclosporine coadministration because cyclosporine interrupts the enterohepatic recirculation of MPA while tacrolimus does not. Clinicians should monitor for MPA associated adverse events and reduce the dose of concomitantly administered mycophenolic acid products, if needed. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 Grapefruit Juice
                     
                        Grapefruit juice inhibits CYP3A-enzymes resulting in increased tacrolimus whole blood trough concentrations, and patients should avoid eating grapefruit or drinking grapefruit juice in combination with ASTAGRAF XL [see Dosage and Administration (2.4)]. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3 Alcohol
                     
                        Consumption of alcohol  with ASTAGRAF XL may increase the rate of release of tacrolimus and/or adversely alter the pharmacokinetic properties and the effectiveness and safety of ASTAGRAF XL. Therefore, alcoholic beverages should not be consumed with ASTAGRAF XL  [see Dosage and Administration (2.4)].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4 Protease Inhibitors
                     
                        Most protease inhibitors inhibit CYP3A enzymes and may increase tacrolimus whole blood concentrations. It is recommended to avoid concomitant use of tacrolimus with nelfinavir unless the benefits outweigh the risks [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)]. Whole blood concentrations of tacrolimus are markedly increased when coadministered with telaprevir or with boceprevir. Monitoring of tacrolimus whole blood concentrations and tacrolimus-associated adverse reactions, and appropriate adjustments in the dosing regimen of tacrolimus are recommended when tacrolimus and protease inhibitors (e.g., ritonavir, telaprevir, boceprevir) are used concomitantly.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.5 Antifungal Agents
                     
                        Frequent monitoring of whole blood concentrations and appropriate dosage adjustments of tacrolimus are recommended when concomitant use of the following antifungal drugs with tacrolimus is initiated or discontinued [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                        Azoles: Voriconazole, posaconazole, itraconazole, ketoconazole, fluconazole and clotrimazole inhibit CYP3A metabolism of tacrolimus and increase tacrolimus whole blood concentrations. When initiating therapy with voriconazole or posaconazole in patients already receiving tacrolimus, it is recommended that the tacrolimus dose be initially reduced to one-third of the original dose and the subsequent tacrolimus doses be adjusted based on the tacrolimus whole blood concentrations. 
                        Caspofungin is an inducer of CYP3A and decreases whole blood concentrations of tacrolimus. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.6 Calcium Channel Blockers
                     
                        Verapamil, diltiazem, nifedipine, and nicardipine inhibit CYP3A metabolism of tacrolimus and may increase tacrolimus whole blood concentrations. Monitoring of whole blood concentrations and appropriate dosage adjustments of tacrolimus are recommended when these calcium channel blocking drugs and tacrolimus are used concomitantly. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.7 Antibacterials
                     
                        Erythromycin, clarithromycin, troleandomycin and chloramphenicol inhibit CYP3A metabolism of tacrolimus and may increase tacrolimus whole blood concentrations. Monitoring of blood concentrations and appropriate dosage adjustments of tacrolimus are recommended when these drugs and tacrolimus are used concomitantly. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.8 Antimycobacterials
                     
                        Rifampin [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)] and rifabutin are inducers of CYP3A enzymes and may decrease tacrolimus whole blood concentrations. Monitoring of whole blood concentrations and appropriate dosage adjustments of tacrolimus are recommended when these antimycobacterial drugs and tacrolimus are used concomitantly.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.9 Anticonvulsants
                     
                        Phenytoin, carbamazepine and phenobarbital induce CYP3A enzymes and may decrease tacrolimus whole blood concentrations. Monitoring of whole blood concentrations and appropriate dosage adjustments of tacrolimus are recommended when these drugs and tacrolimus are used concomitantly.
                        Concomitant administration of phenytoin with tacrolimus may also increase phenytoin plasma concentrations. Thus, frequent monitoring of phenytoin plasma concentrations and adjusting the phenytoin dose as needed are recommended when tacrolimus and phenytoin are administered concomitantly.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.10 St. John's Wort (Hypericum perforatum)
                     
                     
                        St. John’s Wort induces CYP3A enzymes and may decrease tacrolimus whole blood concentrations. Monitoring of whole blood concentrations and appropriate dosage adjustments of tacrolimus are recommended when St. John’s Wort and tacrolimus are coadministered.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.11 Gastric Acid Suppressors/Neutralizers
                     
                        Lansoprazole and omeprazole, the proton pump inhibitors (PPIs), as CYP2C19 and CYP3A4 substrates, share the same CYP3A4 system with tacrolimus for their hepatic elimination, and may potentially competitively inhibit the CYP3A4 metabolism of tacrolimus and thereby substantially increase tacrolimus whole blood concentrations, especially in transplant patients who are intermediate or poor CYP2C19 metabolizers in which the PPIs metabolic pathway shifts from 2C19 to 3A4, as compared to those patients who are efficient CYP2C19 metabolizers.
                        Cimetidine, a CYP2C19 and CYP3A4 inhibitor, may also inhibit the CYP3A4 metabolism of tacrolimus and thereby substantially increase tacrolimus whole blood concentrations. 
                        Coadministration with magnesium and aluminum hydroxide antacids increase tacrolimus whole blood concentrations. Monitoring of whole blood concentrations and appropriate dosage adjustments of tacrolimus are recommended when these drugs and tacrolimus are used concomitantly.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.12 Other Drugs
                     
                        Amiodarone, bromocriptine, nefazodone, metoclopramide, danazol, ethinyl estradiol, methylprednisolone, and herbal products containing schisandra sphenanthera extracts may inhibit CYP3A metabolism of tacrolimus and increase tacrolimus whole blood concentrations. Monitoring of blood concentrations and appropriate dosage adjustments of tacrolimus are recommended when these drugs and tacrolimus are coadministered.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         