
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  
                     
                        Olmesartan medoxomil (7.2):
                        
                           Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDS): May lead to increased risk of renal impairment and loss of antihypertensive effect.
                           Dual inhibition of the renin-angiotension system: Increased risk of renal impairment, hypotension, and hyperkalemia.
                           Colesevelam hydrochloride: Consider administering olmesartan at least 4 hours before colesevelam hydrochloride dose.
                           Lithium: Increases in serum lithium concentrations and lithium toxicity.
                        
                        Amlodipine (7.3):
                        
                           If simvastatin is co-administered with amlodipine, do not exceed doses greater than 20 mg daily of simvastatin.
                        
                        Hydrochlorothiazide (7.4):
                        
                           Alcohol, barbiturates, narcotics: Potentiation of orthostatic hypotension.
                           Antidiabetic drugs: Dosage adjustment of antidiabetic may be required.
                           Cholestyramine and colestipol: Reduced absorption of thiazides.
                           Corticosteroids, ACTH: Electrolyte depletion, hypokalemia.
                           NSAIDs: Can reduce the diuretic, natriuretic, and antihypertensive effects of diuretics.
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 Drug Interactions with Tribenzor
                     
                        The pharmacokinetics of olmesartan medoxomil, amlodipine, and hydrochlorothiazide are not altered when the drugs are co-administered.
                        No drug interaction studies have been conducted with other drugs and Tribenzor, although studies have been conducted with the olmesartan medoxomil, amlodipine, and hydrochlorothiazide components of Tribenzor, as described below.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 Drug Interactions with Olmesartan Medoxomil
                     
                        No significant drug interactions were reported in studies in which olmesartan medoxomil was co-administered with digoxin or warfarin in healthy volunteers.
                        The bioavailability of olmesartan medoxomil was not significantly altered by the co-administration of antacids [Al(OH)3/Mg(OH)2].
                        Olmesartan medoxomil is not metabolized by the cytochrome P450 system and has no effects on P450 enzymes; thus, interactions with drugs that inhibit, induce, or are metabolized by those enzymes are not expected.
                        

                        
                           Non-Steroidal Anti-Inflammatory Agents including Selective Cyclooxygenase-2 Inhibitors (COX-2 Inhibitors)
                           
In patients who are elderly, volume-depleted (including those on diuretic therapy), or with compromised renal function, co-administration of NSAIDs, including selective COX-2 inhibitors, with angiotensin II receptor antagonists, including olmesartan medoxomil, may result in deterioration of renal function, including possible acute renal failure. These effects are usually reversible. Monitor renal function periodically in patients receiving olmesartan medoxomil and NSAID therapy.
                        The antihypertensive effect of angiotensin II receptor antagonists, including olmesartan medoxomil may be attenuated by NSAIDs including selective COX-2 inhibitors.
                        
                           Dual Blockade of the Renin-Angiotensin System (RAS)
                        
                        Dual blockade of the RAS with angiotensin receptor blockers, ACE inhibitors, or aliskiren is associated with increased risks of hypotension, hyperkalemia, and changes in renal function (including acute renal failure) compared to monotherapy.  Most patients receiving the combination of two RAS inhibitors do not obtain any additional benefit compared to monotherapy. In general, avoid combined use of RAS inhibitors. Closely monitor blood pressure, renal function and electrolytes in patients on Tribenzor and other agents that affect the RAS.
                        Do not co-administer aliskiren with Tribenzor in patients with diabetes [See Contraindications (4)]. Avoid use of aliskiren with Tribenzor in patients with renal impairment (GFR <60 ml/min).
                        
                           Use with Colesevelam Hydrochloride
                        
                        Concurrent administration of bile acid sequestering agent colesevelam hydrochloride reduces the systemic exposure and peak plasma concentration of olmesartan. Administration of olmesartan at least 4 hours prior to colesevelam hydrochloride decreased the drug interaction effect. Consider administering olmesartan at least 4 hours before the colesevelam hydrochloride dose [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                        
                           Lithium
                        
                        Increases in serum lithium concentrations and lithium toxicity have been reported with concomitant use of olmesartan or thiazide diuretics. Monitor lithium levels in patients receiving Tribenzor and lithium.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3 Drug Interactions with Amlodipine
                     
                        
                           In vitro data indicate that amlodipine has no effect on the human plasma protein binding of digoxin, phenytoin, warfarin, and indomethacin.
                        Effect of Other Agents on Amlodipine

                           Cimetidine: Co-administration of amlodipine with cimetidine did not alter the pharmacokinetics of amlodipine.

                           Grapefruit juice: Co-administration of 240 mL of grapefruit juice with a single oral dose of amlodipine 10 mg in 20 healthy volunteers had no significant effect on the pharmacokinetics of amlodipine.

                           Maalox® (antacid): Co-administration of the antacid Maalox with a single dose of amlodipine had no significant effect on the pharmacokinetics of amlodipine.

                           Sildenafil: A single 100 mg dose of sildenafil in patients with essential hypertension had no effect on the pharmacokinetic parameters of amlodipine.  When amlodipine and sildenafil were used in combination, each agent independently exerted its own blood pressure lowering effect.
                        Effect of Amlodipine on Other Agents

                           Atorvastatin: Co-administration of multiple 10 mg doses of amlodipine with 80 mg of atorvastatin resulted in no significant change in the steady state pharmacokinetic parameters of atorvastatin.

                           Digoxin: Co-administration of amlodipine with digoxin did not change serum digoxin levels or digoxin renal clearance in normal volunteers.

                           Ethanol (alcohol): Single and multiple 10 mg doses of amlodipine had no significant effect on the pharmacokinetics of ethanol.

                           Warfarin: Co-administration of amlodipine with warfarin did not change the warfarin prothrombin response time.

                           Simvastatin: Co-administration of multiple doses of 10 mg of amlodipine with 80 mg simvastatin resulted in a 77% increase in exposure to simvastatin compared to simvastatin alone. Limit the dose of simvastatin in patients on amlodipine to 20 mg daily.
                        In clinical trials, amlodipine has been safely administered with thiazide diuretics, beta blockers, ACE inhibitors, long-acting nitrates, sublingual nitroglycerin, digoxin, warfarin, non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, antibiotics, and oral hypoglycemic drugs.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4 Drug Interactions with Hydrochlorothiazide
                     
                        When administered concurrently the following drugs may interact with thiazide diuretics:

                           Alcohol, Barbiturates, or Narcotics: Potentiation of orthostatic hypotension may occur.

                           Antidiabetic Drugs (oral agents and insulin): Dosage adjustment of the antidiabetic drug may be required.

                           Other Antihypertensive Drugs: Additive effect or potentiation.

                           Cholestyramine and Colestipol Resins: Absorption of hydrochlorothiazide is impaired in the presence of anionic exchange resins.  Single dose of either cholestyramine or colestipol resins bind the hydrochlorothiazide and reduce its absorption from the gastrointestinal tract by up to 85% and 43%, respectively.

                           Corticosteroids, ACTH: Intensified electrolyte depletion, particularly hypokalemia.

                           Pressor Amines (e.g., Norepinephrine): Possible decreased response to pressor amines but not sufficient to preclude their use.

                           Skeletal Muscle Relaxants, Non-depolarizing (e.g., Tubocurarine): Possible increased responsiveness to the muscle relaxant.

                           Lithium: Monitor lithium levels [See Drug Interactions (7.2)]
                           

                           Non-steroidal Anti-inflammatory Drugs: In some patients the administration of a non-steroidal anti-inflammatory agent can reduce the diuretic, natriuretic, and antihypertensive effects of loop, potassium-sparing and thiazide diuretics.  Therefore, when hydrochlorothiazide tablets and non-steroidal anti-inflammatory agents are used concomitantly, the patients should be observed closely to determine if the desired effect of the diuretic is obtained.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         