
               
               
               
                  CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  Oxymorphone is an opioid agonist whose principal therapeutic action is analgesia. Administered parenterally, 1 mg of OPANA Injection is approximately equivalent in analgesic activity to 10 mg of morphine sulfate. Other members of the class known as opioid agonists include substances such as morphine, oxycodone, hydromorphone, fentanyl, codeine, hydrocodone and tramadol. In addition to analgesia, other pharmacological effects of opioid agonists include anxiolysis, euphoria, feelings of relaxation, respiratory depression, constipation, miosis, and cough suppression. Like all pure opioid agonist analgesics, with increasing doses there is increasing analgesia, unlike with mixed agonist/antagonists or non-opioid analgesics, where there is a limit to the analgesic effect with increasing doses. With pure opioid agonist analgesics, there is no defined maximum dose; the ceiling to analgesic effectiveness is imposed only by side effects, the more serious of which may include somnolence and respiratory depression.
               
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        Central Nervous System
                     
                     
                        The precise mechanism of the analgesic action is unknown. However, specific CNS (central nervous system) opioid receptors for endogenous compounds with opioid-like activity have been identified throughout the brain and spinal cord and play a role in the analgesic effects of this drug. In addition, opioid receptors have been identified within the PNS (peripheral nervous system). The role that these receptors play in these drugs’ analgesic effects is unknown.
                        Opioids produce respiratory depression, likely by a direct action on brain stem respiratory centers. The respiratory depression involves a reduction in the responsiveness of the brain stem respiratory centers to both increases in carbon dioxide tension and electrical stimulation.
                        Opioids depress the cough reflex by direct effect on the cough center in the medulla oblongata. Antitussive effects may occur with doses lower than those usually required for analgesia. Opioids cause miosis, even in total darkness. Pinpoint pupils are a sign of opioid overdose but are not pathognomonic (e.g., pontine lesions of hemorrhagic or ischemic origin may produce similar findings). Marked mydriasis rather than miosis may be seen with hypoxia in overdose situations (see 
                              OVERDOSAGE: Signs and Symptoms
                           ).
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        Gastrointestinal Tract and Other Smooth Muscle
                     
                     
                        Opioids cause a reduction in motility associated with an increase in smooth muscle tone in the antrum of the stomach and duodenum. Digestion of food in the small intestine is delayed and propulsive contractions are decreased. Propulsive peristaltic waves in the colon are decreased, while tone may be increased to the point of spasm resulting in constipation. Other opioid-induced effects may include a reduction in gastric, biliary and pancreatic secretions, spasms of sphincter of Oddi, and transient elevations in serum amylase.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        Cardiovascular System
                     
                     
                        Opioids produce peripheral vasodilation which may result in orthostatic hypotension. Release of histamine can occur and may contribute to opioid-induced hypotension. Manifestations of histamine release may include orthostatic hypotension, pruritus, flushing, red eyes, and sweating. Animal studies have shown that oxymorphone has a lower propensity to cause histamine release than other opioids.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        Endocrine System
                     
                     
                        Opioid agonists have been shown to have a variety of effects on the secretion of hormones. Opioids inhibit the secretion of ACTH, cortisol, and luteinizing hormone (LH) in humans. They also stimulate prolactin, growth hormone (GH) secretion, and pancreatic secretion of insulin and glucagon in humans and other species, rats and dogs.
                        Thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH) has been shown to be both inhibited and stimulated by opioids.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        Immune System
                     
                     
                        Opioids have been shown to have a variety of effects on components of the immune system in in-vitro and animal models. The clinical significance of these findings is unknown.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        Pharmacodynamics
                     
                     
                        Concentration-Efficacy Relationships
The minimum effective plasma concentration of oxymorphone for analgesia varies widely among patients, especially among patients who have been previously treated with potent agonist opioids. As a result, patients need to be individually titrated to achieve a balance between therapeutic and adverse effects. The minimum effective analgesic concentration of oxymorphone for any individual patient may increase over time due to an increase in pain, progression of disease, development of a new pain syndrome and/or development of analgesic tolerance.
                        Concentration-Adverse Experience Relationships
OPANA Injection is associated with typical opioid-related adverse experiences. There is a general relationship between increasing opioid plasma concentration and increasing frequency of adverse experiences such as nausea, vomiting, CNS effects, and respiratory depression.
                        As with all opioids, the dose must be individualized (see 
                              DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION
                           ). The effective analgesic dose for some patients will be too high to be tolerated by other patients.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        Pharmacokinetics
                     
                     
                        The onset of action of parenterally administered OPANA Injection is rapid; initial effects are usually perceived within 5 to 10 minutes. Its duration of action is approximately 3 to 6 hours.
                        Distribution
After an IV dose, the steady state volume of distribution was 3.08 ± 1.14 L/kg in healthy male and female subjects.
                        Metabolism
Oxymorphone is highly metabolized, principally in the liver, and undergoes reduction or conjugation with glucuronic acid to form both active and inactive products. The two major metabolites of oxymorphone are oxymorphone-3-glucuronide and 6-OH-oxymorphone. The mean plasma AUC for oxymorphone-3-glucuronide is approximately 90-fold higher than the parent compound. The pharmacologic activity of the glucuronide metabolite has not been evaluated. 6-OH-oxymorphone has been shown in animal studies to have analgesic bioactivity. The mean plasma 6-OH-oxymorphone AUC is approximately 70% of the oxymorphone AUC following single oral doses but is essentially equivalent to the parent compound at steady-state.
                        Excretion
Because oxymorphone is extensively metabolized, <1% of the administered dose is excreted unchanged in the urine. On average, 33% to 38% of the administered dose is excreted in the urine as oxymorphone-3-glucuronide and 0.25% to 0.62% is excreted as 6-OH-oxymorphone in subjects with normal hepatic and renal function. In animals given radiolabeled oxymorphone, approximately 90% of the administered radioactivity was recovered within 5 days of dosing. The majority of oxymorphone-derived radioactivity was found in the urine and feces.
                        Special Populations

                           Elderly
                           
The effects of OPANA Injection on the elderly have not been studied. However, the plasma levels of oral oxymorphone administered as an extended-release tablet were about 40% higher in elderly than in younger subjects.
                        
                           Gender
                           
The effects of OPANA Injection on gender have not been studied. However, in a study with an extended-release formulation of oral oxymorphone, there was a consistent tendency for female subjects to have slightly higher AUCss and Cmax values than male subjects. However, gender differences were not observed when AUCss and Cmax were adjusted by body weight.
                        
                           Hepatic Impairment
                           
The effects of hepatic impairment on the pharmacokinetics of OPANA Injection have not been studied. The liver plays an important role in the pre-systemic clearance of orally administered oxymorphone. Accordingly the bioavailability of orally administered oxymorphone may be markedly increased in patients with moderate-severe liver disease. In a study with an extended-release formulation of oral oxymorphone (OPANA ER), the disposition of oxymorphone was compared in 6 patients with mild, 5 patients with moderate, and one patient with severe hepatic impairment, and 12 subjects with normal hepatic function. The bioavailability of oral oxymorphone was increased by 1.6-fold in patients with mild hepatic impairment and by 3.7-fold in patients with moderate hepatic impairment. In one patient with severe hepatic impairment, the bioavailability was increased by 12.2-fold. The half-life of oral oxymorphone was not significantly affected by hepatic impairment.
                        Pre-systemic clearance of OPANA Injection is not expected, however, oxymorphone is extensively metabolized by the liver.
                        
                           Renal Impairment
                           
The effects of renal impairment on the pharmacokinetics of OPANA Injection have not been studied. However, in a study with an extended-release formulation of oral oxymorphone, an increase of 26%, 57%, and 65% in oxymorphone bioavailability was observed in mild (creatinine clearance 51-80 mL/min; n=8), moderate (creatinine clearance 30-50 mL/min; n=8), and severe (creatinine clearance <30 mL/min; n=8) patients, respectively, compared to healthy controls.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        Drug-Drug Interactions
                     
                     
                        
                           In vitro studies revealed little to no biotransformation of oxymorphone to 6-OH-oxymorphone by any of the major cytochrome P450 (CYP P450) isoforms at therapeutically relevant oxymorphone plasma concentrations.
                        No inhibition of any of the major CYP P450 isoforms was observed when oxymorphone was incubated with human liver microsomes at concentrations of ≤50 µM. An inhibition of CYP 3A4 activity occurred at oxymorphone concentrations ≥150 µM. Therefore, it is not expected that oxymorphone, or its metabolites will act as inhibitors of any of the major CYP P450 enzymes in vivo.
                        Increases in the activity of the CYP 2C9 and CYP 3A4 isoforms occurred when oxymorphone was incubated with human hepatocytes. However, clinical drug interaction studies with OPANA ER showed no induction of CYP450 3A4 or 2C9 enzyme activity, indicating that no dose adjustment for CYP 3A4- or 2C9-mediated drug-drug interactions is required. Studies with OPANA Injection have not been conducted.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         