
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY

                  
Following a 
                     single 
dose of two 100 mg capsules of minocycline HCl administered to 18 normal fasting 
adult volunteers, maximum serum concentrations were attained in 1 to 4 hours 
(average 2.1 hours) and ranged from 2.1 to 5.1 μg/mL (average 3.5 μg/mL). The 
serum half-life in the normal volunteers ranged from 11.1 to 22.1 hours (average 
15.5 hours).When minocycline hydrochloride capsules were given concomitantly with a meal 
which included dairy products, the extent of absorption of minocycline 
hydrochloride capsules was not noticeably influenced. The peak plasma 
concentrations were slightly decreased (11.2%) and delayed by one hour when 
administered with food, compared to dosing under fasting conditions.

                  
In previous studies with other minocycline dosage forms, the minocycline serum 
half-life ranged from 11 to 16 hours in 7 patients with hepatic dysfunction, and 
from 18 to 69 hours in 5 patients with renal dysfunction. The urinary and fecal 
recovery of minocycline when administered to 12 normal volunteers was one-half 
to one-third that of other tetracyclines.

                  

                  MicrobiologyThe tetracyclines are primarily bacteriostatic and are thought to 
exert their antimicrobial effect by the inhibition of protein synthesis. The 
tetracyclines, including minocycline, have a similar antimicrobial spectrum of 
activity against a wide range of gram-positive and gram-negative organisms. 
Cross-resistance of these organisms to tetracycline is common.
                  Minocycline has been shown to be active against most strains of the following 
microorganisms, both in vitro and in clinical infections as described in the 

                        INDICATIONS AND 
USAGE
                      section.
                  

                  AEROBIC GRAM-POSITIVE MICROORGANISMSBecause many strains of the following gram-positive 
microorganisms have been shown to be resistant to tetracyclines, culture and 
susceptibility testing are especially recommended. Tetracycline antibiotics 
should not be used for streptococcal diseases unless the organism has been 
demonstrated to be susceptible. Tetracyclines are not the drug of choice in the 
treatment of any 
type of staphylococcal infection.
                  
                     Bacillus anthracis
                     1
                     

                     Listeria monocytogenes
                     1
                     

                     Staphylococcus aureus
                     

                     Streptococcus pneumoniae
                  
                  
                     AEROBIC GRAM-NEGATIVE MICROORGANISMS
                  
                  
                     Bartonella bacilliformis
                     

                     Brucella species

                     Calymmatobacterium 
granulomatis
                     

                     Campylobacter fetus
                     

                     Francisella tularensis
                     

                     Haemophilus 
ducreyi
                     

                     Vibrio cholerae
                     

                     Yersinia pestis
                  
                  Because many strains of the following groups of gram-negative microorganisms 
have been shown to be resistant to tetracyclines, culture and susceptibility 
tests are especially recommended.
                  
                     Acinetobacter species
                        

                     
                     Enterobacter aerogenes
                     
                        

                     
                     Escherichia coli
                     
                        

                     
                     Haemophilus influenzae
                     
                        

                     
                     Klebsiella species
                        

                     
                     Neisseria gonorrhoeae
                     1
                     
                        

                     
                     Neisseria 
meningitidis
                     1
                     
                        

                     
                     Shigella species
                  
                     “OTHER” MICROORGANISMS
                  
                  
                     Actinomyces species1
                     
                        

                     
                     Borrelia recurrentis
                     
                        

                     
                     Chlamydia psittaci
                     
                        

                     
                     Chlamydia trachomatis
                     
                        

                     
                     Clostridium species1
                     
                        

                     
                     Entamoeba 
species
                        

                     
                     Fusobacterium 
nucleatum subspecies fusiforme
                     1
                     
                        

                     
                     Mycobacterium marinum
                     
                        

                     
                     Mycoplasma pneumoniae
                     
                        

                     
                     Propionibacterium acnes
                     
                        

                     Rickettsiae
                        

                     
                     Treponema pallidum subspecies pallidum
                     1
                     
                        

                     
                     Treponema pallidum subspecies pertenue†
                        

                     
                     Ureaplasma urealyticum
                  
                  
                     1When penicillin is contraindicated, tetracyclines are 
alternative drugs in the treatment of infections caused by the cited 
microorganisms.
                  Susceptibility TestsSusceptibility testing should be performed with tetracycline 
since it predicts susceptibility to minocycline. However, certain organisms 
(e.g., some staphylococci, and Acinetobacter species) 
may be more susceptible to minocycline and doxycycline than to tetracycline.
                  
                     Dilution techniques:
                  
                  Quantitative methods are used to determine antimicrobial minimal inhibitory 
concentrations (MICs). These MICs provide estimates of the susceptibility of 
bacteria to antimicrobial compounds. The MICs should be determined using a 
standardized procedure. Standardized procedures are based on a dilution method 
(Ref1, Ref3 (broth or agar) or equivalent with standardized inoculum 
concentrations and standardized concentrations of tetracycline powder. The MIC 
values should be interpreted according to the following criteria:
                  For testing aerobic gram-negative microorganisms (Enterobacteriaceae), Acinetobacter species and Staphylococcus aureus:
                  
                  
                     4These interpretative standards are applicable only to 
agar dilution susceptibility testing using GC agar base and 1% defined growth 
supplements. Ref1
                  A report of “Susceptible” indicates that the pathogen is likely to be 
inhibited if the antimicrobial compound in the blood reaches the concentrations 
usually achievable. A report of “Intermediate” indicates that the result should 
be considered equivocal, and, if the microorganism is not fully susceptible to 
alternative, clinically feasible drugs, the test should be repeated. This 
category implies possible clinical applicability in body sites where the drug is 
physiologically concentrated or in situations where high dosage of drug can be 
used. This category also provides a buffer zone which prevents small 
uncontrolled technical factors from causing major discrepancies in 
interpretation. A report of “Resistant” indicates that the pathogen is not 
likely to be inhibited if the antimicrobial compound in the blood reaches the 
concentrations usually achievable; other therapy should be selected.
                  Standardized susceptibility test procedures require the use of laboratory 
control microorganisms to control the technical aspects of the laboratory 
procedures. Standard tetracycline powder should provide the following MIC 
values:
                  
                     Diffusion techniques:
                  
                  Quantitative methods that require measurement of zone diameters also provide 
reproducible estimates of the susceptibility of bacteria to antimicrobial 
compounds. One such standardized procedure (Ref2, Ref3) requires the use of 
standardized inoculum concentrations. This procedure uses paper disks 
impregnated with 30 μg tetracycline (class disk) or 30 μg minocycline to test 
the susceptibility of microorganisms to minocycline.
                  Reports from the laboratory providing results of the standard single-disk 
susceptibility test with a 30-μg tetracycline or minocycline disk should be 
interpreted according to the following criteria:
                  For testing aerobic gram-negative microorganisms (Enterobac-teriaceae), Acinetobacter species and Staphylococcus aureus:.
                  
                     8These interpretative standards are applicable only to 
disk diffusion testing performed with a 30-μg tetracycline disk. Ref2
                  Interpretation should be as stated above for results using dilution 
techniques. Interpretation involves correlation of the diameter obtained in the 
disk test with the MIC for tetracycline.
                  As with standardized dilution techniques, diffusion methods require the use 
of laboratory control microorganisms that are used to control the technical 
aspects of the laboratory procedures. For the diffusion technique, the 30-μg 
tetracycline or minocycline disk should provide the following zone diameters in 
these laboratory test quality control strains:
               
               
            
         