
                     
                     
                     Drug Interactions
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Inhibitors of CYP3A4 Isozymes
                           
                              Caution is advised when midazolam is administered concomitantly with drugs that are known to inhibit the cytochrome P450 3A4 enzyme system (ie, some drugs in the drug classes of azole antimycotics, protease inhibitors, calcium channel antagonists, and macrolide antibiotics). Drugs such as diltiazem, erythromycin, fluconazole, itraconazole, ketoconazole, saquinavir, and verapamil were shown to significantly increase the Cmax and AUC of orally administered midazolam. These drug interactions may result in increased and prolonged sedation due to a decrease in plasma clearance of midazolam. Although not studied, the potent cytochrome P450 3A4 inhibitors ritanovir and nelfinavir may cause intense and prolonged sedation and respiratory depression due to a decrease in plasma clearance of midazolam. Caution is advised when midazolam HCl syrup is used concomitantly with these drugs. Dose adjustments should be considered and possible prolongation and intensity of effect should be anticipated (see 
                                    CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY: Pharmacokinetics: Special Populations: Drug-Drug Interactions
                                 ).
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Inducers of CYP3A4 Isozymes
                           
                              Cytochrome P450 inducers, such as rifampin, carbamazepine, and phenytoin, induce metabolism and cause a markedly decreased Cmax and AUC of oral midazolam in adult studies. Although clinical studies have not been performed, phenobarbital is expected to have the same effect. Caution is advised when administering midazolam HCl syrup to patients receiving these medications and if necessary dose adjustments should be considered.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           CNS Depressants
                           
                              One case was reported of inadequate sedation with chloral hydrate and later with oral midazolam due to a possible interaction with methylphenidate administered chronically in a 2-year-old boy with a history of Williams syndrome. The difficulty in achieving adequate sedation may have been the result of decreased absorption of the sedatives due to both the gastrointestinal effects and stimulant effects of methylphenidate.
                              The sedative effect of midazolam HCl syrup is accentuated by any concomitantly administered medication which depresses the central nervous system, particularly narcotics (eg, morphine, meperidine and fentanyl), propofol, ketamine, nitrous oxide, secobarbital and droperidol. Consequently, the dose of midazolam HCl syrup should be adjusted according to the type and amount of concomitant medications administered and the desired clinical response (see 
                                    DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION
                                 ).
                              No significant adverse interactions with common premedications (such as atropine, scopolamine, glycopyrrolate, diazepam, hydroxyzine, and other muscle relaxants) or local anesthetics have been observed.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               