
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           Mixed agonist/antagonist and partial agonist opioid analgesics: Avoid use with oxymorphone hydrochloride extended-release tablets because they may reduce analgesic effect of oxymorphone hydrochloride extended-release tablets or precipitate withdrawal symptoms. (7.3)
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1	Alcohol
                     
                        Concomitant use of alcohol with oxymorphone hydrochloride extended-release tablets can result in an increase of oxymorphone plasma levels and potentially fatal overdose of oxymorphone. Instruct patients not to consume alcoholic beverages or use prescription or non-prescription products containing alcohol while on oxymorphone hydrochloride extended-release tablets therapy [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2	CNS Depressants
                     
                        The concomitant use of oxymorphone hydrochloride extended-release tablets with other CNS depressants including sedatives, hypnotics, tranquilizers, general anesthetics, phenothiazines, other opioids, and alcohol can increase the risk of respiratory depression, profound sedation, coma and death. Monitor patients receiving CNS depressants and oxymorphone hydrochloride extended-release tablets for signs of respiratory depression, sedation and hypotension.
                        When combined therapy with any of the above medications is considered, the dose of one or both agents should be reduced [see Dosage and Administration (2.2) and Warnings and Precautions (5.4)].
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3 Interactions with Mixed Agonist/Antagonist and Partial Agonist Opioid Analgesics
                     
                        Mixed agonist/antagonist analgesics (i.e., pentazocine, nalbuphine, and butorphanol), and partial agonists (buprenorphine) may reduce the analgesic effect of oxymorphone hydrochloride extended-release tablets or precipitate withdrawal symptoms. Avoid the use of mixed agonist/antagonist and partial agonist analgesics in patients receiving oxymorphone hydrochloride extended-release tablets.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4 Muscle Relaxants
                     
                        Oxymorphone may enhance the neuromuscular blocking action of skeletal muscle relaxants and produce an increased degree of respiratory depression. Monitor patients receiving muscle relaxants and oxymorphone hydrochloride extended-release tablets for signs of respiratory depression that may be greater than otherwise expected.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.5 Cimetidine
                     
                        Cimetidine can potentiate opioid-induced respiratory depression. Monitor patients for respiratory depression when oxymorphone hydrochloride extended-release tablets and cimetidine are used concurrently.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.6 Anticholinergics
                     
                        Anticholinergics or other medications with anticholinergic activity when used concurrently with opioid analgesics may result in increased risk of urinary retention and/or severe constipation, which may lead to paralytic ileus. Monitor patients for signs of respiratory and central nervous system depression when oxymorphone hydrochloride extended-release tablets are used concurrently with anticholinergic drugs.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         