
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        DUEXIS is fixed-combination tablet of ibuprofen and famotidine
                        Ibuprofen possesses analgesic and antipyretic activities. Its mode of action, like that of other NSAIDs, is not completely understood, but may be related to prostaglandin synthetase inhibition.
                        Famotidine is a competitive inhibitor of histamine H2-receptors. The primary clinically important pharmacologic activity of famotidine is inhibition of gastric secretion. Both the acid concentration and volume of gastric secretion are suppressed by famotidine, while changes in pepsin secretion are proportional to volume output.
                        Systemic effects of famotidine in the CNS, cardiovascular, respiratory, or endocrine systems were not noted in clinical pharmacology studies. Also, no antiandrogenic effects were noted. Serum hormone levels, including prolactin, cortisol, thyroxine (T4), and testosterone, were not altered after treatment with famotidine.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        No pharmacodynamic studies were conducted.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Absorption
                              
                              Ibuprofen and famotidine are rapidly absorbed after a single dose administration of DUEXIS. Mean Cmax values for ibuprofen are 45 µg/mL and are reached approximately 1.9 hours after oral administration of DUEXIS. The Cmax and AUC0-24hours values for the 800 mg of ibuprofen contained in a DUEXIS tablet are bioequivalent to the values for 800 mg of ibuprofen administered alone. Cmax values for famotidine were 61 ng/mL and are reached at approximately 2 hours after oral administration of DUEXIS.
                              A high-fat meal reduced famotidine Cmax and AUC by approximately by 15% and 11%, respectively, and reduced ibuprofen AUC by approximately 14% but did not change Cmax. Food delayed famotidine Tmax and ibuprofen Tmax by approximately 1 hour and 0.2 hour, respectively.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Distribution
                              
                              Ibuprofen is extensively bound to plasma proteins.
                              Fifteen to 20% of famotidine in plasma is protein bound.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Metabolism
                              
                              The only metabolite of famotidine identified in man is the S-oxide.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Excretion
                              
                              Ibuprofen is eliminated from the systemic circulation with a mean half-life (t1/2) value of 2 hours following administration of a single dose of DUEXIS.
                              Ibuprofen is rapidly metabolized and eliminated in the urine. The excretion of ibuprofen is virtually complete 24 hours after the last dose.
                              Studies have shown that following ingestion of the drug, 45% to 79% of the dose was recovered in the urine within 24 hours as metabolite A (25%), (+)-2-[p-(2-hydroxymethyl-propyl) phenyl] propionic acid and metabolite B (37%), (+)-2-[p-(2-carboxypropyl)phenyl] propionic acid; the percentages of free and conjugated ibuprofen were approximately 1% and 14%, respectively.
                              Famotidine is eliminated from the systemic circulation with a mean t1/2 value of 4 hours following administration of a single dose of DUEXIS.
                              Famotidine is eliminated by renal (65-70%) and metabolic (30-35%) routes. Renal clearance is 250-450 mL/min, indicating some tubular excretion. Twenty-five to 30% of an oral dose and 65-70% of an intravenous dose are recovered in the urine as unchanged compound.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Special Populations
                              
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    Gender:  The effects of gender on the pharmacokinetics of ibuprofen or famotidine after administration of DUEXIS have not been evaluated.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    Age:  The effects of age on the pharmacokinetics of ibuprofen or famotidine after administration of DUEXIS have not been evaluated.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    Pediatrics:  The pharmacokinetics of ibuprofen or famotidine after administration of DUEXIS have not been evaluated in a pediatric population considering the doses of ibuprofen and famotidine in DUEXIS are targeted for use in an adult population.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    Renal impairment:  There is a close relationship between creatinine clearance values and the elimination t1/2 of famotidine, which is a component of DUEXIS tablets. In patients with creatinine clearance <50 mL/min, the elimination t1/2 of famotidine is increased and may exceed 20 hours. Therefore, DUEXIS is not recommended in patients with creatinine clearance < 50 mL/min. [see Warnings and Precautions (5.7)
                                       ].
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    Hepatic impairment:  The effects of hepatic impairment on the pharmacokinetics of ibuprofen or famotidine after administration of DUEXIS have not been evaluated [see Warnings and Precautions (5.11)
                                       ].
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         