
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
                  Co-administration of ibuprofen (800 mg) and famotidine (40 mg) increased ibuprofen Cmax by 15.6% but did not affect its AUC, and increased famotidine AUC and Cmax by 16% and 22%, respectively.
                  Studies with famotidine in man, in animal models, and in vitro have shown no significant interference with the disposition of compounds metabolized by the hepatic microsomal enzymes, e.g., cytochrome P450 system. Compounds tested in man include warfarin, theophylline, phenytoin, diazepam, aminopyrine and antipyrine. Indocyanine green as an index of hepatic drug extraction has been tested, and no significant effects have been found.
               
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           Warfarin-type anticoagulants:  Concomitant use of NSAIDs and anticoagulants (e.g., warfarin) increases the risk of serious GI bleeding. (7.1) 
                           Aspirin:  Concomitant administration with other NSAIDs, including aspirin, may increase the risk of adverse reactions, including GI bleeding. (7.2)
                           ACE-inhibitors and diuretics: Ibuprofen, a component of DUEXIS, may reduce the effectiveness of these drugs (7.3, 7.4)
                           Lithium:  Ibuprofen, a component of DUEXIS, may increase lithium levels (7.5) 
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1	Warfarin-Type Anticoagulants
                     
                        Several short-term controlled studies failed to show that ibuprofen significantly affected prothrombin times or a variety of other clotting factors when administered to individuals on coumarin-type anticoagulants. However, because bleeding has been reported when ibuprofen and other NSAIDs have been administered to patients on coumarin-type anticoagulants, prescribers should be cautious when administering ibuprofen to patients on anticoagulants. The effects of warfarin and NSAIDs on GI bleeding are synergistic, such that the users of both drugs together have a risk of serious GI bleeding higher than users of either drug alone [see Warnings and Precautions (5.4, 5.14)].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2	Aspirin
                     
                        When ibuprofen, which is a component of DUEXIS tablets, is administered with aspirin, its protein binding is reduced, although the clearance of free ibuprofen is not altered. The clinical significance of this interaction is not known. As with other NSAIDs, the concurrent use of aspirin and DUEXIS may increase the risk of adverse events [see Warnings and Precautions (5.1, 5.4), Adverse Reactions (6), and Clinical Studies (14)].
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3	ACE-Inhibitors
                     
                        Reports suggest that ibuprofen, a component of DUEXIS, may diminish the antihypertensive effect of ACE-inhibitors. This interaction should be given consideration in patients taking DUEXIS concomitantly with ACE-inhibitors. During concomitant therapy with DUEXIS, the patient should be observed closely for signs of renal failure [see Warnings and Precautions (5.6)].
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4	Diuretics
                     
                        Clinical studies, as well as postmarketing observations, have shown that ibuprofen, which is a component of DUEXIS, can reduce the natriuretic effect of furosemide and thiazides in some patients. This response has been attributed to inhibition of renal prostaglandin synthesis. During concomitant therapy with DUEXIS, the patient should be observed closely for signs of renal failure [see Warnings and Precautions (5.6)
                           ], as well as to assure diuretic efficacy.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.5	Lithium
                     
                        Ibuprofen, which is a component of DUEXIS tablets, produced an elevation of plasma lithium levels and a reduction in renal lithium clearance in a study of 11 normal volunteers. The mean minimum lithium concentration increased 15% and the renal clearance of lithium was decreased by 20% during this period of concomitant ibuprofen drug administration. This effect has been attributed to inhibition of renal prostaglandin synthesis by ibuprofen. Thus, when ibuprofen and lithium are administered concurrently, patients should be observed carefully for signs of lithium toxicity.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.6	Methotrexate
                     
                        NSAIDs have been reported to competitively inhibit methotrexate accumulation in rabbit kidney slices. NSAIDs have been reported to reduce the tubular secretion of methotrexate in an animal model. This may indicate that they could enhance the toxicity of methotrexate. Caution should be used when NSAIDs are administered concomitantly with methotrexate.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.7	Selective Serotonin Reuptake Inhibitors (SSRIs)
                     
                        There is an increased risk of gastrointestinal bleeding when selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) are combined with NSAIDs including COX-2 selective inhibitors. Caution should be used when NSAIDs are administered concomitantly with SSRIs [see Warnings and Precautions (5.4)
                           ].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.8	Cholestyramine
                     
                        As with other NSAIDs, concomitant administration of cholestyramine can delay the absorption of ibuprofen, a component of DUEXIS.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         