
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Azacitidine for Injection is a pyrimidine nucleoside analog of cytidine. Azacitidine for Injection is believed to exert its antineoplastic effects by causing hypomethylation of DNA and direct cytotoxicity on abnormal hematopoietic cells in the bone marrow. The concentration of azacitidine required for maximum inhibition of DNA methylation in vitro does not cause major suppression of DNA synthesis. Hypomethylation may restore normal function to genes that are critical for differentiation and proliferation. The cytotoxic effects of azacitidine cause the death of rapidly dividing cells, including cancer cells that are no longer responsive to normal growth control mechanisms. Non-proliferating cells are relatively insensitive to azacitidine.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        The pharmacokinetics of azacitidine were studied in 6 MDS patients following a single 75 mg/m2 subcutaneous (SC) dose and a single 75 mg/m2 intravenous (IV) dose. Azacitidine is rapidly absorbed after SC administration; the peak plasma azacitidine concentration of 750 ± 403 ng/ml occurred in 0.5 hour. The bioavailability of SC azacitidine relative to IV azacitidine is approximately 89%, based on area under the curve. Mean volume of distribution following IV dosing is 76 ± 26 L. Mean apparent SC clearance is 167 ± 49 L/hour and mean half-life after SC administration is 41 ± 8 minutes. The AUC and Cmax of SC administration of azacitidine in 21 patients with cancer were approximately dose proportional within the 25 to 100 mg/m2 dose range. Multiple dosing at the recommended dose-regimen does not result in drug accumulation.
                        Published studies indicate that urinary excretion is the primary route of elimination of azacitidine and its metabolites. Following IV administration of radioactive azacitidine to 5 cancer patients, the cumulative urinary excretion was 85% of the radioactive dose. Fecal excretion accounted for <1% of administered radioactivity over 3 days. Mean excretion of radioactivity in urine following SC administration of 14C-azacitidine was 50%. The mean elimination half-lives of total radioactivity (azacitidine and its metabolites) were similar after IV and SC administrations, about 4 hours.
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Specific Populations
                              
                              In patients with cancer the pharmacokinetics of azacitidine in 6 patients with normal renal function (CLcr > 80 mL/min) and 6 patients with severe renal impairment (CLcr < 30 mL/min) were compared following daily SC dosing (Days 1 through 5) at 75 mg/m2/day. Severe renal impairment increased azacitidine exposure by approximately 70% after single and 41% after multiple subcutaneous administrations. This increase in exposure was not correlated with an increase in adverse events. The exposure was similar to exposure in patients with normal renal function receiving 100 mg/m2. Therefore, a Cycle 1 dose modification is not recommended.
                              The effects of hepatic impairment, gender, age, or race on the pharmacokinetics of azacitidine have not been studied.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Drug-Drug Interactions
                              
                              No formal clinical drug interaction studies with azacitidine have been conducted.
                              An in vitro study of azacitidine incubation in human liver fractions indicated that azacitidine may be metabolized by the liver. Whether azacitidine metabolism may be affected by known microsomal enzyme inhibitors or inducers has not been studied.
                              An in vitro study with cultured human hepatocytes indicated that azacitidine at concentrations up to 100 µM (IV Cmax = 10.6 µM) does not cause any inhibition of CYP2B6 and CYP2C8.
                              The potential of azacitidine to inhibit other cytochrome P450 (CYP) enzymes is not known.
                              
                                 In vitro studies with human cultured hepatocytes indicate that azacitidine at concentrations of 1.0 μM to 100 μM does not induce CYP 1A2, 2C19, or 3A4/5.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         