
                     
                     
                     Drug Interactions
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Dual Blockade of the Renin-Angiotensin System (RAS)
                              
                           
                           
                              Dual blockade of the RAS with angiotensin receptor blockers, ACE inhibitors, or aliskiren is associated with increased risks of hypotension, hyperkalemia, and changes in renal function (including acute renal failure) compared to monotherapy. Most patients receiving the combination of two RAS inhibitors do not obtain any additional benefit compared to monotherapy. In general, avoid combined use of RAS inhibitors. Closely monitor blood pressure, renal function and electrolytes in patients on captopril and other agents that block the RAS. 
                              Do not coadminister aliskiren with captopril in patients with diabetes. Avoid use of aliskiren with captopril in patients with renal impairment (GFR < 60 ml/min). 
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Non-Steroidal Anti-Inflammatory Agents including Selective Cyclooxygenase-2 Inhibitors (COX-2 Inhibitors)
                                 
                                    In patients who are elderly, volume-depleted (including those on diuretic therapy), or with compromised renal function, coadministration of NSAIDs, including selective COX-2 inhibitors, with ACE inhibitors, including captopril, may result in deterioration of renal function, including possible acute renal failure. These effects are usually reversible.  Monitor renal function periodically in patients receiving captopril and NSAID therapy. The antihypertensive effect of ACE inhibitors, including captopril, may be attenuated by NSAIDs.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Hypotension–Patients on Diuretic Therapy 
                                 
                                    Patients on diuretics and especially those in whom diuretic therapy was recently instituted, as well as those on severe dietary salt restriction or dialysis, may occasionally experience a precipitous reduction of blood pressure usually within the first hour after receiving the initial dose of captopril.
                                    The possibility of hypotensive effects with captopril can be minimized by either discontinuing the diuretic or increasing the salt intake approximately one week prior to initiation of treatment with captopril or initiating therapy with small doses (6.25 mg or 12.5 mg). Alternatively, provide medical supervision for at least one hour after the initial dose. If hypotension occurs, the patient should be placed in a supine position and, if necessary, receive an intravenous infusion of normal saline. This transient hypotensive response is not a contraindication to further doses which can be given without difficulty once the blood pressure has increased after volume expansion.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Agents Having Vasodilator Activity
                              
                           
                           
                              Data on the effect of concomitant use of other vasodilators in patients receiving captopril for heart failure are not available; therefore, nitroglycerin or other nitrates (as used for management of angina) or other drugs having vasodilator activity should, if possible, be discontinued before starting captopril. If resumed during captopril therapy, such agents should be administered cautiously, and perhaps at lower dosage.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Agents Causing Renin Release
                              
                           
                           
                              Captopril's effect will be augmented by antihypertensive agents that cause renin release. For example, diuretics (e.g., thiazides) may activate the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Agents Affecting Sympathetic Activity
                              
                           
                           
                              The sympathetic nervous system may be especially important in supporting blood pressure in patients receiving captopril alone or with diuretics. Therefore, agents affecting sympathetic activity (e.g., ganglionic blocking agents or adrenergic neuron blocking agents) should be used with caution. Beta-adrenergic blocking drugs add some further antihypertensive effect to captopril, but the overall response is less than additive.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Agents Increasing Serum Potassium
                              
                           
                           
                              Since captopril decreases aldosterone production, elevation of serum potassium may occur. Potassium-sparing diuretics such as spironolactone, triamterene, or amiloride, or potassium supplements should be given only for documented hypokalemia, and then with caution, since they may lead to a significant increase of serum potassium. Salt substitutes containing potassium should also be used with caution.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Lithium
                              
                           
                           
                              Increased serum lithium levels and symptoms of lithium toxicity have been reported in patients receiving concomitant lithium and ACE inhibitor therapy. These drugs should be coadministered with caution and frequent monitoring of serum lithium levels is recommended. If a diuretic is also used, it may increase the risk of lithium toxicity.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Cardiac Glycosides
                              
                           
                           
                              In a study of young healthy male subjects no evidence of a direct pharmacokinetic captopril-digoxin interaction could be found.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Loop Diuretics
                              
                           
                           
                              Furosemide administered concurrently with captopril does not alter the pharmacokinetics of captopril in renally impaired hypertensive patients.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Allopurinol
                              
                           
                           
                              In a study of healthy male volunteers no significant pharmacokinetic interaction occurred when captopril and allopurinol were administered concomitantly for 6 days.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               