
               
               
               
                  7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              Cimetidine increases nicardipine plasma levels (7.3).
                           
                           
                              Nicardipine increases cyclosporine plasma levels. Monitor cyclosporine levels when co-administering with nicardipine (7.5).
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        7.1 Antihypertensive Agents
                     
                     
                        Since nicardipine hydrochloride injection may be administered to patients already being treated with other medications, including other antihypertensive agents, careful monitoring of these patients is necessary to detect and to treat promptly any undesired effects from concomitant administration. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        7.2 Beta-Blockers
                     
                     
                        In most patients, nicardipine hydrochloride injection can safely be used concomitantly with beta-blockers. However, monitor response carefully when combining nicardipine hydrochloride injection with a beta-blocker in the treatment of congestive heart failure patients [see Warnings and Precautions (5.4)].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        7.3 Cimetidine
                     
                     
                        Cimetidine has been shown to increase nicardipine plasma concentrations with oral nicardipine administration. Carefully monitor patients receiving the two drugs concomitantly. Data with other histamine-2 antagonists are not available.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        7.4 Digoxin
                     
                     
                        Studies have shown that oral nicardipine usually does not alter digoxin plasma concentrations. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        7.5 Cyclosporine
                     
                     
                        Concomitant administration of oral nicardipine and cyclosporine results in elevated plasma cyclosporine levels. Monitor closely plasma concentrations of cyclosporine during nicardipine hydrochloride injection administration, and adjust the dose of cyclosporine accordingly. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        7.6 In Vitro Interaction
                     
                     
                        The plasma protein binding of nicardipine was not altered when therapeutic concentrations of furosemide, propranolol, dipyridamole, warfarin, quinidine, or naproxen were added to human plasma in vitro. 
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         