
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           MAO-A inhibitors: sumatriptan plasma levels nearly doubled; concurrent use ordinarily not recommended (
                                 5.7
                              , 
                                 7.1
                              )
                           Do not use Alsuma and ergotamine-containing or ergot-type medications within 24 hours of each other. (4.6, 7.2)
                           Do not use Alsuma and other 5HT1 agonists (e.g. triptans) within 24 hours of each other. (
                                 4.6
                              , 
                                 7.3
                              )
                           SSRI/SNRI: life-threatening serotonin syndrome reported during combined use with triptans (
                                 5.5
                              , 
                                 7.4
                              )
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 Monoamine Oxidase Inhibitors
                     
                        MAO-A inhibitors reduce sumatriptan clearance, significantly increasing systemic exposure. Therefore, the use of sumatriptan in patients receiving MAO-A inhibitors is not ordinarily recommended. If the clinical situation warrants the combined use of sumatriptan and an MAOI, the dose of sumatriptan employed should be reduced. [see Warnings and Precautions (5.7)
                           
                           and Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)]
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 5-HT1B/1D agonists (e.g. triptans)
                     
                        Concomitant use of other 5-HT1B/1D agonists within 24 hours of sumatriptan treatment is not recommended. [see Contraindications (4.6)]
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3 Ergot-Containing Drugs
                     
                        Ergot-containing drugs have been reported to cause prolonged vasospastic reactions. Since these effects may be additive, use of ergotamine containing or ergot-type medications (like dihydroergotamine or methysergide) and sumatriptan within 24 hours of each other should be avoided. [see  Contraindications (4.6)]
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4 Selective Serotonin Reuptake Inhibitors/Serotonin Norepinephrine Reuptake Inhibitors and Serotonin Syndrome
                     
                        Cases of life-threatening serotonin syndrome have been reported during combined use of selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) or serotonin norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs) and triptans. If concomitant treatment with sumatriptan injection is clinically warranted, careful observation of the patient is advised, particularly during treatment initiation and dose increases. [see Warnings and Precautions (5.5)]
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         