
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY 
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Mechanism of Action 
                     
                        The Glyburide and Metformin Hydrochloride product combines glyburide and metformin hydrochloride, two antihyperglycemic agents with complementary mechanisms of action, to improve glycemic control in patients with type 2 diabetes.
                        Glyburide appears to lower blood glucose acutely by stimulating the release of insulin from the pancreas, an effect dependent upon functioning beta cells in the pancreatic islets. The mechanism by which glyburide lowers blood glucose during long-term administration has not been clearly established. With chronic administration in patients with type 2 diabetes, the blood glucose lowering effect persists despite a gradual decline in the insulin secretory response to the drug. Extrapancreatic effects may be involved in the mechanism of action of oral sulfonylurea hypoglycemic drugs.
                        Metformin hydrochloride is an antihyperglycemic agent that improves glucose tolerance in patients with type 2 diabetes, lowering both basal and postprandial plasma glucose. Metformin hydrochloride decreases hepatic glucose production, decreases intestinal absorption of glucose, and improves insulin sensitivity by increasing peripheral glucose uptake and utilization.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Pharmacokinetics 
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Absorption and Bioavailability
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    Glyburide and Metformin Hydrochloride 
                                 
                                 
                                    In bioavailability studies of glyburide and metformin hydrochloride 2.5 mg/500 mg and 5 mg/500 mg, the mean area under the plasma concentration versus time curve (AUC) for the glyburide component was 18% and 7% respectively, greater than that of the Micronase® brand of glyburide coadministered with metformin. The glyburide component of glyburide and metformin HCl, therefore, is not bioequivalent to Micronase®. The metformin component of glyburide and metformin hydrochloride is bioequivalent to metformin coadministered with glyburide.
                                    Following administration of a single Glyburide and Metformin Hydrochloride 5 mg/500 mg tablet with either a 20% glucose solution or a 20% glucose solution with food, there was no effect of food on the Cmax and a relatively small effect of food on the AUC of the glyburide component. The Tmax for the glyburide component was shortened from 7.5 hours to 2.75 hours with food compared to the same tablet strength administered fasting with a 20% glucose solution. The clinical significance of an earlier Tmax for glyburide after food is not known. The effect of food on the pharmacokinetics of the metformin component was indeterminate.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    Glyburide 
                                 
                                 
                                    Single-dose studies with Micronase® (Glyburide) tablets in normal subjects demonstrate significant absorption of glyburide within one hour, peak drug levels at about four hours, and low but detectable levels at twenty-four hours. Mean serum levels of glyburide, as reflected by areas under the serum concentration-time curve, increase in proportion to corresponding increases in dose. Bioequivalence has not been established between Glyburide and Metformin Hydrochloride combination product and single ingredient glyburide products.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    Metformin hydrochloride 
                                 
                                 
                                    The absolute bioavailability of a 500 mg metformin hydrochloride tablet given under fasting conditions is approximately 50 to 60%. Studies using single oral doses of metformin tablets of 500 mg and 1500 mg, and 850 mg to 2550 mg, indicate that there is a lack of dose proportionality with increasing doses, which is due to decreased absorption rather than an alteration in elimination. Food decreases the extent of and slightly delays the absorption of metformin, as shown by approximately a 40% lower peak concentration and a 25% lower AUC in plasma and a 35-minute prolongation of time to peak plasma concentration following administration of a single 850 mg tablet of metformin with food, compared to the same tablet strength administered fasting. The clinical relevance of these decreases is unknown.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Distribution
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    Glyburide 
                                 
                                 
                                    Sulfonylurea drugs are extensively bound to serum proteins. Displacement from protein binding sites by other drugs may lead to enhanced hypoglycemic action. In vitro, the protein binding exhibited by glyburide is predominantly non-ionic, whereas that of other sulfonylureas (chlorpropamide, tolbutamide, tolazamide) is predominantly ionic.
                                    Acidic drugs such as phenylbutazone, warfarin, and salicylates displace the ionic-binding sulfonylureas from serum proteins to a far greater extent than the non-ionic binding glyburide. It has not been shown that this difference in protein binding results in fewer drug-drug interactions with glyburide tablets in clinical use.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    Metformin hydrochloride 
                                 
                                 
                                    The apparent volume of distribution (V/F) of metformin following single oral doses of 850 mg averaged 654±358 L. Metformin is negligibly bound to plasma proteins. Metformin partitions into erythrocytes, most likely as a function of time. At usual clinical doses and dosing schedules of metformin, steady state plasma concentrations of metformin are reached within 24 to 48 hours and are generally <1 μg/mL. During controlled clinical trials, maximum metformin plasma levels did not exceed 5 μg/mL, even at maximum doses.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Metabolism and Elimination
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    Glyburide 
                                 
                                 
                                    The decrease of glyburide in the serum of normal healthy individuals is biphasic; the terminal half-life is about 10 hours. The major metabolite of glyburide is the 4-trans-hydroxy derivative. A second metabolite, the 3-cis-hydroxy derivative, also occurs. These metabolites probably contribute no significant hypoglycemic action in humans since they are only weakly active (1/400th and 1/40th as active, respectively, as glyburide) in rabbits. Glyburide is excreted as metabolites in the bile and urine, approximately 50% by each route. This dual excretory pathway is qualitatively different from that of other sulfonylureas, which are excreted primarily in the urine.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    Metformin hydrochloride 
                                 
                                 
                                    Intravenous single-dose studies in normal subjects demonstrate that metformin is excreted unchanged in the urine and does not undergo hepatic metabolism (no metabolites have been identified in humans) nor biliary excretion. Renal clearance (see Table 1) is approximately 3.5 times greater than creatinine clearance, which indicates that tubular secretion is the major route of metformin elimination. Following oral administration, approximately 90% of the absorbed drug is eliminated via the renal route within the first 24 hours, with a plasma elimination half-life of approximately 6.2 hours. In blood, the elimination half-life is approximately 17.6 hours, suggesting that the erythrocyte mass may be a compartment of distribution.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Special Populations
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    Patients with Type 2 Diabetes 
                                 
                                 
                                    Multiple-dose studies with glyburide in patients with type 2 diabetes demonstrate drug level concentration-time curves similar to single-dose studies, indicating no build-up of drug in tissue depots.
                                    In the presence of normal renal function, there are no differences between single- or multiple-dose pharmacokinetics of metformin between patients with type 2 diabetes and normal subjects (see Table 1), nor is there any accumulation of metformin in either group at usual clinical doses.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    Hepatic Insufficiency 
                                 
                                 
                                    No pharmacokinetic studies have been conducted in patients with hepatic insufficiency for either glyburide or metformin.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    Renal Insufficiency 
                                 
                                 
                                    No information is available on the pharmacokinetics of glyburide in patients with renal insufficiency.
                                    In patients with decreased renal function (based on creatinine clearance), the plasma and blood half-life of metformin is prolonged and the renal clearance is decreased in proportion to the decrease in creatinine clearance (see Table 1; also, see WARNINGS).
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    Geriatrics 
                                 
                                 
                                    There is no information on the pharmacokinetics of glyburide in elderly patients.
                                    Limited data from controlled pharmacokinetic studies of metformin in healthy elderly subjects suggest that total plasma clearance is decreased, the half-life is prolonged, and Cmax is increased, compared to healthy young subjects. From these data, it appears that the change in metformin pharmacokinetics with aging is primarily accounted for by a change in renal function (see Table 1). Metformin treatment should not be initiated in patients ≥ 80 years of age unless measurement of creatinine clearance demonstrates that renal function is not reduced.
                                    


                                 



                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    Pediatrics 
                                 
                                 
                                    After administration of a single oral metformin hydrochloride 500 mg tablet with food, geometric mean metformin Cmax and AUC differed < 5% between pediatric type 2 diabetic patients (12 to 16 years of age) and gender- and weight-matched healthy adults (20 to 45 years of age), all with normal renal function.
                                    After administration of a single oral Glyburide and Metformin Hydrochloride tablet with food, dose-normalized geometric mean glyburide Cmax and AUC in pediatric patients with type 2 diabetes (11 to 16 years of age, n=28, mean body weight of 97 kg) differed <6% from historical values in healthy adults.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    Gender 
                                 
                                 
                                    There is no information on the effect of gender on the pharmacokinetics of glyburide.
                                    Metformin pharmacokinetic parameters did not differ significantly in subjects with or without type 2 diabetes when analyzed according to gender (males = 19, females = 16). Similarly, in controlled clinical studies in patients with type 2 diabetes, the antihyperglycemic effect of metformin was comparable in males and females.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    Race 
                                 
                                 
                                    No information is available on race differences in the pharmacokinetics of glyburide.
                                    No studies of metformin pharmacokinetic parameters according to race have been performed. In controlled clinical studies of metformin in patients with type 2 diabetes, the antihyperglycemic effect was comparable in whites (n=249), blacks (n=51), and Hispanics (n=24).
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         