
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS

               
                  
                     In vitro studies indicate that the plasma protein binding of zoledronic acid is low, with the unbound fraction ranging from 60%-77%. In vitro studies also indicate that zoledronic acid does not inhibit microsomal CYP450 enzymes. In vivo studies showed that zoledronic acid is not metabolized, and is excreted into the urine as the intact drug.

               
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           Aminoglycosides: May have an additive effect to lower serum calcium for prolonged periods. (7.1)

                           Loop diuretics: Concomitant use with Zoledronic Acid Injection may increase risk of hypocalcemia. (7.2)

                           Nephrotoxic drugs: Use with caution. (7.3)

                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 Aminoglycosides and Calcitonin

                     
                        Caution is advised when bisphosphonates are administered with aminoglycosides or calcitonin, since these agents may have an additive effect to lower serum calcium level for prolonged periods. This effect has not been reported in Zoledronic Acid Injection clinical trials. 

                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 Loop Diuretics

                     
                        Caution should also be exercised when Zoledronic Acid Injection is used in combination with loop diuretics due to an increased risk of hypocalcemia.

                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3 Nephrotoxic Drugs

                     
                        Caution is indicated when Zoledronic Acid Injection is used with other potentially nephrotoxic drugs.

                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4 Thalidomide

                     
                        No dose adjustment for Zoledronic Acid Injection 4 mg is needed when coadministered with thalidomide. In a pharmacokinetic study of 24 patients with multiple myeloma, Zoledronic Acid Injection 4 mg given as a 15-minute infusion was administered either alone or with thalidomide (100 mg once daily on days 1-14 and 200 mg once daily on days 15-28). Coadministration of thalidomide with Zoledronic Acid Injection did not significantly change the pharmacokinetics of zoledronic acid or creatinine clearance.

                     
                     
                  
               
            
         