


CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
High plasma levels of cefotetan are attained after intravenous and intramuscular administration of single doses to normal volunteers.





The plasma elimination half-life of cefotetan is 3 to 4.6 hours after either intravenous or intramuscular administration.Repeated administration of CEFOTAN does not result inaccumulation of the drug in normal subjects.Cefotetan is 88% plasma protein bound.No active metabolites of cefotetan have been detected; however, small amounts (less than 7%) of cefotetan in plasma and urine may be converted to its tautomer, which has antimicrobial activity similar to the parent drug.In normal patients, from 51% to 81% of an administered dose of CEFOTAN is excreted unchanged by the kidneys over a 24 hour period, which results in high and prolonged urinary concentrations. Following intravenous doses of 1 gram and 2 grams, urinary concentrations are highest during the first hour and reach concentrations of approximately 1700 and 3500 µg/mL respectively.In volunteers with reduced renal function, the plasma half-life of cefotetan is prolonged. The mean terminal half-life increases with declining renal function, from approximately 4 hours in volunteers with normal renal function to about 10 hours in those with moderate renal impairment. There is a linear correlation between the systemic clearance of cefotetan and creatinine clearance. When renal function is impaired, a reduced dosing schedule based on creatinine clearance must be used. (see DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION).DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION).In pharmacokinetics studies of eight elderly patients (greater than 65 years) with normal renal function and six healthy volunteers (aged 25 to 28 years), mean (± 1sd) Total Body Clearance (1.8(0.1) L/h vs. 1.8 (0.3) L/h) and mean Volume of Distribution (10.4(1.2) L vs. 10.3 (1.6)L) were similar following administration of a one gram intravenous bolus dose.Therapeutic levels of cefotetan are achieved in many body tissues and fluids including:










Microbiology
The bactericidal action of cefotetan results from inhibition of cell wall synthesis. Cefotetan has in vitro activity against a wide range of aerobic and anaerobic gram-positive and gram-negative organisms. The methoxy group in the 7-alpha position provides cefotetan with a high degree of stability in the presence of beta-lactamases including both penicillinases and cephalosporinases of gram-negative bacteria.in vitro activity against a wide range of aerobic and anaerobic gram-positive and gram-negative organisms. The methoxy group in the 7-alpha position provides cefotetan with a high degree of stability in the presence of beta-lactamases including both penicillinases and cephalosporinases of gram-negative bacteria.Cefotetan has been shown to be active against most strains of the following organisms both in vitro and in clinical infections (see INDICATIONS AND USAGE).both in vitro and in clinical infections (see INDICATIONS AND USAGE).







Gram-Negative Aerobes
Escherichia coliEscherichia coliHaemophilus influenzae (including ampicillin-resistant strains)Haemophilus influenzae (including ampicillin-resistant strains)Klebsiella species (including K. pneumoniae)Klebsiella species (including Morganella morganiiMorganella morganiiNeisseria gonorrhoeae (nonpenicillinase-producing strains)Neisseria gonorrhoeae (nonpenicillinase-producing strains)Proteus mirabilisProteus mirabilisProteus vulgarisProteus vulgarisProvidencia rettgeriProvidencia rettgeriSerratia marcescensSerratia marcescensNOTE:  Approximately one-half of the usually clinically significant strains of Enterobacter species (eg, E. aerogenes and E. cloacae) are resistant to cefotetan. Most strains of Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Acinetobacter species are resistant to cefotetan.NOTE:  Approximately one-half of the usually clinically significant strains of 







Gram-Positive Aerobes
Staphylococcus aureus (including penicillinase- andStaphylococcus aureus (including penicillinase- andnonpenicillinase-producing strains)Staphylococcus epidermidisStaphylococcus epidermidisStreptococcus agalactiae (group B beta-hemolytic streptococcus)Streptococcus agalactiae (group B beta-hemolytic streptococcus)Streptococcus pneumoniaeStreptococcus pneumoniaeStreptococcus pyogenesStreptococcus pyogenesNOTE:  Methicillin-resistant staphylococci are resistant to cephalosporins. Some strains of Staphylococcus epidermidis and most strains of enterococci, eg, Enterococcus faecalis (formerly Streptococcus faecalis) are resistant to cefotetanNOTE:  Methicillin-resistant staphylococci are resistant to cephalosporins. Some strains of 







Anaerobes
Prevotella bivia (formerly Bacteroides bivius)Prevotella bivia (formerly Prevotella disiens (formerly Bacteroides disiens)Prevotella disiens (formerly Bacteroides fragilisBacteroides fragilisPrevotella melaninogenica (formerly BacteroidesPrevotella melaninogenica (formerly melaninogenicus)melaninogenicus)Bacteroides vulgatusBacteroides vulgatusFusobacterium speciesFusobacterium speciesGram-positive bacilli (including Clostridium species; seeWARNINGS)Clostridium species; seeNOTE: Most strains of C. difficile are resistant (see WARNINGS).NOTE: Most strains of Peptococcus nigerPeptococcus nigerPeptostreptococcus speciesPeptostreptococcus speciesNOTE:  Many strains of B. distasonis, B. ovatus and B. thetaiotaomicron are resistant to cefotetan in vitro. However, the therapeutic utility of cefotetan against these organisms cannot be accurately predicted on the basis of in vitro susceptibility tests alone.NOTE:  Many strains of The following in vitro data are available but their clinical significance is unknown. Cefotetan has been shown to be active in vitro against most strains of the following organisms:in vitro data are available but their clinical significance is unknown. Cefotetan has been shown to be active 







Gram-Negative Aerobes
Citrobacter species (including C. diversus and C. freundii)Citrobacter species (including Klebsiella oxytocaKlebsiella oxytocaMoraxella (Branhamella) catarrhalisMoraxella (Branhamella) catarrhalisNeisseria gonorrhoeae (penicillinase-producing strains)Neisseria gonorrhoeae (penicillinase-producing strains)Salmonella speciesSalmonella speciesSerratia speciesSerratia speciesShigella speciesShigella speciesYersinia enterocoliticaYersinia enterocolitica







Anaerobes
Porphyromonas asaccharolytica (formerly BacteroidesPorphyromonas asaccharolytica (formerly asaccharolyticus)asaccharolyticus)Prevotella oralis (formerly Bacteroides oralis)Prevotella oralis (formerly Bacteroides splanchnicusBacteroides splanchnicusClostridium difficile (see WARNINGS)Clostridium difficile (see Propionibacterium speciesPropionibacterium speciesVeillonella speciesVeillonella species







Susceptibility Tests
Dilution Techniques: Quantitative methods are used to determine antimicrobial minimal inhibitory concentrations (MIC’s). These MIC’s provide estimates of the susceptibility of bacteria to antimicrobial compounds. The MICs should be determined using a standardized procedure. Standardized procedures are based on a dilution method1 (broth or agar) or equivalent with standardized inoculum concentrations and standardized concentrations or cefotetan powder. The MIC values should be interpreted according to the following criteria:Dilution Techniques: Quantitative methods are used to determine antimicrobial minimal inhibitory concentrations (MIC’s). These MIC’s provide estimates of the susceptibility of bacteria to antimicrobial compounds. The MICs should be determined using a standardized procedure. Standardized procedures are based on a dilution method




A report of ‘Susceptible’ indicates that the pathogen is likely to be inhibited if the antimicrobial compound in the blood reaches the concentrations usually achievable. A report of ‘Intermediate’ indicates that the result should be considered equivocal, and if the microorganism is not fully susceptible to alternative, clinically feasible drugs, the test should be repeated. This category implies possible clinical applicability in body sites where the drug is physiologically concentrated or in situations where high dosage of drug can be used. This category also provides a buffer zone which prevents small uncontrolled technical factors from causing major discrepancies in interpretation. A report of ‘Resistant’ indicates that the pathogen is not likely to be inhibited if the antimicrobial compound in the blood reaches the concentrations usually achievable; other therapy should be selected.Standardized susceptibility test procedures require the use of laboratory control microorganisms to control the technical aspects of the laboratory procedures. Standard cefotetan powder should provide the following MIC values:




Diffusion Techniques: Quantitative methods that require measurement of zone diameters also provide reproducible estimates of the susceptibility of bacteria to antimicrobial compounds. One such standardized procedure2 requires the use of the standardized inoculum concentrations. This procedure uses paper disks impregnated with 30 μg cefotetan to test the susceptibility of microorganisms to cefotetan.Diffusion Techniques: Quantitative methods that require measurement of zone diameters also provide reproducible estimates of the susceptibility of bacteria to antimicrobial compounds. One such standardized procedureReports from the laboratory providing results of the standard single-disk susceptibility test with a 30 µg cefotetan disk should be interpreted according to the following criteria:




Interpretation should be as stated above for results using dilution techniques. Interpretation involves correlation of the diameter obtained in the disk test with the MIC for cefotetan. As with standardized dilution techniques, diffusion methods require the use of laboratory control microorganisms that are used to control the technical aspects of the laboratory procedures. For the diffusion technique, the 30 μg cefotetan disk should provide the following zone diameters in these laboratory test quality control strains.




Anaerobic Techniques: For anaerobic bacteria, the susceptibility to cefotetan as MIC’s can be determined by standardized test methods3. The MIC values obtained should be interpreted according to the following criteria:Anaerobic Techniques: For anaerobic bacteria, the susceptibility to cefotetan as MIC’s can be determined by standardized test methods




Interpretation is identical to that stated above for results using dilution techniques.As with other susceptibility techniques, the use of laboratory control microorganisms is required to control the technical aspects of the laboratory standardized procedures. Standardized cefotetan powder should provide the following MIC values:


