
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  

                  

                  Pharmacologically, clorazepate dipotassium has the 
characteristics of the benzodiazepines. It has depressant effects on the central 
nervous system. The primary metabolite, nordiazepam, quickly appears in the 
blood stream. The serum half-life is about 2 days. The drug is metabolized in 
the liver and excreted primarily in the urine.
                  Studies in healthy men have shown that clorazepate dipotassium has depressant 
effects on the central nervous system. Prolonged administration of single daily 
doses as high as 120 mg was without toxic effects. Abrupt cessation of high 
doses was followed in some patients by nervousness, insomnia, irritability, 
diarrhea, muscle aches, or memory impairment.
                  Since orally administered clorazepate dipotassium is rapidly decarboxylated 
to form nordiazepam, there is essentially no circulating parent drug. 
Nordiazepam, the primary metabolite, quickly appears in the blood and is 
eliminated from the plasma with an apparent half-life of about 40 to 50 hours. 
Plasma levels of nordiazepam increase proportionally with clorazepate 
dipotassium dose and show moderate accumulation with repeated administration. 
The protein binding of nordiazepam in plasma is high (97 to 98%).
                  Within 10 days after oral administration of a 15 mg (50µCi) dose of 14C-clorazepate dipotassium to two volunteers, 62 to 67% of the 
radioactivity was excreted in the urine and 15 to 19% was eliminated in the 
feces. Both subjects were still excreting measurable amounts of radioactivity in 
the urine (about 1% of the 14C-dose) on day ten.
                  Nordiazepam is further metabolized by hydroxylation. The major urinary 
metabolite is conjugated oxazepam (3-hydroxynordiazepam), and smaller amounts of 
conjugated p-hydroxynordiazepam and nordiazepam are also found in the urine.
                  

               
               
            
         