
                           
                           
                           
                              Drug Interactions:
                           
                           
                              All drug interaction studies were performed in healthy volunteers using a single 10 mg dose of zolmitriptan and a single dose of the other drug except where otherwise noted.
                              
                                 Fluoxetine: The pharmacokinetics of zolmitriptan, as well as its effect on blood pressure, were unaffected by 4 weeks of pretreatment with oral fluoxetine (20 mg/day).
                              
                                 MAO Inhibitors:  Following one week of administration of 150 mg bid moclobemide, a specific MAO-A inhibitor, there was an increase of about 25% in both Cmax and AUC for zolmitriptan and a 3-fold increase in the Cmax and AUC of the active N-desmethyl metabolite of zolmitriptan (see CONTRAINDICATIONS and PRECAUTIONS).
                              Selegiline, a selective MAO-B inhibitor, at a dose of 10 mg/day for 1 week, had no effect on the pharmacokinetics of zolmitriptan and its metabolite.
                              
                                 Propranolol:  Cmax and AUC of zolmitriptan increased 1.5-fold after one week of dosing with propranolol (160 mg/day).  Cmax and AUC of the N-desmethyl metabolite were reduced by 30% and 15%, respectively.  There were no interactive effects on blood pressure or pulse rate following administration of propranolol with zolmitriptan.
                              
                                 Acetaminophen: A single 1 g dose of acetaminophen does not alter the pharmacokinetics of zolmitriptan and its N-desmethyl metabolite.  However, zolmitriptan delayed the Tmax of acetaminophen by one hour.
                              
                                 Metoclopramide:  A single 10 mg dose of metoclopramide had no effect on the pharmacokinetics of zolmitriptan or its metabolites.
                              
                                 Oral Contraceptives: Retrospective analysis of pharmacokinetic data across studies indicated that mean plasma concentrations of zolmitriptan were generally higher in females taking oral contraceptives compared to those not taking oral contraceptives.  Mean Cmax and AUC of zolmitriptan were found to be higher by 30% and 50%, respectively, and Tmax was delayed by one-half hour in females taking oral contraceptives.  The effect of zolmitriptan on the pharmacokinetics of oral contraceptives has not been studied.
                              
                                 Cimetidine: Following the administration of cimetidine, the half-life and AUC of a 5 mg dose of zolmitriptan and its active metabolite were approximately doubled (see PRECAUTIONS). 
                           
                           
                        
                     