
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  In isolated nerve-muscle preparation, Dantrium has been shown to produce relaxation by affecting the contractile response of the skeletal muscle at a site beyond the myoneural junction, directly on the muscle itself.  In skeletal muscle, Dantrium dissociates the excitation-contraction coupling, probably by interfering with the release of Ca++ from the sarcoplasmic reticulum.  This effect appears to be more pronounced in fast muscle fibers as compared to slow ones, but generally affects both.  A central nervous system effect occurs, with drowsiness, dizziness, and generalized weakness occasionally present.  Although Dantrium does not appear to directly affect the CNS, the extent of its indirect effect is unknown.  The absorption of Dantrium after oral administration in humans is incomplete and slow but consistent, and dose-related blood levels are obtained.  The duration and intensity of skeletal muscle relaxation is related to the dosage and blood levels.  The mean biologic half-life of Dantrium in adults is 8.7 hours after a 100-mg dose.  Specific metabolic pathways in the degradation and elimination of Dantrium in human subjects have been established.  Metabolic patterns are similar in adults and pediatric patients.  In addition to the parent compound, dantrolene, which is found in measurable amounts in blood and urine, the major metabolites noted in body fluids are the 5-hydroxy analog and the acetamido analog.  Since Dantrium is probably metabolized by hepatic microsomal enzymes, enhancement of its metabolism by other drugs is possible.  However, neither phenobarbital nor diazepam appears to affect Dantrium metabolism.
                  Clinical experience in the management of fulminant human malignant hyperthermia, as well as experiments conducted in malignant hyperthermia susceptible swine, have revealed that the administration of intravenous dantrolene, combined with indicated supportive measures, is effective in reversing the hypermetabolic process of malignant hyperthermia.  Known differences between human and swine malignant hyperthermia are minor.  The prophylactic administration of oral or intravenous dantrolene to malignant hyperthermia susceptible swine will attenuate or prevent the development of signs of malignant hyperthermia in a manner dependent upon the dosage of dantrolene administered and the intensity of the malignant hyperthermia triggering stimulus.  Limited clinical experience with the administration of oral dantrolene to patients judged malignant hyperthermia susceptible, when combined with clinical experience in the use of intravenous dantrolene for the treatment of malignant hyperthermia and data derived from the above cited animal model experiments, suggests that oral dantrolene will also attenuate or prevent the development of signs of human malignant hyperthermia, provided that currently accepted practices in the management of such patients are adhered to (see 
                        INDICATIONS AND USAGE
                     ); intravenous dantrolene should also be available for use should the signs of malignant hyperthermia appear.
               
               
            
         