
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
                  
                     CYP3A4 Inhibitors
                     
Erlotinib is metabolized predominantly by CYP3A4. Co-treatment with the potent CYP3A4 inhibitor ketoconazole increased erlotinib AUC by 67%. When TARCEVA was co-administered with ciprofloxacin, an inhibitor of both CYP3A4 and CYP1A2, the erlotinib exposure [AUC] and maximum concentration [Cmax] increased by 39% and 17%, respectively. Dose modifications are recommended [see Dosage and Administration (2.4)].
                  
                     CYP3A4 Inducers
                     
Pre-treatment with the CYP3A4 inducer rifampicin for 7-11 days prior to TARCEVA decreased erlotinib AUC by 58% to 80%. Dose modifications are recommended [see Dosage and Administration (2.4)]. 
                  
                     Drugs Affecting Gastric pH
                     
Co-administration of TARCEVA with omeprazole decreased erlotinib AUC by 46% and co-administration of TARCEVA with ranitidine 300 mg decreased erlotinib AUC by 33%. When TARCEVA was administered with ranitidine 150 mg twice daily (at least 10 h after the previous ranitidine evening dose and 2 h before the ranitidine morning dose), erlotinib AUC decreased by 15%. Increasing the dose of TARCEVA when co-administered with such agents is not likely to compensate for the loss of exposure. Scheduling modifications are recommended [see Dosage and Administration (2.4) and Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                  
                     Cigarette Smoking
                     
Cigarette smoking results in reductions in erlotinib AUC. Dose modifications are recommended [see Dosage and Administration (2.4) and Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                  
                     Anticoagulants
                     
Interaction with coumarin-derived anticoagulants, including warfarin, leading to increased International Normalized Ratio (INR) and bleeding adverse reactions, which in some cases were fatal, have been reported in patients receiving TARCEVA. Regularly monitor prothrombin time or INR in patients taking coumarin-derived anticoagulants. Dose modifications of TARCEVA are not recommended [see Warnings and Precautions (5.10) and Adverse Reactions (6.1)].
               
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              •CYP3A4 inhibitors increase erlotinib plasma concentrations. (7)
                           
                              •CYP3A4 inducers decrease erlotinib plasma concentrations. (7)
                           
                              •Drugs affecting gastric pH decrease erlotinib plasma concentrations. (7)
                           
                              •Cigarette smoking decreases erlotinib plasma concentrations. (7)
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         