
                     
                     
                     Drug Interactions
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Catecholamine-Depleting Drugs
                           
                           
                              Close observation of the patient is recommended when timolol is administered to patients receiving catecholamine-depleting drugs such as reserpine, because of possible additive effects and the production of hypotension and/or marked bradycardia, which may produce vertigo, syncope, or postural hypotension.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Non-Steroidal Anti-Inflammatory Drugs
                           
                           
                              Blunting of the antihypertensive effect of beta-adrenoceptor blocking agents by non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs has been reported. When using these agents concomitantly, patients should be observed carefully to confirm that the desired therapeutic effect has been obtained.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Calcium Antagonists
                           
                           
                              Literature reports suggest that oral calcium antagonists may be used in combination with beta-adrenergic blocking agents when heart function is normal, but should be avoided in patients with impaired cardiac function. Hypotension, AV conduction disturbances, and left ventricular failure have been reported in some patients receiving beta-adrenergic blocking agents when an oral calcium antagonist was added to the treatment regimen. Hypotension was more likely to occur if the calcium antagonist were a dihydropyridine derivative, e.g., nifedipine, while left ventricular failure and AV conduction disturbances were more likely to occur with either verapamil or diltiazem.
                              Intravenous calcium antagonists should be used with caution in patients receiving beta-adrenergic blocking agents.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Digitalis and Either Diltiazem or Verapamil
                           
                           
                              The concomitant use of beta-adrenergic blocking agents with digitalis and either diltiazem or verapamil may have additive effects in prolonging AV conduction time.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Quinidine
                           
                           
                              Potentiated systemic beta-blockade (e.g., decreased heart rate) has been reported during combined treatment with quinidine and timolol, possibly because quinidine inhibits the metabolism of timolol via the P-450 enzyme, CYP2D6.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Clonidine
                           
                           
                              Beta-adrenergic blocking agents may exacerbate the rebound hypertension which can follow the withdrawal of clonidine. If the two drugs are coadministered, the beta-adrenergic blocking agent should be withdrawn several days before the gradual withdrawal of clonidine. If replacing clonidine by beta-blocker therapy, the introduction of beta-adrenergic blocking agents should be delayed for several days after clonidine administration has stopped.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               