
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  Visicol Tablets, taken in two doses of 30 grams (the complete
                            regimen contains a total of 60 grams of sodium phosphate) approximately
                            twelve hours apart, induces diarrhea, which effectively cleanses the
                            entire colon. Each administration has a purgative effect for
                            approximately 1 to 3 hours. The primary mode of action is thought to be
                            through osmotic action of sodium, causing large amounts of water to be
                            drawn into the colon, promoting colon evacuation.
               
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Pharmacokinetics
                     
                         An open-label pharmacokinetic study of Visicol in
                                    healthy volunteers was performed to determine the
                                    concentration-time profile of serum inorganic phosphorus levels
                                    after Visicol administration. All subjects received a total of
                                    60 grams of sodium phosphate with a total liquid volume of 3.6
                                    quarts. Subjects received a 30 gram dose (20 tablets given as 3
                                    tablets every 15 minutes with 8 ounces of clear liquids)
                                    beginning at 6 PM and then received a second 30 gram dose (20
                                    tablets given as 3 tablets every 15 minutes with 8 ounces of
                                    clear liquids) the following morning beginning at 6 AM. 
                        Twenty-three healthy subjects (mean age 57 years old;
                                    57% male and 43% female; and 65%
                                    Hispanic, 30% Caucasian, and 4%
                                    African-American) participated in this pharmacokinetic study.
                                    The serum phosphorus level rose from a mean (± standard
                                    deviation) baseline of 4.0 (± 0.7) mg/dL to 7.7
                                    (± 1.6 mg/dL), at a median of 3 hours after the
                                    administration of the first 30 gram dose of Visicol Tablets (see
                                    Figure 1). 
                        
                           
                               Figure 1. Mean (±
                                            standard deviation) serum phosphorus concentrations
                                        
                           
                        
                        
                           
                        
                        The serum phosphorus level rose to a mean of 8.4
                                    (± 1.9) mg/dL, at a median of 4 hours after the
                                    administration of the second 30 gram dose of Visicol Tablets.
                                    The serum phosphorus level remained above baseline for a median
                                    of 24 hours after the administration of the initial dose of
                                    Visicol Tablets (range 16 to 48 hours).
                        The upper (4.5 mg/dL) and lower (2.6 mg/dL) reference
                                    limits for serum phosphate are represented by solid
                                    bars.
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           Figure 1 table
                           
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Special Populations
                     
                        
                           
                              Renal insufficiency:
                            The effect of
                                    renal dysfunction on Visicol Tablets pharmacokinetics has not
                                    been studied. Since the inorganic form of phosphate in the
                                    circulating plasma is excreted almost entirely by the kidneys,
                                    patients with renal disease may have difficulty excreting a
                                    large phosphate load. Thus, Visicol Tablets should be used with
                                    caution in patients with impaired renal function (
                              see
                                        
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                                WARNINGS
                              
                           ).
                        
                           
                              Hepatic insufficiency:
                            Visicol
                                    Tablets have not been investigated in patients with hepatic
                                    failure. Visicol is not expected to be metabolized in the
                                    liver.
                        
                           
                              Geriatric:
                            In a single
                                    pharmacokinetic study of sodium phosphate tablets, which
                                    included 6 elderly volunteers, plasma half-life increased
                                    two-fold in subjects > 70 years of age compared to
                                    subjects < 50 years of age (3 subjects and 5 subjects,
                                    respectively).
                        
                           
                              Gender:
                            No difference in serum
                                    phosphate AUC values were observed in the single pharmacokinetic
                                    study conducted with Visicol in 13 male and 10 female healthy
                                    volunteers. 
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         