
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               The mechanism of action of buspirone is unknown. Buspirone differs from typical benzodiazepine anxiolytics in that it does not exert anticonvulsant or muscle relaxant effects. It also lacks the prominent sedative effect that is associated with more typical anxiolytics. In vitro preclinical studies have shown that buspirone has a high affinity for serotonin (5-HT1A) receptors. Buspirone has no significant affinity for benzodiazepine receptors and does not affect GABA binding in vitro or in vivo when tested in preclinical models.
Buspirone has moderate affinity for brain D2-dopamine receptors. Some studies do suggest that buspirone may have indirect effects on other neurotransmitter systems.
Buspirone hydrochloride tablets are rapidly absorbed in man and undergo extensive first-pass metabolism. In a radiolabeled study, unchanged buspirone in the plasma accounted for only about 1% of the radioactivity in the plasma. Following oral administration, plasma concentrations of unchanged buspirone are very low and variable between subjects. Peak plasma levels of 1 to 6 ng/mL have been observed 40 to 90 minutes after single oral doses of 20 mg. The single-dose bioavailability of unchanged buspirone when taken as a tablet is on the average about 90% of an equivalent dose of solution, but there is large variability.
A multiple-dose study conducted in 15 subjects suggests that buspirone has nonlinear pharmacokinetics. Thus, dose increases and repeated dosing may lead to somewhat higher blood levels of unchanged buspirone than would be predicted from results of single-dose studies.
An in vitro protein binding study indicated that approximately 86% of buspirone is bound to plasma proteins. It was also observed that aspirin increased the plasma levels of free buspirone by 23%, while flurazepam decreased the plasma levels of free buspirone by 20%. However, it is not known whether these drugs cause similar effects on plasma levels of free buspirone in vivo, or whether such changes, if they do occur, cause clinically significant differences in treatment outcome. An in vitro study indicated that buspirone did not displace highly protein-bound drugs such as phenytoin, warfarin, and propranolol from plasma protein, and that buspirone may displace digoxin.

                  

                  Special Populations

                  
                  

                  Age and Gender Effects

                  After single or multiple doses in adults, no significant differences in buspirone pharmacokinetics (AUC and Cmax) were observed between elderly and younger subjects or between men and women.

                  

                  Hepatic Impairment

                  After multiple-dose administration of buspirone to patients with hepatic impairment, steady-state AUC of buspirone increased 13 fold compared with healthy subjects (see PRECAUTIONS).

                  

                  Renal Impairment

                  After multiple-dose administration of buspirone to renally impaired (Clcr = 10 to 70 mL/min/1.73 m2) patients, steady-state AUC of buspirone increased 4 fold compared with healthy (Clcr80 mL/min/1.73 m2) subjects (see PRECAUTIONS).

                  

                  Race Effects

                  The effects of race on the pharmacokinetics of buspirone have not been studied.

                  

               
               
            
         