
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  Phendimetrazine tartrate is a phenylalkylamine sympathomimetic 
amine with pharmacological activity similar to the prototype drugs of this class 
used in obesity, the amphetamines. Actions include central nervous system 
stimulation and elevation of blood pressure. Tachyphylaxis and tolerance have 
been demonstrated with all drugs of this class in which these phenomena have 
been looked for.
                  Drugs of this class used in obesity are commonly known as "anorectics" or 
"anorexigenics". It has not been established, however, that the action of such 
drugs in treating obesity is primarily one of appetite suppression. Other 
central nervous system actions or metabolic effects, may be involved, for 
example. Adult obese subjects instructed in dietary management and treated with 
anorectic drugs, lose more weight on the average than those treated with placebo 
and diet, as determined in relatively short term clinical trials.
                  The magnitude of increased weight loss of drug-treated patients over 
placebo-treated patients is only a fraction of a pound a week. The rate of 
weight loss is greatest in the first weeks of therapy for both drug and placebo 
subjects and tends to decrease in succeeding weeks. The possible origins of the 
increased weight loss due to the various drug effects are not established. The 
amount of weight loss associated with the use of an anorectic drug varies from 
trial to trial, and the increased weight loss appears to be related in part to 
variables other than the drug prescribed, such as the physician investigator, 
the population treated, and the diet prescribed. Studies do not permit 
conclusions as to the relative importance of the drug and non-drug factors on 
weight loss.
                  The natural history of obesity is measured in years, whereas the studies 
cited are restricted to a few weeks duration, thus, the total impact of 
drug-induced weight loss over that of diet alone must be considered clinically 
limited.
                  The active drug, 105 mg of Phendimetrazine Tartrate in each capsule of this 
special extended-release dosage form approximates the action of three 35 mg 
immediate release doses taken at four hour intervals.
                  The major route of elimination is via the kidneys where most of the drug and 
metabolites are excreted. Some of the drug is metabolized to Phenmetrazine and 
also Phendimetrazine-N-oxide.
                  The average half-life of elimination when studied under controlled conditions 
is about 3.7 hours for both the extended-release and immediate release forms. 
The absorption half-life of the drug from the immediate release 35 mg 
phendimetrazine tablets is appreciably more rapid than the absorption rate of 
the drug from the extended-release formulation
               
               
            
         