
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY

                  
Morphine is a natural product that is the prototype for the class of natural and synthetic opioid analgesics. Opioids produce a wide spectrum of pharmacologic effects including analgesia, dysphoria, euphoria, somnolence, respiratory depression, diminished gastrointestinal motility, altered circulatory dynamics, histamine release and physical dependence.

                  
Morphine produces both its therapeutic and its adverse effects by interaction with one or more classes of specific opioid receptors located throughout the body.  Morphine acts as a pure agonist, binding with and activating opioid receptors at sites in the peri-aqueductal and peri-ventricular grey matter, the ventro-medial medulla and the spinal cord to produce analgesia.

                  

                  
Effects on the Central Nervous System

                  
The principal actions of therapeutic value of morphine are analgesia and sedation (i.e., sleepiness and anxiolysis). The precise mechanism of the analgesic action is unknown.  However, specific CNS opiate receptors and endogenous compounds with morphine-like activity have been identified throughout the brain and spinal cord and are likely to play a role in the expression of analgesic effects.  Morphine produces respiratory depression by direct action on brainstem respiratory centers.  The mechanism of respiratory depression involves a reduction in the responsiveness of the brainstem respiratory centers to increases in carbon dioxide tension, and to electrical stimulation.  Morphine depresses the cough reflex by direct effect on the cough center in the medulla.  Antitussive effects may occur with doses lower than those usually required for analgesia.  Morphine causes miosis, even in total darkness, and little tolerance develops to this effect.  Pinpoint pupils are a sign of opioid overdose but are not pathognomonic (e.g., pontine lesions of hemorrhagic or ischemic origins may produce similar findings).  Marked mydriasis rather than miosis may be seen with worsening hypoxia in the setting of KADIAN® overdose (See OVERDOSAGE).

                  

                  
Effects on the Gastrointestinal Tract and Other Smooth Muscle

                  
Gastric, biliary and pancreatic secretions are decreased by morphine.  Morphine causes a reduction in motility associated with an increase in tone in the antrum of the stomach and duodenum.  Digestion of food in the small intestine is delayed and propulsive contractions are decreased.  Propulsive peristaltic waves in the colon are decreased, while tone is increased to the point of spasm. The end result is constipation.  Morphine can cause a marked increase in biliary tract pressure as a result of spasm of the sphincter of Oddi.

                  
Effects on the Cardiovascular System

                  
Morphine produces peripheral vasodilation which may result in orthostatic hypotension or syncope.  Release of histamine may be induced by morphine and can contribute to opioid-induced hypotension. Manifestations of histamine release and/or peripheral vasodilation may include pruritus, flushing, red eyes and sweating.

               
               
            
         