
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  Flucytosine is rapidly and virtually completely
absorbed following oral administration. Flucytosine Capsules are not
metabolized significantly when given orally to man. Bioavailability
estimated by comparing the area under the curve of serum concentrations
after oral and intravenous administration showed 78% to 89% absorption
of the oral dose. Peak serum concentrations of 30 to 40 μg/mL were
reached within 2 hours of administration of a 2 g oral dose to normal
subjects. Other studies revealed mean serum concentrations of
approximately 70 to 80 μg/mL 1 to 2 hours after a dose in patients with
normal renal function receiving a 6-week regimen of flucytosine (150
mg/kg/day given in divided doses every 6 hours) in combination with
amphotericin B. The half-life in the majority of healthy subjects
ranged between 2.4 and 4.8 hours. Flucytosine is excreted via the
kidneys by means of glomerular filtration without significant tubular
reabsorption. More than 90% of the total radioactivity after oral
administration was recovered in the urine as intact drug. Flucytosine
is deaminated (probably by gut bacteria) to 5-fluorouracil. The area
under the curve (AUC) ratio of 5-fluorouracil to flucytosine is 4%.
Approximately 1% of the dose is present in the urine as the α-fluoro-β-
ureido-propionic acid metabolite. A small portion of the dose is
excreted in the feces.

                  
                  The half-life of flucytosine is
prolonged in patients with renal insufficiency; the average half-life
in nephrectomized or anuric patients was 85 hours (range: 29.9 to 250
hours). A linear correlation was found between the elimination rate
constant of flucytosine and creatinine clearance.

                     
                  
                  
                     In vitro
studies have shown that 2.9% to 4% of flucytosine is protein-bound over
the range of therapeutic concentrations found in the blood. Flucytosine
readily penetrates the blood-brain barrier, achieving clinically
significant concentrations in cerebrospinal fluid.

                     

                  
                  
                     Pharmacokinetics in Pediatric Patients
                  Limited
data are available regarding the pharmacokinetics of Flucytosine
Capsules administered to neonatal patients being treated for systemic
candidiasis. After five days of continuous therapy median peak levels
in infants were 19.6 μg/mL, 27.7 μg/mL, and 83.9 μg/mL at doses of 25
mg/kg (N=3), 50 mg/kg (N=4), and 100 mg/kg (N=3), respectively. Mean
time to peak serum levels was of 2.5 ± 1.3 hours, similar to that
observed in adult patients. A good deal of interindividual variability
was noted, which did not correlate with gestational age. Some patients
had serum levels > 100 μg/mL, suggesting a need for drug level
monitoring during therapy. In another study, serum concentrations were
determined during flucytosine therapy in two patients (total assays
performed =10). Median serum flucytosine concentrations at steady state
were calculated to be 57 ± 10 μg/mL (doses of 50 to 125 mg/kg/day,
normalized to 25 mg/kg per dose for comparison). In three infants
receiving flucytosine 25 mg/kg/day (four divided doses), a median
flucytosine half-life of 7.4 hours was observed, approximately double
that seen in adult patients. The concentration of flucytosine in the
cerebrospinal fluid of one infant was 43 μg/mL 3 hours after a 25 mg
oral dose, and ranged from 20 to 67 mg/L in another neonate receiving
oral doses of 120 to 150 mg/kg/day.
               
            
         