
               
               
               7   DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1   Strong CYP2D6 Inhibitors
                     
                        
                           In vitro studies indicate that α-HTBZ and β-HTBZ are substrates for CYP2D6.  Strong CYPD6 inhibitors (e.g., paroxetine, fluoxetine, quinidine) markedly increase exposure to these metabolites. A reduction in tetrabenazine tablets dose may be necessary when adding a strong CYP2D6 inhibitor (e.g., fluoxetine, paroxetine, quinidine) in patients maintained on a stable dose of tetrabenazine tablets.  The daily dose of tetrabenazine tablets should not exceed 50 mg per day and the maximum single dose of tetrabenazine tablets should not exceed 25 mg in patients taking strong CYP2D6 inhibitors [see Dosage and Administration (2.3), Warnings and Precautions (5.2),Use in Specific Populations (8.8), and Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2   Reserpine
                     
                        Reserpine binds irreversibly to VMAT2 and the duration of its effect is several days.  Prescribers should wait for chorea to reemerge before administering tetrabenazine tablets to avoid overdosage and major depletion of serotonin and norepinephrine in the CNS. At least 20 days should elapse after stopping reserpine before starting tetrabenazine tablets. Tetrabenazine tablets and reserpine should not be used concomitantly [see Contraindications (4), Warnings and Precautions (5.12), and Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3   Monoamine Oxidase Inhibitors (MAOIs)
                     
                        Tetrabenazine tablets are contraindicated in patients taking MAOIs. Tetrabenazine tablets should not be used in combination with an MAOI, or within a minimum of 14 days of discontinuing therapy with an MAOI [see Contraindications (4), Warnings and Precautions (5.12), and Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4   Alcohol
                     
                        Concomitant use of alcohol or other sedating drugs may have additive effects and worsen sedation and somnolence [see Warnings and Precautions (5.10)].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.5   Drugs that Cause QTc Prolongation
                     
                        Since tetrabenazine tablets cause a small increase in QTc prolongation (about 8 msec), the concomitant use with other drugs that are known to cause QTc prolongation should be avoided including antipsychotic medications (e.g., chlorpromazine, haloperidol, thioridazine, ziprasidone), antibiotics (e.g., moxifloxacin), Class 1A (e.g., quinidine, procainamide), and Class III (e.g., amiodarone, sotalol) antiarrhythmic medications or any other medications known to prolong the QTc interval.  Tetrabenazine tablets should also be avoided in patients with congenital long QT syndrome and in patients with a history of cardiac arrhythmias.  Certain circumstances may increase the risk of the occurrence of torsade de pointes and/or sudden death in association with the use of drugs that prolong the QTc interval, including (1) bradycardia; (2) hypokalemia or hypomagnesemia; (3) concomitant use of other drugs that prolong the QTc interval; and (4) presence of congenital prolongation of the QT interval [see Warnings and Precautions (5.11, 5.12), Drug Interactions (7.6), and Clinical Pharmacology (12.2)].
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.6   Neuroleptic Drugs
                     
                        Adverse reactions associated with tetrabenazine tablets, such as QTc prolongation, NMS, and extrapyramidal disorders, may be exaggerated by concomitant use of dopamine antagonists, including antipsychotics (e.g., chloropromazine, haloperidol, olanzapine, risperidone, thioridazine, ziprasidone) [see Warnings and Precautions (5.5, 5.9, 5.11, 5.12) and Drug Interactions (7.5)].
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         