
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1  Antimuscarinic Drugs
                     
                        Coadministration of Toviaz with other antimuscarinic agents that produce dry mouth, constipation, urinary retention, and other anticholinergic pharmacological effects may increase the frequency and/or severity of such effects. Anticholinergic agents may potentially alter the absorption of some concomitantly administered drugs due to anticholinergic effects on gastrointestinal motility.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2  CYP3A4 Inhibitors
                     
                        Doses of Toviaz greater than 4 mg are not recommended in patients taking potent CYP3A4 inhibitors, such as ketoconazole, itraconazole, and clarithromycin. Coadministration of the potent CYP3A4 inhibitor ketoconazole with fesoterodine led to approximately a doubling of the maximum concentration (Cmax) and area under the concentration versus time curve (AUC) of 5-hydroxymethyl tolterodine (5-HMT), the active metabolite of fesoterodine. Compared with CYP2D6 extensive metabolizers not taking ketoconazole, further increases in the exposure to 5-HMT were observed in subjects who were CYP2D6 poor metabolizers taking ketoconazole [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3), Warnings and Precautions (5.8), and Dosage and Administration (2)
                           ].
                        There is no clinically relevant effect of moderate CYP3A4 inhibitors on the pharmacokinetics of fesoterodine. Following blockade of CYP3A4 by coadministration of the moderate CYP3A4 inhibitor fluconazole 200 mg twice a day for 2 days, the average (90% confidence interval) increase in Cmax and AUC of the active metabolite of fesoterodine was approximately 19% (11% – 28%) and 27% (18% – 36%) respectively. No dosing adjustments are recommended in the presence of moderate CYP3A4 inhibitors (e.g., erythromycin, fluconazole, diltiazem, verapamil and grapefruit juice).
                        The effect of weak CYP3A4 inhibitors (e.g. cimetidine) was not examined; it is not expected to be in excess of the effect of moderate inhibitors  [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3), Warnings and Precautions (5.8), and Dosage and Administration (2)
                           ].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3  CYP3A4 Inducers
                     
                        No dosing adjustments are recommended in the presence of CYP3A4 inducers, such as rifampin and carbamazepine. Following induction of CYP3A4 by coadministration of rifampin 600 mg once a day, Cmax and AUC of the active metabolite of fesoterodine decreased by approximately 70% and 75%, respectively, after oral administration of Toviaz 8 mg. The terminal half-life of the active metabolite was not changed.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4  CYP2D6 Inhibitors
                     
                        The interaction with CYP2D6 inhibitors was not tested clinically. In poor metabolizers for CYP2D6, representing a maximum CYP2D6 inhibition, Cmax and AUC of the active metabolite are increased 1.7- and 2-fold, respectively.
                        No dosing adjustments are recommended in the presence of CYP2D6 inhibitors.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.5  Drugs Metabolized by Cytochrome P450
                     
                        
                           In vitro data indicate that at therapeutic concentrations, the active metabolite of fesoterodine does not have the potential to inhibit or induce Cytochrome P450 enzyme systems [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)
                           ].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.6  Oral Contraceptives
                     
                        In the presence of fesoterodine, there are no clinically significant changes in the plasma concentrations of combined oral contraceptives containing ethinyl estradiol and levonorgestrel [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)
                           ].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.7  Warfarin
                     
                        A clinical study has shown that fesoterodine 8 mg once daily has no significant effect on the pharmacokinetics or the anticoagulant activity (PT/INR) of warfarin 25 mg. Standard therapeutic monitoring for warfarin should be continued [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)
                           ].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.8  Drug-Laboratory Test Interactions
                     
                        Interactions between Toviaz and laboratory tests have not been studied.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         