
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Somatropin (as well as endogenous GH) binds to a dimeric GH receptor in the cell membrane of target cells resulting in intracellular signal transduction and a host of pharmacodynamic effects. Some of these pharmacodynamic effects are primarily mediated by IGF-1 produced in the liver and also locally (e.g., skeletal growth, protein synthesis), while others are primarily a consequence of the direct effects of somatropin (e.g., lipolysis) [see Pharmacodynamics (12.2)].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Tissue Growth
                           
                              The primary and most intensively studied action of somatropin is the stimulation of linear growth. This effect is demonstrated in children with GHD and children who have PWS, were born SGA, have TS or have ISS.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Skeletal Growth
                           
                              The measurable increase in bone length after administration of somatropin results from its effect on the cartilaginous growth areas of long bones. Studies in vitro have shown that the incorporation of sulfate into proteoglycans is not due to a direct effect of somatropin, but rather is mediated by the somatomedins or insulin-like growth factors (IGFs). The somatomedins, among them IGF-1, are polypeptide hormones which are synthesized in the liver, kidney, and various other tissues. IGF-1 levels are low in the serum of hypopituitary dwarfs and hypophysectomized humans or animals, and increase after treatment with somatropin.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Cell Growth
                           
                              It has been shown that the total number of skeletal muscle cells is markedly decreased in children with short stature lacking endogenous GH compared with normal children, and that treatment with somatropin results in an increase in both the number and size of muscle cells.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Organ Growth
                           
                              Somatropin influences the size of internal organs, and it also increases red cell mass.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Protein Metabolism
                           
                              Linear growth is facilitated in part by increased cellular protein synthesis. This synthesis and growth are reflected by nitrogen retention which can be quantitated by observing the decline in urinary nitrogen excretion and blood urea nitrogen following the initiation of somatropin therapy.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Carbohydrate Metabolism
                           
                              Hypopituitary children sometimes experience fasting hypoglycemia that may be improved by treatment with somatropin. In healthy subjects, large doses of somatropin may impair glucose tolerance. Although the precise mechanism of the diabetogenic effect of somatropin is not known, it is attributed to blocking the action of insulin rather than blocking insulin secretion. Insulin levels in serum actually increase as somatropin levels increase. Administration of human growth hormone to normal adults and patients with growth hormone deficiency results in increases in mean serum fasting and postprandial insulin levels, although mean values remain in the normal range. In addition, mean fasting and postprandial glucose and hemoglobin A1C levels remain in the normal range.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Lipid Metabolism
                           
                              Somatropin stimulates intracellular lipolysis, and administration of somatropin leads to an increase in plasma free fatty acids and triglycerides. Untreated GHD is associated with increased body fat stores, including increased abdominal visceral and subcutaneous adipose tissue. Treatment of growth hormone deficient patients with somatropin results in a general reduction of fat stores, and decreased serum levels of low density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Mineral Metabolism
                           
                              Administration of somatropin results in an increase in total body potassium and phosphorus and to a lesser extent sodium. This retention is thought to be the result of cell growth. Serum levels of phosphate increase in children with GHD after somatropin therapy due to metabolic activity associated with bone growth. Serum calcium levels are not altered. Although calcium excretion in the urine is increased, there is a simultaneous increase in calcium absorption from the intestine. Negative calcium balance, however, may occasionally occur during somatropin treatment.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Connective Tissue Metabolism
                           
                              Somatropin stimulates the synthesis of chondroitin sulfate and collagen, and increases the urinary excretion of hydroxyproline.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        There are no pharmacokinetic studies using Omnitrope® Cartridges in patients with growth hormone deficiency.
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Absorption
                           
                              Following a subcutaneous injection of single dose of 5 mg Omnitrope® 5 mg/1.5 mL Cartridge or 5 mg Omnitrope® 10 mg/1.5 mL Cartridge in healthy male and female adults, the peak concentration (Cmax) was 72-74 mcg/L. The time to reach Cmax (tmax) for Omnitrope was 4.0 hours.
                              The aqueous formulations of 5 mg/1.5 mL Omnitrope® cartridge and 10 mg/mL Omnitrope® cartridge are bioequivalent to the lyophilized 5.8 mg/vial Omnitrope® formulation.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Metabolism
                           
                              Somatropin is metabolized in both the liver and kidneys by proteolytic degradation. In renal cells, at least a portion of the breakdown products are returned to the systemic circulation. 
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Excretion
                           
                              The mean terminal half-life of somatropin after subcutaneous administration of Omnitrope® Cartridge in healthy adults is 2.5-2.8 hours. The mean clearance of subcutaneously administered Omnitrope® Cartridge in healthy adults was about 0.14 L/hr∙kg.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Specific Populations
                           
                              
                                 
                                    Pediatric:
                                  No pharmacokinetic studies of Omnitrope® have been conducted in pediatric patients. 
                              
                                 
                                    Gender:
                                  The effect of gender on pharmacokinetics of Omnitrope® has not been evaluated in pediatric patients.
                              
                                 
                                    Race:
                                  No studies have been conducted with Omnitrope® to assess pharmacokinetic differences among races.
                              
                                 
                                    Renal or hepatic impairment:
                                  No pharmacokinetic studies have been conducted with Omnitrope® in patients with renal or hepatic impairment.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         