
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        The miconazole component of VUSION is an antifungal agent [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.4)]. The mechanism of action of white petrolatum and zinc oxide for the adjunctive treatment of diaper dermatitis is unknown.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        The human pharmacodynamics of Vusion is unknown [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.4) for fungal pharmacodynamics].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        The topical absorption of miconazole from VUSION was studied in immunocompetent male and female infants and children (n=17) with diaper dermatitis complicated by documented candidiasis (microscopic evidence of pseudohyphae and/or budding yeast) ranging in age from 1 month to 21 months. After multiple daily applications to the affected area at every diaper change (approximately 5-12 times per day) for 7 days, the plasma concentrations of miconazole were below the lower limit of quantitation (LOQ) of 0.5 ng/mL in 15 out of 17 (88%) subjects. In the other 2 remaining subjects, the plasma concentrations of miconazole were 0.57 and 0.58 ng/mL, respectively at a single timepoint (4 hours after the last application) on Day 7.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.4 Microbiology
                     
                        The miconazole nitrate component in this product has been shown to have in vitro activity against Candida albicans, an organism that is associated with diaper dermatitis. The activity of miconazole nitrate against C. albicans is based on the inhibition of the ergosterol biosynthesis in the cell membrane. The accumulation of ergosterol precursors and toxic peroxides results in cytolysis of the cell. In vitro minimal inhibitory concentration (MIC) test results for C. albicans isolates obtained from treatment failures in Clinical Study 1 (see Clinical Studies (14)) does not appear to indicate that resistance to miconazole nitrate was the reason for treatment failure. The clinical significance of the in vitro activity of miconazole nitrate against C. albicans in the setting of diaper dermatitis is unclear.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         