
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
                  Sirolimus is known to be a substrate for both cytochrome P-450 3A4 (CYP3A4) and p-glycoprotein (P-gp). Inducers of CYP3A4 and P-gp may decrease sirolimus concentrations whereas inhibitors of CYP3A4 and P-gp may increase sirolimus concentrations. 
               
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           Avoid concomitant use with strong CYP3A4/P-gp inducers or strong CYP3A4/P-gp inhibitors that decrease or increase sirolimus concentrations (7.4, 12.3). 
                           Exercise caution when administering with drugs that are inhibitors/inducers of CYP3A4/P-gp (7.4, 12.3). 
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1	Use with Cyclosporine 
                     
                        Cyclosporine, a substrate and inhibitor of CYP3A4 and P-gp, was demonstrated to increase sirolimus concentrations when co-administered with sirolimus. In order to diminish the effect of this interaction with cyclosporine, it is recommended that sirolimus be taken 4 hours after administration of cyclosporine oral solution (MODIFIED) and/or cyclosporine capsules (MODIFIED). If cyclosporine is withdrawn from combination therapy with sirolimus, higher doses of sirolimus are needed to maintain the recommended sirolimus trough concentration ranges [see 
                              Dosage and Administration (2.2), Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)
                           ]. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2	Strong Inducers and Strong Inhibitors of CYP3A4 and P-gp 
                     
                        Avoid concomitant use of sirolimus with strong inducers (e.g., rifampin, rifabutin) and strong inhibitors (e.g., ketoconazole, voriconazole, itraconazole, erythromycin, telithromycin, clarithromycin) of CYP3A4 and P-gp. Alternative agents with lesser interaction potential with sirolimus should be considered [see 
                              Warnings and Precautions (5.17), Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)
                           ]. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3	Grapefruit Juice 
                     
                        Because grapefruit juice inhibits the CYP3A4-mediated metabolism of sirolimus, it must not be taken with or be used for dilution of sirolimus [see Dosage and Administration (2.9), Drug Interactions (7.3), Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)
                           ]. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4	Inducers or Inhibitors of CYP3A4 and P-gp 
                     
                        Exercise caution when using sirolimus with drugs or agents that are modulators of CYP3A4 and P-gp. The dosage of sirolimus and/or the co-administered drug may need to be adjusted [see 
                              Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)
                           ]. 
                        
                           
                              Drugs that could increase sirolimus blood concentrations:
                              
Bromocriptione, cimetidine, cisapride, clotrimazole, danazol, diltiazem, fluconazole, protease inhibitors (e.g., HIV and hepatitis C that include drugs such as ritonavir, indinavir, boceprevir, and telaprevir), metoclopramide, nicardipine, troleandomycin, verapamil 
                           
                              Drugs and other agents that could decrease sirolimus concentrations:
                              
Carbamazepine, phenobarbital, phenytoin, rifapentine, St. John's Wort (Hypericum perforatum)
                           
                              Drugs with concentrations that could increase when given with sirolimus:
                              
Verapamil 
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.5	Vaccination 
                     
                        Immunosuppressants may affect response to vaccination. Therefore, during treatment with sirolimus, vaccination may be less effective. The use of live vaccines should be avoided; live vaccines may include, but are not limited to, the following: measles, mumps, rubella, oral polio, BCG, yellow fever, varicella, and TY21a typhoid. 
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         