
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Mucopolysaccharide storage disorders are caused by the deficiency of specific lysosomal enzymes required for the catabolism of GAG.  MPS VI is characterized by the absence or marked reduction in N–acetylgalactosamine 4-sulfatase.  The sulfatase activity deficiency results in the accumulation of the GAG substrate, dermatan sulfate, throughout the body.  This accumulation leads to widespread cellular, tissue, and organ dysfunction.  NAGLAZYME is intended to provide an exogenous enzyme that will be taken up into lysosomes and increase the catabolism of GAG.  Galsulfase uptake by cells into lysosomes is most likely mediated by the binding of mannose-6-phosphate-terminated oligosaccharide chains of galsulfase to specific mannose-6-phosphate receptors. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        The responsiveness of urinary GAG to dosage alterations of NAGLAZYME is unknown, and the relationship of urinary GAG to other measures of clinical response has not been established. No association was observed between antibody development and urinary GAG levels [see Adverse Reactions (6.2
                           
                           )].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        The pharmacokinetic parameters of galsulfase were evaluated in 13 patients with MPS VI who received 1 mg/kg of NAGLAZYME as a weekly 4-hour infusion for 24 weeks.  The pharmacokinetic parameters at Week 1 and Week 24 are shown in Table 2.
                        


                        


Galsulfase pharmacokinetic parameters listed in Table 2 require cautious interpretation because of large assay variability. Development of anti-galsulfase antibodies appears to affect galsulfase pharmacokinetics, however, the data are limited.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         