
                     
                     
                     Drug – Drug/Solution Interactions: 
                     
                        
                           Caution should be exercised when administering INFUVITE ADULT to patients on warfarin sodium-type anticoagulant therapy. In such patients, vitamin K may antagonize the hypoprothrombinemic response to anticoagulant drugs, such as warfarin and its congeners. Therefore, periodic monitoring of prothrombin/INR response is essential in determining the appropriate dosage of anticoagulant therapy.
                        
                        
                           INFUVITE ADULT
                            (Multiple Vitamins for Infusion) is not physically compatible with alkaline solutions or moderately alkaline drugs such as acetazolamide, chlorothiazide sodium, aminophylline or sodium bicarbonate. Tetracycline HCl and ampicillin may not be physically compatible with
                        
                           INFUVITE ADULT
                           . Also, it has been reported that folic acid is unstable in the presence of calcium salts such as calcium gluconate. Direct addition to intravenous fat emulsions is not recommended. Consult appropriate references for listings of physical compatibility of solutions and drugs with the vitamin infusion. In such circumstances, admixture or Y-site administration with vitamin solutions should be avoided.
                        A number of interactions between vitamins and drugs have been reported which may affect the metabolism of either agent. The following are examples of these types of interactions.
                        Folic acid may lower the serum concentration of phenytoin resulting in increased seizure activity. Conversely, phenytoin may decrease serum folic acid concentrations and, therefore, should be avoided in pregnancy. Folic acid may decrease the patient’s response to methotrexate therapy.
                        Pyridoxine may decrease the efficacy of levodopa by increasing its metabolism. Concomitant administration of hydralazine or isoniazid may increase pyridoxine requirements.
                        In patients with pernicious anemia, the hematologic response to vitamin B12 therapy may be inhibited by concomitant administration of chloramphenicol.
                        Several vitamins have been reported to decrease the activity of certain antibiotics. Thiamine, riboflavin, pyridoxine, niacinamide, and ascorbic acid have been reported to decrease the antibiotic activity of erythromycin, kanamycin, streptomycin, doxycycline, and lincomycin. Bleomycin is inactivated in vitro by ascorbic acid and riboflavin.
                        Vitamin K may antagonize the hypoprothrombinemic effect of oral anticoagulants (see bolded statement above).
                        Consult appropriate references for additional specific vitamin-drug interactions.
                        Some of the vitamins in INFUVITE ADULT
                            may react with vitamin K bisulfite or sodium bisulfite; if bisulfite solutions are necessary, patients should be monitored for vitamin A and thiamine deficiencies.
                     
                     
                  
               