
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  Divigel provides estrogen therapy by delivering estradiol, the major estrogenic hormone secreted by the human ovary, to the systemic circulation following topical application.
               
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Endogenous estrogens are largely responsible for the development and maintenance of the female reproductive system and secondary sexual characteristics. Although circulating estrogens exist in a dynamic equilibrium of metabolic interconversions, estradiol is the principal intracellular human estrogen and is substantially more potent than its metabolites, estrone and estriol, at the receptor level.
                        The primary source of estrogen in normally cycling adult women is the ovarian follicle, which secretes 70 to 500 mcg of estradiol daily, depending on the phase of the menstrual cycle. After menopause, most endogenous estrogen is produced by conversion of androstenedione, which is secreted by the adrenal cortex, to estrone in the peripheral tissues. Thus, estrone and the sulfate conjugated form, estrone sulfate, are the most abundant circulating estrogens in postmenopausal women.
                        Estrogens act through binding to nuclear receptors in estrogen-responsive tissues. To date, two estrogen receptors have been identified. These vary in proportion from tissue to tissue.
                        Circulating estrogens modulate the pituitary secretion of the gonadotropins, luteinizing hormone (LH) and FSH, through a negative feedback mechanism. Estrogens act to reduce the elevated levels of these hormones seen in postmenopausal women.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        Currently, there are no pharmacodynamic data known for Divigel.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Absorption
                              
                              Estradiol diffuses across intact skin and into the systemic circulation by a passive absorption process, with diffusion across the stratum corneum being the rate-limiting factor.
                              In a 14-day, Phase 1, multiple-dose study, Divigel demonstrated linear and approximately dose-proportional estradiol pharmacokinetics at steady state for both AUC0-24 and Cmax following once daily dosing to the skin of either the right or left upper thigh (Table 2).
                              


                              


Steady-state serum concentration of estradiol are achieved by day 12 following daily application of Divigel to the skin of the upper thigh. The mean (SD) serum estradiol levels following once daily dosing at day 14 are shown in Figure 1.
                              
                                 Figure 1: Mean (SD) Serum Estradiol Concentrations (Values Uncorrected for Baseline) on Day 14 Following Multiple Daily Doses of Divigel 0.1%
                              
                              
                              The effect of sunscreens and other topical lotions on the systemic exposure of Divigel has not been evaluated. Studies conducted using topical estrogen gel approved products have shown that sunscreens have the potential for changing the systemic exposure of topically applied estrogen gels.
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Figure 1
                                 
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Distribution
                              
                              The distribution of exogenous estrogens is similar to that of endogenous estrogens. Estrogens are widely distributed in the body and are generally found in higher concentrations in the sex hormone target organs. Estrogens circulate in the blood largely bound to SHBG and albumin.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Metabolism
                              
                              Exogenous estrogens are metabolized in the same manner as endogenous estrogens. Circulating estrogens exist in a dynamic equilibrium of metabolic interconversions. These transformations take place mainly in the liver. Estradiol is converted reversibly to estrone, and both can be converted to estriol, which is a major urinary metabolite. Estrogens also undergo enterohepatic recirculation via sulfate and glucuronide conjugation in the liver, biliary secretion of conjugates into the intestine, and hydrolysis in the intestine followed by reabsorption. In postmenopausal women, a significant proportion of the circulating estrogens exist as sulfate conjugates, especially estrone sulfate, which serves as a circulating reservoir for the formation of more active estrogens.
                              Estradiol from Divigel avoids first pass metabolism and provides estradiol to estrone ratios at steady state in the range of 0.42 to 0.65.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Excretion
                              
                              Estradiol, estrone, and estriol are excreted in the urine along with glucuronide and sulfate conjugates. The apparent terminal half-life for estradiol was about 10 hours following administration of Divigel.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Use in Specific Populations
                              
                              No pharmacokinetic studies were conducted in specific populations, including patients with renal or hepatic impairment.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Potential for Estradiol Transfer
                              
                              The effect of estradiol transfer was evaluated in healthy postmenopausal women who topically applied 1.0 g of Divigel (single dose) on one thigh. One and 8 hours after gel application, they engaged in direct thigh-to-arm contact with a partner for 15 minutes. While some elevation of estradiol levels over baseline was seen in the male subjects, the degree of transferability in this study was inconclusive.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Effects of Washing
                              
                              The effect of application site washing on skin surface levels and serum concentrations of estradiol was determined in 16 healthy postmenopausal women after application of 1.0 g of Divigel to a 200 cm2 area on the thigh. Washing the application site with soap and water 1 hour after application removed all detectable amounts of estradiol from the surface of the skin, and resulted in a 30 to 38 percent decrease in the mean total 24-hour exposure to estradiol.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         