
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           Absorption and Metabolism: After oral administration, cefuroxime axetil is absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract and rapidly hydrolyzed by nonspecific esterases in the intestinal mucosa and blood to cefuroxime. Cefuroxime is subsequently distributed throughout the extracellular fluids. The axetil moiety is metabolized to acetaldehyde and acetic acid. 
                        
                           Pharmacokinetics: Approximately 50% of serum cefuroxime is bound to protein. Serum pharmacokinetic parameters for cefuroxime axetil tablets are shown in Table 1.
                        


                        



                           Comparative Pharmacokinetic Properties: Cefuroxime axetil for oral suspension was not bioequivalent to cefuroxime axetil tablets when tested in healthy adults. The tablet and powder for oral suspension formulations are NOT substitutable on a milligram per milligram basis.
                        
                        The area under the curve for the suspension averaged 91% of that for the tablet, and the peak plasma concentration for the suspension averaged 71% of the peak plasma concentration of the tablets. Therefore, the safety and effectiveness of both the tablet and oral suspension formulations had to be established in separate clinical trials.
                        
                           Food Effect on Pharmacokinetics: Absorption of the tablet is greater when taken after food (absolute bioavailability of cefuroxime axetil tablets increases from 37% to 52%). Despite this difference in absorption, the clinical and bacteriologic responses of patients were independent of food intake at the time of tablet administration in 2 studies where this was assessed.
                        
                           Renal Excretion: Cefuroxime is excreted unchanged in the urine; in adults, approximately 50% of the administered dose is recovered in the urine within 12 hours. The pharmacokinetics of cefuroxime in the urine of pediatric patients have not been studied at this time. Until further data are available, the renal pharmacokinetic properties of cefuroxime axetil established in adults should not be extrapolated to pediatric patients.
                        In a study of 28 adults with normal and markedly impaired renal function, the elimination half-life of cefuroxime was prolonged in relation to severity of renal impairment. In a study of 16 adult hemodialysis patients with end-stage renal disease, the majority of a cefuroxime dose was removed by hemodialysis. In a study of 20 elderly patients (mean age =83.9 years) having a mean creatinine clearance of 34.9 mL/min, the mean serum elimination half-life was 3.5 hours. Despite the lower elimination of cefuroxime in geriatric patients, dosage adjustment based on age is not necessary (see PRECAUTIONS: Geriatric Use).
                        
                           Microbiology
                        
                        
                           
                              Mechanism of Action:
                           
                        
                        Cefuroxime axetil is a bactericidal agent that acts by inhibition of bacterial cell wall synthesis. Cefuroxime axetil has activity in the presence of some beta-lactamases, both penicillinases and cephalosporinases, of Gram-negative and Gram-positive bacteria.
                        
                           
                              Mechanism of Resistance:
                           
                        
                        Resistance to cefuroxime axetil is primarily through hydrolysis by beta-lactamase, alteration of penicillin-binding proteins (PBPs), decreased permeability and the presence of bacterial efflux pumps. Susceptibility to cefuroxime axetil will vary with geography and time; local susceptibility data should be consulted, if available. Cefuroxime axetil has been shown to be active against most isolates of the following bacteria, both in vitro and in clinical infections as described in the Indications and Usage section:
                        ● Gram-positive bacteria
                        
                           Staphylococcus aureus (methicillinsusceptible isolates only)
                        
                           Streptococcus pneumoniae
                        
                        
                           Streptococcus pyogenes
                        
                        ● Gram-negative bacteria
                        
                           Escherichia colia
                           
                        
                        
                           Klebsiella pneumoniaea
                           
                        
                        
                           Haemophilus influenzaeb
                           
                        
                        
                           Haemophilus parainfluenzae
                        
                        
                           Moraxella catarrhalis
                        
                        
                           Neisseria gonorrhoeae
                        
                        
                           aMost extended spectrum beta-lactamase (ESBL)–producing and carbapenemase-producing isolates are resistant to cefuroxime axetil.
                        
                           bBeta-lactamase–negative, ampicillin resistant (BLNAR) isolates of H.influenzae must be considered resistant to cefuroxime axetil.
                        ● Spirochetes
                        
                           Borrelia burgdorferi
                        
                        The following in vitro data are available, 
                              but their clinical significance is unknown
                           . At least 90 percent of the following microorganisms exhibit an in vitro minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) less than or equal to the susceptible breakpoint for cefuroxime axetil. However, the efficacy of cefuroxime axetil in treating clinical infections due to these microorganisms 
                              has not been
                            established in adequate and well controlled clinical trials.
                        ● Gram-positive bacteria
                        
                           Staphylococcus epidermidis (methicillin-susceptible isolates only)
                        
                           Staphylococcus saprophyticus (methicillin-susceptible isolates only)
                        
                           Streptococcus agalactiae
                        
                        ● Gram-negative bacteria
                        
                           Morganella morganii
                        
                        
                           Proteus inconstans
                        
                        
                           Proteus mirabilis
                        
                        
                           Providencia rettgeri
                        
                        ● Anaerobic bacteria
                        
                           Peptococcus niger
                        
                        
                           
                              Susceptibility Test Methods:
                           
                        
                        When available, the clinical microbiology laboratory should provide the results of in vitro susceptibility test results for antimicrobial drug products used in resident hospitals to the physician as periodic reports that describe the susceptibility profile of nosocomial and community-acquired pathogens. These reports should aid the physician in selecting an antibacterial drug product for treatment.
                        
                           
                              Dilution Techniques:
                           
                        
                        Quantitative methods are used to determine antimicrobial minimal inhibitory concentrations (MICs). These MICs provide reproducible estimates of the susceptibility of bacteria to antimicrobial compounds. The MICs should be determined using a standardized test method (broth or agar)1,2. The MIC values should be interpreted according to criteria provided in Table 22,3.
                        
                           
                              Diffusion Techniques:
                           
                        
                        Quantitative methods that require measurement of zone diameters also provide reproducible estimates of the susceptibility of bacteria to antimicrobial compounds. The zone size provides an estimate of the susceptibility of bacteria to antimicrobial compounds. The zone size should be determined using a standardized test method4. This procedure uses paper disks impregnated with 30 mcg cefuroxime axetil to test the susceptibility of microorganisms to cefuroxime axetil. The disk diffusion interpretive criteria are provided in Table 23
                        
                        


                        


Susceptibility of staphylococci to cefuroxime axetil may be deduced from testing only penicillin and either cefoxitin or oxacillin. 
                        Susceptibility of Streptococcus pyogenes may be deduced from testing penicillin.
                        A report of Susceptible indicates that the antimicrobial is likely to inhibit growth of the pathogen if the antimicrobial compound reaches the concentration at the infection site necessary to inhibit growth of the pathogen. A report of Intermediate indicates that the result should be considered equivocal, and if the microorganism is not fully susceptible to alternative, clinically feasible drugs, the test should be repeated. This category implies possible clinical applicability in body sites where the drug is physiologically concentrated or in situations where a high dosage of drug can be used. This category also provides a buffer zone that prevents small uncontrolled technical factors from causing major discrepancies in interpretation. A report of Resistant indicates that the antimicrobial is not likely to inhibit growth of the pathogen if the antimicrobial compound reaches the concentrations usually achievable at the infection site; other therapy should be selected.
                        
                           
                              Quality Control:
                           
                        
                        Standardized susceptibility test procedures require the use of laboratory controls to monitor and ensure the accuracy and precision of supplies and reagents used in the assay, and the techniques of the individual performing the test1,2,4. The QC ranges for MIC and disk diffusion testing using the 30 mcg disk are provided in Table 33.
                        


