
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           Drug Interaction:
                           
Nimodipine is metabolized via the cytochrome P450 3A4 system located both in the intestinal mucosa and in the liver. Drugs that are known to either inhibit or to induce this enzyme system may therefore alter the first pass or the clearance of nimodipine.
                        In addition, the blood pressure lowering effects of antihypertensives could be enhanced when taken concomitantly with nimodipine.
                        
                           Inducers of CYP3A4
                           
Nimodipine plasma concentration and efficacy may be significantly reduced when concomitantly administered with strong CYP3A4 inducers. Therefore strong CYP3A4 inducers (e.g., rifampin, carbamazepine, phenobarbital, phenytoin, St. John’s Wort) should generally not be administered concomitantly with nimodipine (see 
                              WARNINGS
                           ). Other moderate and weak inducers of CYP3A4 may also reduce the efficacy of nimodipine, although the magnitude of decrease in nimodipine plasma concentrations is not known. Patients on these should be closely monitored for lack of effectiveness, and a nimodipine dosage increase may be required. Moderate and weak CYP3A4 inducers include: amprenavir, aprepitant, armodafinil, bosentan, efavirenz, etravirine, Echinacea, modafinil, nafcillin, pioglitazone, prednisone and rufinamide.
                        
                           Inhibitors of CYP3A4
                           
Nimodipine plasma concentration can be significantly increased when concomitantly administered with strong inhibitors of the CYP3A4 system. As a consequence, the blood pressure lowering effect may be increased. Therefore strong CYP3A4 inhibitors should not be coadministered with nimodipine (see 
                              CONTRAINDICATIONS
                           ). Strong CYP3A4 inhibitors include some members of the following classes: - macrolide antibiotics (e.g., clarithromycin, telithromycin,), - HIV protease inhibitors (e.g., delavirdine, indinavir, nelfinavir, ritonavir, saquinavir), - azole antimycotics (e.g., ketoconazole, itraconazole, voriconazole), - antidepressants (e.g., nefazodone) - grapefruit juice: after intake of grapefruit juice and nimodipine, the blood pressure lowering effect may last for at least 4 days after the last ingestion of grapefruit juice. Ingestion of grapefruit / grapefruit juice is therefore not recommended while taking nimodipine (see 
                              DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION
                           ).
                        Nimodipine plasma concentration can also be increased in the presence of moderate and weak inhibitors of CYP3A4. If nimodipine is concomitantly administered with these drugs, blood pressure should be monitored, and a reduction of the nimodipine dose may be necessary. Moderate and weak CYP3A4 inhibitors include amprenavir, aprepitant, atazanavir, amiodarone, alprozalam, cyclosporine, cimetidine, erythromycin, fluconazole, fluoxetine, isoniazid, oral contraceptives, quinuprestin/dalforpristin, and valproic acid.
                        
                           Blood pressure lowering drugs
                           
Nimodipine may increase the blood pressure lowering effect of concomitantly administered anti-hypertensives, such as:
                        - diuretics,                      - other calcium antagonists,
- β-blockers,                   - α-adrenergic blocking agents,
- ACE inhibitors,             - PDE5 inhibitors,
- A1-antagonists,            - α-methyldopa.
                        Blood pressure should be carefully monitored, and dose adjustment of the blood pressure lowering drug(s) may be necessary.
                     
                     
                  
               