
               
               
               
                  12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        12.1    Mechanism of Action
                     
                     
                        Hydromorphone, a semi-synthetic morphine derivative, is a hydrogenated ketone of morphine. Hydromorphone is principally an agonist of mu-receptors, showing a weak affinity for κ-receptors. Comparing relative binding affinity for mu- and κ-opioid receptors, hydromorphone binds more specifically to mu- receptors than structurally related morphine. As an opioid agonist, the principle therapeutic action of hydromorphone is analgesia. The precise mechanism of action of opioid analgesics is not known but the effects are thought to be mediated through opioid-specific receptors located predominantly in the central nervous system (CNS). Interaction with the mu-opioid receptor subtype is believed to be responsible for most of hydromorphone’s clinical effects. There is no intrinsic limit to the analgesic effect of hydromorphone. Clinically, however, dosage limitations are imposed by the adverse effects, primarily respiratory depression, sedation, nausea, and vomiting, which can result from high doses.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        12.2    Pharmacodynamics
                     
                     
                        
                           
                              CNS Depressant/Alcohol Interaction

                              
                           Additive pharmacodynamic effects may be expected when hydromorphone hydrochloride is used in conjunction with alcohol, other opioids, legal or illicit drugs that cause central nervous system depression.
                        
                           
                              Effects on the Central Nervous System

                              
                           Hydromorphone produces dose-related respiratory depression by direct action on brain stem respiratory centers.  The  respiratory  depression  involves  a  reduction  in  the  responsiveness  of  the  brain  stem respiratory centers to increases in carbon dioxide tension and to electrical stimulation.
                        Hydromorphone depresses the cough reflex by direct effect on the cough center in the medulla. 
                        Hydromorphone causes miosis, even in total darkness. Pinpoint pupils are a sign of opioid overdose but are not pathognomic. Marked mydriasis, rather than miosis, may be seen due to severe hypoxia in overdose situations.
                        
                           
                              Effects on the Gastrointestinal Tract and Other Smooth Muscle

                              
                           Gastric, biliary and pancreatic secretions are decreased by hydromorphone. Hydromorphone causes a reduction in motility associated with an increase in tone in the antrum of the stomach and duodenum. Digestion of food in the small intestine is delayed and propulsive contractions are decreased. Propulsive peristaltic waves in the colon are decreased, while tone may be increased to the point of spasm. The end result is constipation. Hydromorphone also can cause an increase in biliary tract pressure as a result of spasm of the sphincter of Oddi.
                        
                           
                              Effects on the Cardiovascular System

                              
                           Hydromorphone produces peripheral vasodilation which may result in orthostatic hypotension or syncope. Release of histamine may be induced by hydromorphone and can contribute to opioid-induced hypotension. Manifestations of histamine release or peripheral vasodilation may include pruritus, flushing, red eyes, and sweating.
                        
                           
                              Effects on the Endocrine System

                              
                           Opioids inhibit the secretion of ACTH, cortisol, and luteinizing hormone (LH) in humans. They also stimulate prolactin, growth hormone (GH) secretion, and pancreatic secretion of insulin and glucagon.
                        
                           
                              Effects on the Immune System

                              
                           Opioids have been shown to have a variety of effects on components of the immune system in in vitro and animal models. The clinical significance of these findings is unknown. Overall, the effects of opioids appear to be modestly immunosuppressive.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        12.3    Pharmacokinetics
                     
                     
                        
                           
                              Absorption

                              
                           Hydromorphone hydrochloride is an extended-release formulation of hydromorphone that produces a gradual increase in hydromorphone concentrations.  Following a single-dose administration of hydromorphone hydrochloride, plasma concentrations gradually increase over 6 to 8 hours, and thereafter concentrations are sustained for approximately 18 to 24 hours post-dose. The median Tmax values ranged from 12 to 16 hours. The mean half-life was approximately 11 hours, ranging from 8 to 15 hours in most individual subjects. Linear pharmacokinetics has been demonstrated for hydromorphone hydrochloride over the dose range 8 to 64 mg, with a dose-proportional increase in Cmax and overall exposure (AUC0-∞) (see 
                           Table 4). Steady-state plasma concentrations are approximately twice those observed following the first dose, and steady state is reached after 3 to 4 days of once-daily dosing of hydromorphone hydrochloride. At steady state, hydromorphone hydrochloride given once daily maintained hydromorphone plasma concentrations within the same concentration range as the immediate-release tablet given 4 times daily at the same total daily dose and diminished the fluctuations between peak and trough concentrations seen with the immediate-release tablet (see 
                           Figure 1). The bioavailability of hydromorphone hydrochloride once daily and immediate-release hydromorphone four times daily in adults is comparable, as presented in Table 4.
                        
                        


                        


NA = not applicable

                           * Median (range) reported for Tmax
                           

                           † Steady-state results on Day 5 (0-24 hours)

                           ‡Cmin 2.15 (0.87) ng/mL

                           §Cmin 1.47 (0.42) ng/mL
                        
                           
                              Food Effect

                              
                           The  pharmacokinetics  of  hydromorphone hydrochloride  are  not  affected  by  food  as  indicated  by  bioequivalence  when administered under fed and fasting conditions. Therefore, hydromorphone hydrochloride may be administered without regard to meals. When a 16 mg dose of hydromorphone hydrochloride was administered to healthy volunteers immediately following a high-fat meal, the median time to Cmax (Tmax) was minimally affected by the high-fat meal occurring at 16 hours compared to 18 hours while fasting.
                        
                           
                              Distribution

                              
                           Following  intravenous  administration  of  hydromorphone  to  healthy  volunteers,  the  mean  volume  of distribution was 2.9 (±1.3) L/kg, suggesting extensive tissue distribution. The mean extent of binding of hydromorphone to human plasma proteins was determined to be 27% in an in vitro study.
                        
                           
                              Metabolism

                              
                           After oral administration of an immediate-release formulation, hydromorphone undergoes extensive first-pass metabolism and is metabolized primarily in the liver by glucuronidation to hydromorphone-3­glucuronide, which follows a similar time course to hydromorphone in plasma. Exposure to the glucuronide metabolite is 35 to 40 times higher than exposure to the parent drug. In vitro data suggest that hydromorphone in clinically relevant concentrations has minimal potential to inhibit the activity of human hepatic CYP450 enzymes including CYP1A2, 2C9, 2C19, 2D6, 3A4, and 4A11.
                        
                           
                              Excretion

                              
                           Approximately 75% of the administered dose is excreted in urine.  Most of the administered hydromorphone dose is excreted as metabolites. Approximately 7% and 1% of the dose are excreted as unchanged hydromorphone in urine and feces, respectively.
                        
                           
                              Specific Populations

                              
                           
                           Geriatric Patients

                           Based on data obtained from a study using immediate-release hydromorphone, the pharmacokinetics of hydromorphone in healthy elderly subjects (65 to 74 years old) are similar to the pharmacokinetics in healthy young subjects.
                        
                           Pediatric Patients

                           The pharmacokinetics of hydromorphone hydrochloride were not evaluated in a pediatric population.
                        
                           Gender

                           Females appeared to have approximately 10% higher mean systemic exposure in terms of Cmax and AUC values.
                        
                           R
                           a
                           ce

                           The effect of race on hydromorphone hydrochloride pharmacokinetics has not been studied.
                        
                           Hepatic Impairment

                           In a study that used a single 4 mg oral dose of immediate-release hydromorphone tablets, four-fold increases in plasma levels of hydromorphone (Cmax and AUC0-∞) were observed in patients with moderate hepatic impairment (Child-Pugh Group B). Pharmacokinetics of hydromorphone in severe hepatic impairment patients has not been studied. Further increase in Cmax and AUC0-∞ of hydromorphone in this group is expected. Start patients with moderate hepatic impairment on 25% of the usual dose of hydromorphone hydrochloride and closely monitor for respiratory and central nervous system depression during dose titration. Consider alternate analgesic therapy for patients with severe hepatic impairment [see Dosage and Administration (2.4) and Specific Populations (8.6)].
                        
                           Renal Impairment

                           Renal impairment affected the pharmacokinetics of hydromorphone and its metabolites following administration of a single 4 mg dose of immediate-release tablets. The effects of renal impairment on hydromorphone pharmacokinetics were two-fold and four-fold increases in plasma levels of hydromorphone (Cmax and AUC0-48h) in moderate (CLcr = 40 to 60 mL/min) and severe (CLcr < 30 mL/min) impairment, respectively. In addition, in patients with severe renal impairment hydromorphone appeared to be more slowly eliminated with longer terminal elimination half-life (40 hr) compared to subjects with normal renal function (15 hr). Start patients with moderate renal impairment on 50% of the usual hydromorphone hydrochloride dose for patients with normal renal function and closely monitor for respiratory and central nervous system depression during dose titration. As hydromorphone hydrochloride is only intended for once-daily administration, consider use of an alternate analgesic that may permit more flexibility with the dosing interval in patients with severe renal impairment [see Dosage and Administration (2.5) and Use in Specific Populations (8.7)].
                        
                           Drug Interaction/Alcohol Interaction

                           An in vivo study examined the effect of alcohol (40%, 20%, 4% and 0%) on the bioavailability of a single dose of 16 mg of hydromorphone hydrochloride in healthy, fasted or fed volunteers. The results showed that the hydromorphone mean AUC0-∞ was 5% higher and 4% lower (not statistically significant) in the fasted and fed groups respectively after co-administration of 240 mL of 40% alcohol. The AUC0-∞ was similarly unaffected in subjects following the co-administration of hydromorphone hydrochloride and alcohol (240 mL of 20% or 4% alcohol).
                        The change in geometric mean Cmax with concomitant administration of alcohol and hydromorphone hydrochloride ranged from an increase of 10% to 31% across all conditions studied. The change in mean Cmax was greater in the fasted group of subjects. Following concomitant administration of 240 mL of 40% alcohol while fasting, the mean Cmax increased by 37% and up to 151% in an individual subject. Following the concomitant administration of 240 mL of 20% alcohol while fasting, the mean Cmax increased by 35% and up to 139% in an individual subject. Following the concomitant administration of 240 mL of 4
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           Figure 1
                           
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         