
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  Combination oral contraceptives act by suppression of gonadotropins. Although the primary mechanism of this action is inhibition of ovulation, other alterations include changes in the cervical mucus (which increase the difficulty of sperm entry into the uterus) and the endometrium (which reduce the likelihood of implantation).
               
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Pharmacokinetics
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Absorption
                              
                           
                           
                              Norethindrone acetate appears to be completely and rapidly deacetylated to norethindrone after oral administration, because the disposition of norethindrone acetate is indistinguishable from that of orally administered norethindrone. Norethindrone acetate and ethinyl estradiol are rapidly absorbed from norethindrone acetate and ethinyl estradiol tablets, with maximum plasma concentrations of norethindrone and ethinyl estradiol occurring 1 to 4 hours postdose. Both are subject to first-pass metabolism after oral dosing, resulting in an absolute bioavailability of approximately 64% for norethindrone and 43% for ethinyl estradiol.
                              The plasma norethindrone and ethinyl estradiol pharmacokinetics following single- and multiple-dose administrations of norethindrone acetate and ethinyl estradiol tablets in 17 healthy female volunteers are provided in Figures 1 and 2, and Table 1.   
                              Following multiple-dose administration of norethindrone acetate and ethinyl estradiol tablets, mean maximum concentrations of norethindrone and ethinyl estradiol were increased by 95% and 27%, respectively, as compared to single-dose administration. Mean norethindrone and ethinyl estradiol exposures (AUC values) were increased by 164% and 51% respectively, as compared to single-dose administration of norethindrone acetate and ethinyl estradiol tablets.
                              Steady-state with respect to norethindrone was reached by Day 17 and steady-state with respect to ethinyl estradiol was reached by Day 13.
                              Mean SHBG concentrations were increased by 150% from baseline (57.5 nmol/L) to 144 nmol/L at steady-state.
                              




                              


Cmax = Maximum plasma concentration; tmax = Time of Cmax; Cmin = minimum plasma concentration at steady-state; AUC(0−24) = Area under plasma concentration versus time curve from 0 to 24 hours; t½ = Apparent first-order terminal elimination half-life; Cavg = Average plasma concentration = AUC(0–24)/24
                                 
% CV = Coefficient of Variation (%); SHBG = Sex Hormone Binding Globulin (nmol/L)

                                 a The harmonic mean (0.693/mean apparent elimination rate constant) is reported for t½, and the median (range) is reported for tmax.

                                 b The SHBG concentration reported here is the pre-dose concentration
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Figure one illustrates mean plasma Norethindrone concentration.
                                 
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 Figure 2 illustrates mean plasma Ethinyl Estradiol concentration.
                                 
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Effect of food
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                    Norethindrone acetate and ethinyl estradiol tablets may be administered without regard to meals. A single-dose administration of norethindrone acetate and ethinyl estradiol tablets with food decreased the maximum concentration of norethindrone by 11% and increased the extent of absorption by 27% and decreased the maximum concentration of ethinyl estradiol by 30% but not the extent of absorption.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Distribution
                              
                           
                           
                              Volume of distribution of norethindrone and ethinyl estradiol ranges from 2 to 4 L/kg. Plasma protein binding of both steroids is extensive (> 95%); norethindrone binds to both albumin and SHBG, whereas ethinyl estradiol binds only to albumin. Although ethinyl estradiol does not bind to SHBG, it induces SHBG synthesis.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Metabolism
                              
                           
                           
                              Norethindrone undergoes extensive biotransformation, primarily via reduction, followed by sulfate and glucuronide conjugation. The majority of metabolites in the circulation are sulfates, with glucuronides accounting for most of the urinary metabolites.
                              Ethinyl estradiol is also extensively metabolized, both by oxidation and by conjugation with sulfate and glucuronide. Sulfates are the major circulating conjugates of ethinyl estradiol and glucuronides predominate in urine. The primary oxidative metabolite is 2-­hydroxy ethinyl estradiol, formed by the CYP3A4 isoform of cytochrome P450. Part of the first-pass metabolism of ethinyl estradiol is believed to occur in gastrointestinal mucosa. Ethinyl estradiol may undergo enterohepatic circulation.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Excretion
                              
                           
                           
                              Norethindrone and ethinyl estradiol are excreted in both urine and feces, primarily as metabolites. Plasma clearance values for norethindrone and ethinyl estradiol are similar (approximately 0.4 L/hr/kg). Steady-state elimination half-lives of norethindrone and ethinyl estradiol following administration of norethindrone acetate and ethinyl estradiol tablets are approximately 8 hours and 14 hours, respectively.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Special Populations
                              
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Race
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                    The effect of race on the disposition of norethindrone and ethinyl estradiol tablets has not been evaluated.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Renal insufficiency
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                    The effect of renal disease on the disposition of norethindrone and ethinyl estradiol tablets has not been evaluated. In premenopausal women with chronic renal failure undergoing peritoneal dialysis who received multiple doses of an oral contraceptive containing ethinyl estradiol and norethindrone, plasma ethinyl estradiol concentrations were higher and norethindrone concentrations were unchanged compared to concentrations in premenopausal women with normal renal function.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Hepatic insufficiency
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                    The effect of hepatic disease on the disposition of norethindrone and ethinyl estradiol tablets has not been evaluated. However, ethinyl estradiol and norethindrone may be poorly metabolized in patients with impaired liver function.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Drug-Drug Interactions
                              
                           
                           
                              See 
                                    PRECAUT
                                    IONS
                                 
                                 , 
                                 
                                    Drug Interactions
                                 .
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         