
               
               
               12  CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1  Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Methylphenidate HCl is a central nervous system (CNS) stimulant.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2  Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        Methylphenidate is a racemic mixture comprised of the d- and l-isomers. The d-isomer is more pharmacologically active than the l-isomer. Methylphenidate is thought to block the reuptake of norepinephrine and dopamine into the presynaptic neuron and increase the release of these monoamines into the extraneuronal space.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3  Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        
                           Absorption
                        
                        Following oral administration of APTENSIO XR in adults, plasma methylphenidate concentrations increase rapidly, reaching an initial maximum at about 2 hours, followed by gradual descending concentrations over the next 4 to 6 hours, after which a gradual increase begins, reaching a second peak at approximately 8 hours (Figure 1). The relative bioavailability of APTENSIO XR given once daily as compared to a methylphenidate immediate-release oral product given three times daily in adults is comparable. The relative bioavailability is 102%.
                        The pharmacokinetic profiles and parameters of methylphenidate are similar when APTENSIO XR is administered either as a whole capsule or sprinkled onto applesauce in subjects under fasting conditions (see Table 2 and Figure 1).
                        
                        
                           Table 2: The Single Dose Pharmacokinetics of d,l-Methylphenidate1 ER Capsule and Sprinkle following an Oral Dose of 80 mg 
                           APTENSIO XR under Fast Conditions in Healthy Adults
                        
                        


                        



                           1 
                           d-l (racemic) methylphenidate HCl 

                           2 Cmax, AUC(0-t), AUC(0-inf) presented as mean ± SD

                           ‡ data presented as median (range)
                        
                        
                           Figure 1: Mean d,l-Methylphenidate Plasma Concentration-Time Profiles following 
                           80 mg Administered as Capsule and Sprinkle Dose in Healthy Adults
                        
                        
                           
                        
                        
                        
                           Metabolism and Excretion
                        
                        In humans, methylphenidate is metabolized primarily via deesterification to alpha-phenyl-piperidine acetic acid (PPAA). The metabolite has little or no pharmacologic activity.
                        After oral dosing of radiolabeled methylphenidate in humans, about 90% of the radioactivity was recovered in urine. The main urinary metabolite was PPAA, accounting for approximately 80% of the dose.
                        
                           Food Effects
                        
                        Administration of APTENSIO XR with high fat meal showed a decreased or diminished second peak. A high-fat meal also increased the average Cmax of methylphenidate by about 28% and the AUC by about 19%. In the clinical trials of APTENSIO XR, it was administered without regard to meals.
                        
                           Alcohol Effect
                        
                        At an alcohol concentration up to 40%, there was 96% release of methylphenidate from APTENSIO XR 80 mg capsule within two hours. The results with the 80 mg capsule are considered to be representative of the other available capsules strengths.
                        
                           Studies in Specific Populations
                        
                        
                           Gender
                        
                        There is insufficient experience with the use of APTENSIO XR to detect gender variations in pharmacokinetics.
                        
                           Race
                        
                        There is insufficient experience with the use of APTENSIO XR to detect ethnic variations in pharmacokinetics.
                        
                           Age
                        
                        The pharmacokinetics of methylphenidate after APTENSIO XR administration was studied in pediatric patients with ADHD between 6 and 12 years of age. Following administration of APTENSIO XR, the bi-phasic plasma methylphenidate concentration profile was qualitatively similar in healthy adult volunteers and pediatric patients with ADHD. The bi-phasic profile in both groups is characterized by an early peak due to rapid absorption of the immediate-release component followed by a delayed, secondary peak due to the controlled-release component of APTENSIO XR.
                        
                           Renal Insufficiency
                        
                        There is no experience with the use of APTENSIO XR in patients with renal insufficiency. After oral administration of radiolabeled methylphenidate in humans, methylphenidate was extensively metabolized and approximately 80% of the radioactivity was excreted in the urine in the form of ritalinic acid metabolite. Since renal clearance is not an important route of methylphenidate clearance, renal insufficiency is expected to have little effect on the pharmacokinetics of APTENSIO XR.
                        
                           Hepatic Insufficiency
                        
                        There is no experience with the use of APTENSIO XR in patients with hepatic insufficiency.
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           Figure 1
                           
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         