
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  
                     
                        Concomitant use with SSRIs, SNRIs or Tryptophan is not recommended (7.1).
                        Use caution when concomitant use with drugs that affect Hemostasis (NSAIDs, Aspirin, Warfarin) (7.6).
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 Monoamine Oxidase Inhibitors (MAOIs)
                     
                        
                           [See Dosage and Administration (2.5 and 2.6), Contraindications (4.1) and Warnings and Precautions (5.2)]. 
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 Serotonergic Drugs
                     
                        
                           [See Dosage and Administration (2.5 and 2.6), Contraindications (4.1) and Warnings and Precautions (5.2)]. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3 Triptans
                     
                        There have been rare postmarketing reports of serotonin syndrome with use of an SSRI and a triptan. If concomitant treatment of Escitalopram Oral Solution, USP with a triptan is clinically warranted, careful observation of the patient is advised, particularly during treatment initiation and dose increases [see Warnings and Precautions (5.2)].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4 CNS Drugs
                     
                        Given the primary CNS effects of escitalopram, caution should be used when it is taken in combination with other centrally acting drugs.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.5 Alcohol
                     
                        Although Escitalopram Oral Solution, USP did not potentiate the cognitive and motor effects of alcohol in a clinical trial, as with other psychotropic medications, the use of alcohol by patients taking Escitalopram Oral Solution, USP is not recommended.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.6 Drugs That Interfere With Hemostasis (NSAIDs, Aspirin, Warfarin, etc.)
                     
                        Serotonin release by platelets plays an important role in hemostasis. Epidemiological studies of the case-control and cohort design that have demonstrated an association between use of psychotropic drugs that interfere with serotonin reuptake and the occurrence of upper gastrointestinal bleeding have also shown that concurrent use of an NSAID or aspirin may potentiate the risk of bleeding. Altered anticoagulant effects, including increased bleeding, have been reported when SSRIs and SNRIs are coadministered with warfarin. Patients receiving warfarin therapy should be carefully monitored when Escitalopram Oral Solution, USP is initiated or discontinued.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.7 Cimetidine
                     
                        In subjects who had received 21 days of 40 mg/day racemic citalopram, combined administration of 400 mg twice a day cimetidine for 8 days resulted in an increase in citalopram AUC and Cmax of 43% and 39%, respectively. The clinical significance of these findings is unknown.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.8 Digoxin
                     
                        In subjects who had received 21 days of 40 mg/day racemic citalopram, combined administration of citalopram and digoxin (single dose of 1 mg) did not significantly affect the pharmacokinetics of either citalopram or digoxin.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.9 Lithium
                     
                        Coadministration of racemic citalopram (40 mg/day for 10 days) and lithium (30 mmol/day for 5 days) had no significant effect on the pharmacokinetics of citalopram or lithium. Nevertheless, plasma lithium levels should be monitored with appropriate adjustment to the lithium dose in accordance with standard clinical practice. Because lithium may enhance the serotonergic effects of escitalopram, caution should be exercised when Escitalopram Oral Solution, USP and lithium are coadministered.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.10 Pimozide and Citalopram
                     
                        In a controlled study, a single dose of pimozide 2 mg co-administered with racemic citalopram 40 mg given once daily for 11 days was associated with a mean increase in QTc values of approximately 10 msec compared to pimozide given alone. Racemic citalopram did not alter the mean AUC or Cmax of pimozide. The mechanism of this pharmacodynamic interaction is not known.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.11 Sumatriptan
                     
                        There have been rare postmarketing reports describing patients with weakness, hyperreflexia, and incoordination following the use of an SSRI and sumatriptan. If concomitant treatment with sumatriptan and an SSRI (e.g., fluoxetine, fluvoxamine, paroxetine, sertraline, citalopram, escitalopram) is clinically warranted, appropriate observation of the patient is advised.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.12 Theophylline
                     
                        Combined administration of racemic citalopram (40 mg/day for 21 days) and the CYP1A2 substrate theophylline (single dose of 300 mg) did not affect the pharmacokinetics of theophylline. The effect of theophylline on the pharmacokinetics of citalopram was not evaluated.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.13 Warfarin
                     
                        Administration of 40 mg/day racemic citalopram for 21 days did not affect the pharmacokinetics of warfarin, a CYP3A4 substrate. Prothrombin time was increased by 5%, the clinical significance of which is unknown.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.14 Carbamazepine
                     
                        Combined administration of racemic citalopram (40 mg/day for 14 days) and carbamazepine (titrated to 400 mg/day for 35 days) did not significantly affect the pharmacokinetics of carbamazepine, a CYP3A4 substrate. Although trough citalopram plasma levels were unaffected, given the enzyme-inducing properties of carbamazepine, the possibility that carbamazepine might increase the clearance of escitalopram should be considered if the two drugs are coadministered.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.15 Triazolam
                     
                        Combined administration of racemic citalopram (titrated to 40 mg/day for 28 days) and the CYP3A4 substrate triazolam (single dose of 0.25 mg) did not significantly affect the pharmacokinetics of either citalopram or triazolam.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.16 Ketoconazole
                     
                        Combined administration of racemic citalopram (40 mg) and ketoconazole (200 mg), a potent CYP3A4 inhibitor, decreased the Cmax and AUC of ketoconazole by 21% and 10%, respectively, and did not significantly affect the pharmacokinetics of citalopram.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.17 Ritonavir
                     
                        Combined administration of a single dose of ritonavir (600 mg), both a CYP3A4 substrate and a potent inhibitor of CYP3A4, and escitalopram (20 mg) did not affect the pharmacokinetics of either ritonavir or escitalopram.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.18 CYP3A4 and -2C19 Inhibitors
                     
                        
                           In vitro studies indicated that CYP3A4 and -2C19 are the primary enzymes involved in the metabolism of escitalopram. However, coadministration of escitalopram (20 mg) and ritonavir (600 mg), a potent inhibitor of CYP3A4, did not significantly affect the pharmacokinetics of escitalopram. Because escitalopram is metabolized by multiple enzyme systems, inhibition of a single enzyme may not appreciably decrease escitalopram clearance.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.19 Drugs Metabolized by Cytochrome P4502D6
                     
                        
                           In vitro studies did not reveal an inhibitory effect of escitalopram on CYP2D6. In addition, steady state levels of racemic citalopram were not significantly different in poor metabolizers and extensive CYP2D6 metabolizers after multiple-dose administration of citalopram, suggesting that coadministration, with escitalopram, of a drug that inhibits CYP2D6, is unlikely to have clinically significant effects on escitalopram metabolism. However, there are limited in vivo data suggesting a modest CYP2D6 inhibitory effect for escitalopram, i.e., coadministration of escitalopram (20 mg/day for 21 days) with the tricyclic antidepressant desipramine (single dose of 50 mg), a substrate for CYP2D6, resulted in a 40% increase in Cmax and a 100% increase in AUC of desipramine. The clinical significance of this finding is unknown. Nevertheless, caution is indicated in the coadministration of escitalopram and drugs metabolized by CYP2D6.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.20 Metoprolol
                     
                        Administration of 20 mg/day Escitalopram Oral Solution, USP for 21 days in healthy volunteers resulted in a 50% increase in Cmax and 82% increase in AUC of the beta-adrenergic blocker metoprolol (given in a single dose of 100 mg). Increased metoprolol plasma levels have been associated with decreased cardioselectivity. Coadministration of Escitalopram Oral Solution, USP and metoprolol had no clinically significant effects on blood pressure or heart rate.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.21 Electroconvulsive Therapy (ECT)
                     
                        There are no clinical studies of the combined use of ECT and escitalopram.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         