
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  Morphine produces a wide spectrum of pharmacologic effects including analgesia, dysphoria, euphoria, somnolence, respiratory depression, diminished gastrointestinal motility, and physical dependence. Opiate analgesia involves at least three anatomical areas of the central nervous system: the periaqueductal-periventricular gray matter, the ventromedial medulla, and the spinal cord. A systemically administered opiate may produce analgesia by acting at any, all, or some combination of these distinct regions. Morphine interacts predominantly with the μ-receptor. The μ-binding sites of opioids are very discretely distributed in the human brain, with high densities of sites found in the posterior amygdala, hypothalamus, thalamus, nucleus caudatus, putamen, and certain cortical areas. They are also found on the terminal axons of primary afferents within laminae I and II (substantia gelatinosa) of the spinal cord and in the spinal nucleus of the trigeminal nerve.
                  
                     
                        Pharmacokinetics
                     
                  
                  Morphine has an apparent volume of distribution ranging from 1 to 4.7 L/kg after intravenous dosage. Protein binding is low, about 36%, and muscle tissue binding is reported as 54%. When morphine is introduced outside of the CNS, plasma concentrations of morphine remain higher than the corresponding CSF morphine levels.
                  Morphine has a total plasma clearance which ranges from 0.9 to 1.2 L/kg/h (liters/kilogram/hour) in postoperative patients, but shows considerable interindividual variation. The major pathway of clearance is hepatic glucuronidation to morphine-3-glucuronide, which is pharmacologically inactive. The major excretion path of the conjugate is through the kidneys, with about 10% in the feces. Morphine is also eliminated by the kidneys, 2 to 12% being excreted unchanged in the urine. Terminal half-life is commonly reported to vary from 1.5 to 4.5 hours, although the longer half-lives were obtained when morphine levels were monitored over protracted periods with very sensitive radioimmunoassay methods. The accepted elimination half-life in normal subjects is 1.5 to 2 hours.
                  The minimum analgesic morphine plasma concentration during Patient-Controlled Analgesia (PCA) has been reported as 20-40 ng/mL, corresponding to a self-administration rate of 1.5 to 3 mg/h.
                  
                     
                        Clinical Trials
                     
                  
                  Morphine is the most frequently-used opioid administered by PCA, and has been studied in controlled clinical trials in both acute postoperative settings and the chronic pain of malignancy. PCA morphine was administered to opioid-naive postoperative patients using a 1-2 mg bolus size and a six minute lockout interval. This resulted in an average self-administration rate of  2-3 mg/h, and average blood level of 30-70 ng/mL, and an analgesic efficacy similar to that observed with conventional dosing.
                  In opioid-tolerant patients with pain from malignancy, most patients were studied with a bolus size of 1-3 mg, a lockout of six minutes, and self-administered at a rate of 3-10 mg/h. In a minority of cases, patients were studied using subcutaneous route of administration, and in such cases a bolus size of 10 mg was used with a lockout of 30 minutes. PCA analgesia was rated as effective as conventional therapy by both patients and physicians.
                  
                     
                        Individualization of Dosage
                     
                  
                  The mean morphine self-administration rate observed in controlled clinical trials ranged from 1‑10 mg/h, depending on the nature of the pain, the degree of opioid tolerance developed by the patient, and the individual patient factors. Most patients will achieve adequate analgesia with a 1 mg bolus and a six minute lockout, although patients with a high degree of opioid tolerance may require a larger bolus size to be comfortable without excessively frequent triggering of the device. In such patients, a bolus size of 2-3 mg is usually adequate, although up to a 5 mg bolus has been used in opioid-tolerant patients in some studies. Although the lockout interval may be varied, most investigators have left it at 6 minutes to facilitate easy calculation of the maximal dosing rate.
                  For opioid-naive patients, the combination of dosing rate and lockout should not permit a maximal dosing rate greater than 10 mg/h (1 mg possible every 6 minutes), while for opioid-tolerant patients maximal dosing rates up to 30 mg/h are common (3 mg every 6 minutes) and greater rates may be needed in selected patients.
               
               
            
         