
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  
                  Azithromycin is a macrolide antibacterial drug [see Microbiology (12.4)].
                  Azithromycin concentrates in phagocytes and fibroblasts as demonstrated by in vitro incubation techniques. Using such methodology, the ratio of intracellular to extracellular concentration was > 30 after one hour of incubation. In vivo studies suggest that concentration in phagocytes may contribute to drug distribution to inflamed tissues.
                  
 

                  
                  Based on animal models of infection, the antibacterial activity of azithromycin appears to correlate with the ratio of area under the concentration-time curve to minimum inhibitory concentration (AUC/MIC) for certain pathogens (S. pneumoniae and S. aureus). The principal pharmacokinetic/pharmacodynamic parameter best associated with clinical and microbiological cure has not been elucidated in clinical trials with azithromycin.
                  
                     Cardiac Electrophysiology 
                  
                  QTc interval prolongation was studied in a randomized, placebo-controlled parallel trial in 116 healthy subjects who received either chloroquine (1000 mg) alone or in combination with oral azithromycin (500 mg, 1000 mg, and 1500 mg once daily). Coadministration of azithromycin increased the QTc interval in a dose- and concentration-dependent manner. In comparison to chloroquine alone, the maximum mean (95% upper confidence bound) increases in QTcF were 5 (10) ms, 7 (12) ms and 9 (14) ms with the coadministration of 500 mg, 1000 mg and 1500 mg azithromycin, respectively.
                  
 

                  
                  The pharmacokinetic parameters of azithromycin in plasma after dosing as per labeled recommendations in healthy young adults and asymptomatic HIV-positive adults (age 18 to 40 years old) are portrayed in the following chart:
                  


                  



                     AUC
                  
                  
                     0-last.
                  
                  With a regimen of 500 mg on Day 1 and 250 mg/day on Days 2 to 5, Cmin and Cmax remained essentially unchanged from Day 2 through Day 5 of therapy. However, without a loading dose, azithromycin Cmin levels required 5 to 7 days to reach steady state. 
                  In asymptomatic HIV-positive adult subjects receiving 600 mg azithromycin tablets once daily for 22 days, steady state azithromycin serum levels were achieved by Day 15 of dosing. 
                  The high values in adults for apparent steady-state volume of distribution (31.1 L/kg) and plasma clearance (630 mL/min) suggest that the prolonged half-life is due to extensive uptake and subsequent release of drug from tissues. 
                  
                     Absorption 
                  
                  The 1 gram single-dose packet is bioequivalent to four 250 mg azithromycin capsule 
                  When the oral suspension of azithromycin was administered with food, the Cmax increased by 46% and the AUC by 14%. 
                  The absolute bioavailability of two 600 mg tablets was 34% (CV = 56%). Administration of two 600 mg tablets with food increased Cmax by 31% (CV = 43%) while the extent of absorption (AUC) was unchanged (mean ratio of AUCs = 1.00; CV = 55%). 
                  
                     Distribution 
                  
                  The serum protein binding of azithromycin is variable in the concentration range approximating human exposure, decreasing from 51% at 0.02 mcg/mL to 7% at 2 mcg/mL. 
                  The antibacterial activity of azithromycin is pH related and appears to be reduced with decreasing pH. However, the extensive distribution of drug to tissues may be relevant to clinical activity. 
                  Azithromycin has been shown to penetrate into tissues in humans, including skin, lung, tonsil, and cervix. Extensive tissue distribution was confirmed by examination of additional tissues and fluids (bone, ejaculum, prostate, ovary, uterus, salpinx, stomach, liver, and gallbladder). As there are no data from adequate and well-controlled studies of azithromycin treatment of infections in these additional body sites, the clinical importance of these tissue concentration data is unknown. 
                  Following oral administration of a single 1200 mg dose (two 600 mg tablets), the mean maximum concentration in peripheral leukocytes was 140 mcg/mL. Concentrations remained above 32 mcg/mL for approximately 60 hours. The mean half-lives for 6 males and 6 females were 34 hours and 57 hours, respectively. Leukocyte-to-plasma Cmax ratios for males and females were 258 (± 77%) and 175 (± 60%), respectively, and the AUC ratios were 804 (± 31%) and 541 (± 28%), respectively. The clinical relevance of these findings is unknown.
                  Following oral administration of multiple daily doses of 600 mg (1 tablet/day) to asymptomatic HIV-positive adults, mean maximum concentration in peripheral leukocytes was 252 mcg/mL (± 49%). Trough concentrations in peripheral leukocytes at steady-state averaged 146 mcg/mL (± 33%). The mean leukocyte-to-serum Cmax ratio was 456 (± 38%) and the mean leukocyte to serum AUC ratio was 816 (± 31%). The clinical relevance of these findings is unknown. 
                  
                     Metabolism
                  
                  
                     In vitro and in vivo studies to assess the metabolism of azithromycin have not been performed. 
                  
                     Elimination 
                  
                  Plasma concentrations of azithromycin following single 500 mg oral and IV doses declined in a polyphasic pattern resulting in an average terminal half-life of 68 hours. Biliary excretion of azithromycin, predominantly as unchanged drug, is a major route of elimination. Over the course of a week, approximately 6% of the administered dose appears as unchanged drug in urine. 
                  
                     Specific Populations 
                  
                  
                     Renal Insufficiency 
                  
                  Azithromycin pharmacokinetics was investigated in 42 adults (21 to 85 years of age) with varying degrees of renal impairment. Following the oral administration of a single 1.0 g dose of azithromycin (4 × 250 mg capsules), the mean Cmax and AUC0-120 increased by 5.1% and 4.2%, respectively, in subjects with GFR 10 to 80 mL/min compared to subjects with normal renal function (GFR > 80 mL/min). The mean Cmax and AUC0-120 increased 61% and 35%, respectively, in subjects with end-stage renal disease (GFR < 10 mL/min) compared to subjects with normal renal function (GFR > 80 mL/min). 
                  
                  
                     Hepatic Insufficiency 
                  
                  The pharmacokinetics of azithromycin in subjects with hepatic impairment has not been established. 
                  
                     Gender 
                  
                  There are no significant differences in the disposition of azithromycin between male and female subjects. No dosage adjustment is recommended on the basis of gender. 
                  
                     Geriatric Patients 
                  
                  Pharmacokinetic parameters in older volunteers (65 to 85 years old) were similar to those in younger volunteers (18 to 40 years old) for the 5 day therapeutic regimen. Dosage adjustment does not appear to be necessary for older patients with normal renal and hepatic function receiving treatment with this dosage regimen [see Geriatric Use (8.5)].
                  
                     Pediatric Patients 
                  
                  For information regarding the pharmacokinetics of azithromycin for oral suspension in pediatric patients, see the prescribing information for azithromycin for oral suspension 100 mg/5 mL and 200 mg/5 mL bottles. 
                  
                     Drug-drug Interactions 
                  
                  Drug interaction studies were performed with azithromycin and other drugs likely to be coadministered. The effects of coadministration of azithromycin on the pharmacokinetics of other drugs are shown in Table 1 and the effects of other drugs on the pharmacokinetics of azithromycin are shown in Table 2. 
                  Coadministration of azithromycin at therapeutic doses had a modest effect on the pharmacokinetics of the drugs listed in Table 1. No dosage adjustment of drugs listed in Table 1 is recommended when coadministered with azithromycin. 
                  Coadministration of azithromycin with efavirenz or fluconazole had a modest effect on the pharmacokinetics of azithromycin. Nelfinavir significantly increased the Cmax and AUC of azithromycin. No dosage adjustment of azithromycin is recommended when administered with drugs listed in Table 2 [see Drug Interactions (7.3)].
                  


                  



                     - 90% Confidence interval not reported
                  
                  


                  



                     - 90% Confidence interval not reported
                  
                  
 

                  
                  Azithromycin has been shown to be active against most strains of the following microorganisms, both in vitro and in clinical infections as described in [see Indications and Usage (1)].
                  
                     Aerobic Gram-Positive Microorganisms 
                  
                   
                  
                     Staphylococcus aureus
                  
                   
                  
                     Streptococcus agalactiae
                  
                   
                  
                     Streptococcus pneumonia
                  
                   
                  
                     Streptococcus pyogenes 
                  
                  NOTE: Azithromycin demonstrates cross-resistance with erythromycin-resistant gram-positive strains. Most strains of Enterococcus faecalis and methicillin-resistant staphylococci are resistant to azithromycin.
                  
                     Aerobic Gram-Negative Microorganisms 
                  
                   
                  
                     Haemophilus influenza
                  
                   
                  
                     Moraxella catarrhalis 
                  
                  
                     Other Microorganisms 
                  
                   
                  
                     Chlamydia trachomatis 
                  
                  Beta-lactamase production should have no effect on azithromycin activity. 
                  Azithromycin has been shown to be active in vitro and in the prevention and treatment of disease caused by the following microorganisms: 
                  
                     Mycobacteria 
                  
                   
                  
                     Mycobacterium avium 
                  
                  complex (MAC) consisting of: 
                  
                     Mycobacterium avium
                  
                   
                  
                     Mycobacterium intracellulare 
                  
                  The following in vitro data are available, but their clinical significance is unknown. 
                  Azithromycin exhibits in vitro minimal inhibitory concentrations (MICs) of 2.0 mcg/mL or less against most (≥ 90%) strains of the following microorganisms; however, the safety and effectiveness of azithromycin in treating clinical infections due to these microorganisms have not been established in adequate and well-controlled trials. 
                  
                     Aerobic Gram-Positive Microorganisms 
                  
                   
                  
                     Streptococci (Groups C, F, G)
                  
                   
                  
                     Viridans group streptococci 
                  
                  
                     Aerobic Gram-Negative Microorganisms 
                  
                   
                  
                     Bordetella pertussis
                  
                   
                  
                     Campylobacter jejuni
                  
                   
                  
                     Haemophilus ducreyi
                  
                   
                  
                     Legionella pneumophila 
                  
                  
                     Anaerobic Microorganisms 
                  
                   
                  
                     Bacteroides bivius
                  
                   
                  
                     Clostridium perfringens
                  
                   
                  
                     Peptostreptococcus species 
                  
                  
                     Other Microorganisms 
                  
                   
                  
                     Borrelia burgdorferi
                  
                   
                  
                     Mycoplasma pneumonia
                  
                   
                  
                     Treponema pallidum
                  
                   
                  
                     Ureaplasma urealyticum 
                  
                  
                     Susceptibility Testing of Bacteria Excluding Mycobacteria 
                  
                  The in vitro potency of azithromycin is markedly affected by the pH of the microbiological growth medium during incubation. Incubation in a 10% CO2 atmosphere will result in lowering of media pH (7.2 to 6.6) within 18 hours and in an apparent reduction of the in vitro potency of azithromycin. Thus, the initial pH of the growth medium should be 7.2 to 7.4, and the CO2 content of the incubation atmosphere should be as low as practical. 
                  Azithromycin can be solubilized for in vitro susceptibility testing by dissolving in a minimum amount of 95% ethanol and diluting to working concentration with water. 
                  
                     Dilution Techniques 
                  
                  Quantitative methods are used to determine minimal inhibitory concentrations that provide reproducible estimates of the susceptibility of bacteria to antibacterial compounds. One such standardized procedure uses a standardized dilution method1 (broth, agar or microdilution) or equivalent with azithromycin powder. The MIC values should be interpreted according to the following criteria:
                  


                  


A report of “Susceptible” indicates that the pathogen is likely to respond to monotherapy with azithromycin. A report of “Intermediate” indicates that the result should be considered equivocal, and, if the microorganism is not fully susceptible to alternative, clinically feasible drugs, the test should be repeated. This category also provides a buffer zone which prevents small uncontrolled technical factors from causing major discrepancies in interpretation. A report of “Resistant” indicates that usually achievable drug concentrations are unlikely to be inhibitory and that other therapy should be selected. 
                  Measurement of MIC or minimum bacterial concentration (MBC) and achieved antibacterial compound concentrations may be appropriate to guide therapy in some infections. [See Clinical Pharmacology (12)]section for further information on drug concentrations achieved in infected body sites and other pharmacokinetic properties of this antibacterial drug product. 
                  Standardized susceptibility test procedures require the use of laboratory control microorganisms. Standard azithromycin powder should provide the following MIC values:
                  


                  



                     Diffusion Techniques 
                  
                  Quantitative methods that require measurement of zone diameters also provide reproducible estimates of the susceptibility of bacteria to antibacterial compounds. One such standardized procedure2 that has been recommended for use with disks to test the susceptibility of microorganisms to azithromycin uses the 15 mcg azithromycin disk. Interpretation involves the correlation of the diameter obtained in the disk test with the MIC for azithromycin. 
                  Reports from the laboratory providing results of the standard single-disk susceptibility test with a 15 mcg azithromycin disk should be interpreted according to the following criteria:
                  


                  


Interpretation should be as stated above for results using dilution techniques. 
                  As with standardized dilution techniques, diffusion methods require the use of laboratory control microorganisms. The 15 mcg azithromycin disk should provide the following zone diameters in these laboratory test quality control strains:
                  


                  



                     
                        In Vitro Activity of Azithromycin Against Mycobacteria 
                  
                  Azithromycin has demonstrated in vitro activity against MAC organisms. While gene probe techniques may be used to distinguish between M. avium and M. intracellulare, many studies only reported results on MAC isolates. Azithromycin has also been shown to be active against phagocytized MAC organisms in mouse and human macrophage cell cultures as well as in the beige mouse infection model. 
                  Various in vitro methodologies employing broth or solid media at different pHs, with and without oleic acid-albumin-dextrose-catalase (OADC), have been used to determine azithromycin MIC values for MAC strains. In general, azithromycin MIC values decreased 4 to 8 fold as the pH of Middlebrook 7H11 agar media increased from 6.6 to 7.4. At pH 7.4, azithromycin MIC values determined with Mueller-Hinton agar were 4 fold higher than that observed with Middlebrook 7H12 media at the same pH. Utilization of oleic OADC in these assays has been shown to further alter MIC values. The relationship between azithromycin and clarithromycin MIC values has not been established. In general, azithromycin MIC values were observed to be 2 to 32 fold higher than clarithromycin independent of the susceptibility method employed. 
                  The ability to correlate MIC values and plasma drug levels is difficult as azithromycin concentrates in macrophages and tissues [see Clinical Pharmacology (12)].
                  
                     Drug Resistance
                  
                  Complete cross-resistance between azithromycin and clarithromycin has been observed with MAC isolates. In most isolates, a single-point mutation at a position that is homologous to the Escherichia coli positions 2058 or 2059 on the 23S rRNA gene is the mechanism producing this cross-resistance pattern.3,4 MAC isolates exhibiting cross-resistance show an increase in azithromycin MICs to ≥ 128 mcg/mL with clarithromycin MICs increasing to ≥ 32 mcg/mL. These MIC values were determined employing the radiometric broth dilution susceptibility testing method with Middlebrook 7H12 medium. The clinical significance of azithromycin and clarithromycin cross-resistance is not fully understood at this time but preclinical data suggest that reduced activity to both agents will occur after MAC strains produce the 23S rRNA mutation.
                  
                     Susceptibility Testing for MAC 
                  
                  The disk diffusion techniques and dilution methods for susceptibility testing against gram-positive and gram-negative bacteria should not be used for determining azithromycin MIC values against mycobacteria. In vitro susceptibility testing methods and diagnostic products currently available for determining MIC values against MAC organisms have not been standardized or validated. Azithromycin MIC values will vary depending on the susceptibility testing method employed, composition and pH of media, and the utilization of nutritional supplements. Breakpoints to determine whether clinical isolates of M. avium or M. intracellulare are susceptible or resistant to azithromycin have not been established. 
                  The clinical relevance of azithromycin in vitro susceptibility test results for other mycobacterial species, including Mycobacterium tuberculosis, using any susceptibility testing method has not been determined.
                  
 

               
               
            
         