
               
               
               
                  
                  Drug InteractionsAspirin
                  
                  
                     Concomitant administration of oxaprozin and aspirin 
is not recommended because oxaprozin displaces salicylates from plasma protein 
binding sites. Coadministration would be expected to increase the risk of 
salicylate toxicity. 
                  As with other NSAIDs, concomitant administration of oxaprozin and aspirin is 
not generally recommended because of the potential for increased adverse 
effects.
                  Methotrexate
                  
                     NSAIDs have been reported to competitively inhibit 
methotrexate accumulation in rabbit kidney slices. This may indicate that they 
could enhance the toxicity of methotrexate. Caution should be used when NSAIDs 
are administered concomitantly with methotrexate. Coadministration of oxaprozin 
with methotrexate results in approximately a 36% reduction in apparent oral 
clearance of methotrexate. A reduction in methotrexate dosage may be considered 
due to the potential for increased methotrexate toxicity associated with the 
increased exposure.
                  ACE-Inhibitors
                  Reports suggest that NSAIDs may diminish the antihypertensive effect of 
ACE-inhibitors. Oxaprozin has been shown to alter the pharmacokinetics of 
enalapril (significant decrease in dose-adjusted AUC0-24
                     and Cmax) and 
its active metabolite enalaprilat (significant increase in dose-adjusted 
AUC0-24). This interaction should be given consideration 
in patients taking NSAIDs concomitantly with ACE-inhibitors.
                  Diuretics
                  Clinical studies, as well as post marketing observations, have shown that 
oxaprozin can reduce the natriuretic effect of furosemide and thiazides in some 
patients. This response has been attributed to inhibition of renal prostaglandin 
synthesis. During concomitant therapy with NSAIDs, the patient should be 
observed closely for signs of renal failure (see WARNINGS, 
Renal Effects), as well as to assure diuretic efficacy.
                  Lithium
                  Oxaprozin, like other NSAIDs has produced an elevation of plasma lithium 
levels and a reduction in renal lithium clearance. The mean minimum lithium 
concentration increased 15% and the renal clearance was decreased by 
approximately 20%. 
                  These effects have been attributed to inhibition of renal prostaglandin 
synthesis by the nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug. Thus, when NSAIDs and 
lithium are administered concurrently, subjects should be observed carefully for 
signs of lithium toxicity.
                  Glyburide
                  While oxaprozin does alter the pharmacokinetics of glyburide, 
coadministration of oxaprozin to type II non-insulin dependent diabetic patients 
did not affect the area under the glucose concentration curve nor the magnitude 
or duration of control. However, it is advisable to monitor patients’ blood 
glucose in the beginning phase of glyburide and oxaprozin cotherapy.
                  Warfarin
                  The effects of warfarin and NSAIDs on gastrointestinal (GI) bleeding are 
synergistic, such that users of both drugs together have a risk of serious GI 
bleeding higher than that of users of either drug alone.
                  H2-receptor Antagonists
                  The total body clearance of oxaprozin was reduced by 20% in subjects who 
concurrently received therapeutic doses of cimetidine or ranitidine; no other 
pharmacokinetic parameter was affected. A change of clearance of this magnitude 
lies within the range of normal variation and is unlikely to produce a 
clinically detectable difference in the outcome of therapy.
                  Beta-Blockers
                  Subjects receiving 1200 mg oxaprozin QD with 100 mg metoprolol bid exhibited 
statistically significant but transient increases in sitting and standing blood 
pressures after 14 days. Therefore, as with all NSAIDs, routine blood pressure 
monitoring should be considered in these patients when starting oxaprozin 
therapy.
                  Other Drugs
                  The coadministration of oxaprozin and antacids, acetaminophen, or conjugated 
estrogens resulted in no statistically significant changes in pharmacokinetic 
parameters in single- and/or multiple-dose studies. The interaction of oxaprozin 
with cardiac glycosides has not been studied.
                  
                  
                  
                  Laboratory Test Interactions
                  False-positive urine immunoassay screening tests for 
benzodiazepines have been reported in patients taking oxaprozin. This is due to 
lack of specificity of the screening tests. False-positive test results may be 
expected for several days following discontinuation of oxaprozin therapy. 
Confirmatory tests, such as gas chromatography/mass spectrometry, will 
distinguish oxaprozin from benzodiazepines.
                  
                  
                  Carcinogenesis, Mutagenesis, Impairment of 
FertilityIn oncogenicity studies, oxaprozin administration for 2 years was 
associated with the exacerbation of liver neoplasms (hepatic adenomas and 
carcinomas) in male CD mice, but not in female CD mice or rats. The significance 
of this species-specific finding to man is unknown.
                  Oxaprozin did not display mutagenic potential. Results from the Ames test, 
forward mutation in yeast and Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cells, DNA repair 
testing in CHO cells, micronucleus testing in mouse bone marrow, chromosomal 
aberration testing in human lymphocytes, and cell transformation testing in 
mouse fibroblast all showed no evidence of genetic toxicity or cell-transforming 
ability.
                  Oxaprozin administration was not associated with impairment of fertility in 
male and female rats at oral doses up to 200 mg/kg/day (1180 mg/m2); the usual human dose is 17 mg/kg/day (629 mg/m2). However, testicular degeneration was observed in beagle 
dogs treated with 37.5 to 150 mg/kg/day (750 to 3000 mg/m2) of oxaprozin for 6 months, or 37.5 mg/kg/day for 42 days, a 
finding not confirmed in other species. The clinical relevance of this finding 
is not known.
                  
                  
                  Pregnancy Teratogenic Effects—Pregnancy Category C.
                  Teratology studies with oxaprozin were performed in mice, rats, and rabbits. 
In mice and rats, no drug-related developmental abnormalities were observed at 
50 to 200 mg/kg/day of oxaprozin (225 to 900 mg/m2). 
However, in rabbits, infrequent malformed fetuses were observed in dams treated 
with 7.5 to 30 mg/kg/day of oxaprozin (the usual human dosage range). Animal 
reproductive studies are not always predictive of human response. There are no 
adequate or    well-controlled studies in pregnant women. Oxaprozin should be 
used during pregnancy only if the potential benefits justify the potential risks 
to the fetus.
                  Nonteratogenic Effects 
                  Because of the known effects of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs on the 
fetal cardiovascular system (closure of ductus arteriosus), use during pregnancy 
(particularly late pregnancy) should be avoided.
                  
                  
                  
                  Labor and Delivery 
                  In rat studies with NSAIDs, as with other drugs known to inhibit 
prostaglandin synthesis, an increased incidence of dystocia, delayed 
parturition, and decreased pup survival occurred. The effects of oxaprozin on 
labor and delivery in pregnant women are unknown. 
                  
                  
                  Nursing MothersIt is not known whether this drug is excreted in human milk; 
however, oxaprozin was found in the milk of lactating rats. Because many drugs 
are excreted in human milk and because of the potential for serious adverse 
reactions in nursing infants from oxaprozin, a decision should be made whether 
to discontinue nursing or to discontinue the drug, taking into account the 
importance of the drug to the mother. 
                  
                  
                  Pediatric UseSafety and effectiveness in pediatric patients below the age of 6 
years of age have not been established. The effectiveness of oxaprozin for the 
treatment of the signs and symptoms of juvenile rheumatoid arthritis (JRA) in 
pediatric patients aged 6-16 years is supported by evidence from adequate and 
well controlled studies in adult rheumatoid arthritis patients, and is based on 
an extrapolation of the demonstrated efficacy of oxaprozin in adults with 
rheumatoid arthritis and the similarity in the course of the disease and the 
drug’s mechanism of effect between these two patient populations. Use of 
oxaprozin in JRA patients 6-16 years of age is also supported by the following 
pediatric studies.
                  The pharmacokinetic profile and tolerability of oxaprozin were assessed in 
JRA patients relative to adult rheumatoid arthritis patients in a 14 day 
multiple dose pharmacokinetic study. Apparent clearance of unbound oxaprozin in 
JRA patients was reduced compared to adult rheumatoid arthritis patients, but 
this reduction could be accounted for by differences in body weight (see Pharmacokinetics, Pediatric Patients). No pharmacokinetic data 
are available for pediatric patients under 6 years. Adverse events were reported 
by approximately 45% of JRA patients versus an approximate 30% incidence of 
adverse events in the adult rheumatoid arthritis patient cohort. Most of the 
adverse events were related to the gastrointestinal tract and were mild to 
moderate. 
                  In a 3 month open label study, 10 - 20 mg/kg/day of oxaprozin were 
administered to 59 JRA patients. Adverse events were reported by 58% of JRA 
patients. Most of those reported were generally mild to moderate, tolerated by 
the patients, and did not interfere with continuing treatment. Gastrointestinal 
symptoms were the most frequently reported adverse effects and occurred at a 
higher incidence than those historically seen in controlled studies in adults. 
Fifty-two patients completed 3 months of treatment with a mean daily dose of 20 
mg/kg. Of 30 patients who continued treatment (19 - 48 week range total 
treatment duration), nine (30%) experienced rash on sun-exposed areas of the 
skin and 5 of those discontinued treatment. Controlled clinical trials with 
oxaprozin in pediatric patients have not been conducted.
                  
                  
                  Geriatric UseNo adjustment of the dose of oxaprozin is necessary in the 
elderly for pharmacokinetic reasons, although many elderly may need to receive a 
reduced dose because of low body weight or disorders associated with aging. No 
significant differences in the pharmacokinetic profile for oxaprozin were seen 
in studies in the healthy elderly (see CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY, 
Special Populations).
                  Of the total number of subjects evaluated in four placebo controlled clinical 
studies of oxaprozin, 39% were 65 and over, and 11% were 75 and over. No overall 
differences in safety or effectiveness were observed between these subjects and 
younger subjects, and other reported clinical experience has not identified 
differences in responses between the elderly and younger patients, but greater 
sensitivity of some older individuals cannot be ruled out.
                  Although selected elderly patients in controlled clinical trials tolerated as 
well as younger patients, caution should be exercised in treating the elderly, 
and extra care should be taken when choosing a dose. As with any NSAID, the 
elderly are likely to tolerate adverse reactions less well than younger 
patients.
                  Oxaprozin is substantially excreted by the kidney, and the risk of toxic 
reactions to oxaprozin may be greater in patients with impaired renal function. 
Because elderly patients are more likely to have decreased renal function, care 
should be taken in dose selection, and it may be useful to monitor renal 
function (see WARNINGS, Renal Effects).
                  
                     

                  
               
               
            
         