
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           Cationic drugs eliminated by renal tubular secretion may interfere with metformin elimination: use with caution. (7.1)
                           Repaglinide is partly metabolized by CYP2C8 and CYP3A4. Use caution in patients taking inhibitors and/or inducers of CYP2C8 and CYP3A4. (7.2) 
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 Cationic Drugs
                     
                        Cationic drugs (e.g., amiloride, digoxin, morphine, procainamide, quinidine, quinine, ranitidine, triamterene, trimethoprim, and vancomycin) that are eliminated by renal tubular secretion theoretically have the potential for interaction with metformin by competing for common renal tubular transport systems. Careful patient monitoring and dose adjustment of PrandiMet and/or the interfering drug is recommended in patients who are taking cationic medications that are excreted via the proximal renal tubular secretory system [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)
                           ].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 CYP2C8 and CYP3A4 Inhibitors/Inducers
                     
                        Repaglinide is metabolized by CYP2C8 and to a lesser extent by CYP3A4. Drugs that inhibit 2C8 (gemfibrozil, trimethoprim, deferasirox), inhibit 3A4 (itraconazole, ketaconazole), or induce CYP2C8/3A4 (rifampin) may alter the pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of repaglinide. In vivo data from a study that evaluated the co-administration of gemfibrozil and repaglinide in healthy subjects showed a significant increase in repaglinide blood levels. Administration of PrandiMet and gemfibrozil to the same patient is not recommended [see Warnings and Precautions (5.7) and Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)
                           ].
                        Repaglinide exposures are increased more than 20-fold in patients taking both gemfibrozil and itraconazole [see Contraindications (4) and Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)
                           ].
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         