
                     
                     
                     Drug Interactions
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Methyldopa
                           
                           
                              When methyldopa is used with other antihypertensive drugs, potentiation of antihypertensive effect may occur. Patients should be followed carefully to detect side reactions or unusual manifestations of drug idiosyncrasy.
                              Patients may require reduced doses of anesthetics when on methyldopa. If hypotension does occur during anesthesia, it usually can be controlled by vasopressors. The adrenergic receptors remain sensitive during treatment with methyldopa.
                              Monoamine oxidase (MAO) inhibitors: See CONTRAINDICATIONS.
                              When methyldopa and lithium are given concomitantly the patient should be carefully monitored for symptoms of lithium toxicity. Read the prescribing information for lithium preparations.
                              Several studies demonstrate a decrease in the bioavailability of methyldopa when it is ingested with ferrous sulfate or ferrous gluconate. This may adversely affect blood pressure control in patients treated with methyldopa. Coadministration of methyldopa with ferrous sulfate or gluconate is not recommended.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Hydrochlorothiazide
                           
                           
                              When given concurrently the following drugs may interact with thiazide diuretics.
                              
                                 Alcohol, barbiturates, or narcotics: Potentiation of orthostatic hypotension may occur.
                              
                                 Antidiabetic drugs: (Oral agents and insulin) dosage adjustment of the antidiabetic drug may be required.
                              
                                 Other antihypertensive drugs: Additive effect or potentiation.
                              
                                 Cholestyramine and colestipol resins: Absorption of hydrochlorothiazide is impaired in the presence of anionic exchange resins. Single doses of either cholestyramine or colestipol resins bind the hydrochlorothiazide and reduce its absorption from the gastrointestinal tract by up to 85 and 43 percent, respectively.
                              
                                 Corticosteroids, ACTH: Intensified electrolyte depletion, particularly hypokalemia.
                              
                                 Pressor amines (e.g., norepinephrine): Possible decreased response to pressor amines but not sufficient to preclude their use.
                              
                                 Skeletal muscle relaxants, nondepolarizing (e.g., tubocurarine): Possible increased responsiveness to the muscle relaxant.
                              
                                 Lithium: Generally should not be given with diuretics. Diuretic agents reduce the renal clearance of lithium and add a high risk of lithium toxicity. Refer to the package insert for lithium preparations before use of such preparations with methyldopa and hydrochlorothiazide.
                              
                                 Nonsteroidal Anti-inflammatory Drugs: In some patients, the administration of a nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory agent can reduce the diuretic, natriuretic, and antihypertensive effects of loop, potassium-sparing and thiazide diuretics. Therefore, when methyldopa and hydrochlorothiazide and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory agents are used concomitantly, the patient should be observed closely to determine if the desired effect of the diuretic is obtained.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               