
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Moxifloxacin is a member of the fluoroquinolone class of anti-infective drugs (See 12.4 Microbiology).
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        Plasma concentrations of moxifloxacin were measured in healthy adult male and female subjects who received bilateral topical ocular doses of VIGAMOX® solution 3 times a day. The mean steady-state Cmax (2.7 ng/mL) and estimated daily exposure AUC (45 ng•hr/mL) values were 1,600 and 1,000 times lower than the mean Cmax and AUC reported after therapeutic 400 mg doses of moxifloxacin. The plasma half-life of moxifloxacin was estimated to be 13 hours.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.4 Microbiology
                     
                        The antibacterial action of moxifloxacin results from inhibition of the topoisomerase II (DNA gyrase) and topoisomerase IV. DNA gyrase is an essential enzyme that is involved in the replication, transcription and repair of bacterial DNA. Topoisomerase IV is an enzyme known to play a key role in the partitioning of the chromosomal DNA during bacterial cell division.
                        The mechanism of action for quinolones, including moxifloxacin, is different from that of macrolides, aminoglycosides, or tetracyclines. Therefore, moxifloxacin may be active against pathogens that are resistant to these antibiotics and these antibiotics may be active against pathogens that are resistant to moxifloxacin. There is no cross-resistance between moxifloxacin and the aforementioned classes of antibiotics. Cross resistance has been observed between systemic moxifloxacin and some other quinolones.
                        
                           In vitro resistance to moxifloxacin develops via multiple-step mutations. Resistance to moxifloxacin occurs in vitro at a general frequency of between 1.8 x 10-9 to < 1 x 10-11 for Gram-positive bacteria.
                        Moxifloxacin has been shown to be active against most strains of the following microorganisms, both in vitro and in clinical infections as described in the INDICATIONS AND USAGE section:
                        
                           Aerobic Gram-positive microorganisms:

                           
                           Corynebacterium species*

                           Micrococcus luteus*

                           
                           Staphylococcus aureus

                           
                           Staphylococcus epidermidis

                           
                           Staphylococcus haemolyticus

                           
                           Staphylococcus hominis

                           
                           Staphylococcus warneri*

                           
                           Streptococcus pneumoniae

                           
                           Streptococcus viridans group
                        
                           Aerobic Gram-negative microorganisms:

                           
                           Acinetobacter lwoffii*

                           
                           Haemophilus influenzae

                           
                           Haemophilus parainfluenzae*
                        
                        
                           Other microorganisms:

                           
                           Chlamydia trachomatis
                        
                        *Efficacy for this organism was studied in fewer than 10 infections.
                        The following in vitro data are also available, but their clinical significance in ophthalmic infections is unknown. The safety and effectiveness of VIGAMOX® solution in treating ophthalmological infections due to these microorganisms have not been established in adequate and well-controlled trials.
                        The following organisms are considered susceptible when evaluated using systemic breakpoints. However, a correlation between the in vitro systemic breakpoint and ophthalmological efficacy has not been established. The list of organisms is provided as guidance only in assessing the potential treatment of conjunctival infections. Moxifloxacin exhibits in vitro minimal inhibitory concentrations (MICs) of 2 μg/ml or less (systemic susceptible breakpoint) against most (≥ 90%) strains of the following ocular pathogens.
                        
                           Aerobic Gram-positive microorganisms:

                           
                           Listeria monocytogenes

                           
                           Staphylococcus saprophyticus

                           
                           Streptococcus agalactiae

                           
                           Streptococcus mitis

                           
                           Streptococcus pyogenes

                           
                           Streptococcus Group C, G and F
                        
                           Aerobic Gram-negative microorganisms:

                           
                           Acinetobacter baumannii

                           
                           Acinetobacter calcoaceticus

                           
                           Citrobacter freundii

                           
                           Citrobacter koseri

                           
                           Enterobacter aerogenes

                           
                           Enterobacter cloacae

                           
                           Escherichia coli

                           
                           Klebsiella oxytoca

                           
                           Klebsiella pneumoniae

                           
                           Moraxella catarrhalis

                           
                           Morganella morganii

                           
                           Neisseria gonorrhoeae

                           
                           Proteus mirabilis

                           
                           Proteus vulgaris

                           
                           Pseudomonas stutzeri
                        
                        
                           Anaerobic microorganisms:

                           
                           Clostridium perfringens

                           
                           Fusobacterium species

                           Prevotella species

                           Propionibacterium acnes
                        
                        
                           Other microorganisms:

                           
                           Chlamydia pneumoniae

                           
                           Legionella pneumophila

                           
                           Mycobacterium avium

                           
                           Mycobacterium marinum

                           
                           Mycoplasma pneumoniae
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         