
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  Pharmacological actions of histamine include the increase of capillary and post capillary venular permeability. This vascular change leads to the wheal-flare response. Large reactions can cause an amplification of a reaction to a nearby skin test.  Histamine is degraded either by oxidative deamination or by methylation and oxidative deamination so that the principal excretion products are imidazoleacetic acid-riboside and 1-methyl imidazoleacetic acid respectively.2
                  
                  10 atopic subjects and 10 non-atopics were tested with Positive Skin Test Control - Histamine Solutions, and to negative control solutions. Thirteen females (35-49 years old; mean age 36.5) and 7 males (23-45 years old; mean age 36.4) were tested. This study included 19 Caucasian subjects and 1 African American subject. Different skin test devices produce different skin test responses. (14,15) Study results are summarized in Table 1 and Table 2. Atopic and non-atopic subject information was combined, as there were no significant differences in their skin responses.
                  Summation of wheal (∑W) or summation of erythema (∑E) was determined by measuring the longest diameter and the mid-point orthoganol diameter of the wheal or erythema response and summing the two measurements.
                  

                  
                     
                  
                  
                     
                  
                  
                  
                  Malling tested 25 subjects using a straight needle prick technique with Histamine Dihydrochloride 10mg/mL and found wheal single diameters of 5.4-8.5mm (mean 7 mm). 13
                  
                  Histamine Dihydrochloride at 10mg/mL has been shown to elicit fewer false negative and false positive reactions than Histamine Dihydrochloride at 1mg/mL. 12 10mg/mL Histamine Dihydrochloride has been shown to be the appropriate strength to perform biological standardization using skin reactivity to histamine as a standard of comparison.11,13
                     
                  
               
               
               
                  
                     Histamine Table1
                     
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     Histamine Table2
                     
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         