
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           Other photosensitizing agents: May increase the risk of photosensitivity reaction (7.1)
                           Concomitant therapy: May decrease the efficacy of PDT (7.2)
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 Other Photosensitizing Agents
                     
                        There have been no formal interaction studies of PHOTOFRIN and any other drugs. However, it is possible that concomitant use of other photosensitizing agents (e.g., tetracyclines, sulfonamides, phenothiazines, sulfonylurea hypoglycemic agents, thiazide diuretics, griseofulvin, and fluoroquinolones) could increase the risk of photosensitivity reaction.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 Concomitant Therapy
                     
                        Photodynamic therapy (PDT) with PHOTOFRIN causes direct intracellular damage by initiating radical chain reactions that damage intracellular membranes and mitochondria. Tissue damage also results from ischemia secondary to vasoconstriction, platelet activation and aggregation and clotting. Research in animals and in cell culture has suggested that many drugs could influence the effects of PDT, possible examples of which are described below. There are no human data that support or rebut these possibilities. 
                        Compounds that quench active oxygen species or scavenge radicals, such as dimethyl sulfoxide, β-carotene, ethanol, formate and mannitol would be expected to decrease PDT activity. Preclinical data also suggest that tissue ischemia, allopurinol, calcium channel blockers and some prostaglandin synthesis inhibitors could interfere with PHOTOFRIN PDT. Drugs that decrease clotting, vasoconstriction or platelet aggregation, e.g., thromboxane A2 inhibitors, could decrease the efficacy of PDT. Glucocorticoid hormones given before or concomitant with PDT may decrease the efficacy of the treatment. 
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         