
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Cellular damage caused by photodynamic therapy (PDT) with PHOTOFRIN is a consequence of the propagation of radical reactions. Radical initiation may occur after porfimer sodium absorbs light to form a porphyrin excited state. Spin transfer from porfimer sodium to molecular oxygen may then generate singlet oxygen. Subsequent radical reactions can form superoxide and hydroxyl radicals. Tumor death also occurs through ischemic necrosis secondary to vascular occlusion that appears to be partly mediated by thromboxane A2 release. As opposed to a thermal effect, the laser treatment with porfimer sodium induces a photochemical effect. The necrotic reaction and associated inflammatory responses may evolve over several days.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        The cytotoxic and antitumor actions of PHOTOFRIN are light and oxygen dependent. PDT with PHOTOFRIN is a two-stage process. The first stage is the intravenous injection of PHOTOFRIN. Clearance from a variety of tissues occurs over 40-72 hours, but tumors, skin, and organs of the reticuloendothelial system (including liver and spleen) retain PHOTOFRIN  for a longer period. Illumination with 630 nm wavelength laser light constitutes the second stage of therapy. Tumor selectivity in treatment occurs through a combination of selective retention of PHOTOFRIN and selective delivery of light.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        The pharmacokinetics of PHOTOFRIN were studied in 18 cancer patients who received two doses of PHOTOFRIN, 2 mg/kg each, administered 30 to 45 days apart as slow IV injection over 3 to 5 minutes. The mean Cmax values were comparable after the first and second administrations (43.1 ± 10.5 mcg/mL and 41.3 ± 8.7 mcg/mL, respectively). However, the mean AUC0-inf of porfimer was about 34% higher after the second administration than that after the first administration (3937 ± 1034 mcg.h/mL and 2937 ± 627 mcg.hour/mL, respectively), indicating some accumulation upon repeated administration. The elimination half-life of porfimer increased from 410 to 725 hours after the first and second administrations, respectively.
                        PHOTOFRIN was approximately 90% protein bound in human serum, studied in vitro. The binding was independent of concentration over the concentration range of 20–100 mcg/mL.
                        Effect of Gender:
                        The effect of gender was determined in 18 patients (8 males and 10 females) who received two administrations of PHOTOFRIN 2 mg/kg within 30-45 days apart as slow IV injection over 3 to 5 minutes. The mean Cmax and AUC values were comparable between males and females following either the first or the second administrations.
                        Effect of Hepatic and Renal Impairment:
                        The effect of hepatic and renal impairment has not been studied.
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         