
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Ceftriaxone is an antibacterial drug. [see 
                              Microbiology (12.4)
                           ]
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        Average plasma concentrations of ceftriaxone following a single 30-minute intravenous (I.V.) infusion of a 0.5, 1 or 2 g dose in healthy subjects are presented in Table 3. Multiple intravenous doses ranging from 0.5 to 2 g at 12- to 24-hour intervals resulted in 15% to 36% accumulation of ceftriaxone above single dose values.
                        
                           TABLE 3: Ceftriaxone Plasma Concentrations After Single Dose Administration
                        
                        


                        


Over a 0.15 to 3 g dose range in healthy adult subjects, the mean elimination half-life ranged from 5.8 to 8.7 hours, plasma clearance ranged from 0.58 to 1.45 L/hour, and renal clearance ranged from 0.32 to 0.73 L/hour.
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Distribution
                           
                              Ceftriaxone is reversibly bound to human plasma proteins and the binding of ceftriaxone decreases with increasing concentration from a value of 95% at plasma concentrations less than 25 mcg/mL to 85% at plasma concentration of 300 mcg/mL. Over a 0.15 to 3 g dose range in healthy adult subjects, the apparent volume of distribution ranged from 5.8 to 13.5 L.
                              Ceftriaxone crosses the blood placenta barrier.
                              Ceftriaxone penetrates the inflamed meninges of infants and pediatric patients. The average values of maximum plasma concentration, cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) concentrations, elimination half-life, plasma clearance and volume of distribution after a 50 mg/kg intravenous dose and after a 75 mg/kg intravenous dose in pediatric patients suffering from bacterial meningitis are shown in Table 4.
                              
                                 TABLE 4: Average Pharmacokinetic Parameters of Ceftriaxone in Pediatric Patients with Meningitis
                              
                              


                              


After a 1 gram intravenous dose, average concentrations of ceftriaxone, determined from 1 to 3 hours after dosing, were 581 mcg/mL in the gallbladder bile, 788 mcg/mL in the common duct bile, 898 mcg/mL in the cystic duct bile, 78.2 mcg/gram in the gallbladder wall compared to a corresponding concentration of 62.1 mcg/mL in plasma.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Excretion
                           
                              Ceftriaxone concentrations in urine are shown in Table 5.
                              
                                 TABLE 5: Urinary Concentrations of Ceftriaxone After Single Dose Administration
                              
                              


                              


Thirty-three percent to 67% of a ceftriaxone dose was excreted in the urine as unchanged drug, and the remainder was secreted in the bile and ultimately found in the feces as microbiologically inactive compounds.
                              The elimination of ceftriaxone is not altered by probenecid.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Special Populations
                           
                              Average pharmacokinetic parameters of ceftriaxone in healthy subjects, elderly subjects, subjects with renal impairment, and subjects with liver disease are summarized in Table 6. Compared to healthy adult subjects, the pharmacokinetics of ceftriaxone were only minimally altered in elderly subjects and in patients with renal or hepatic impairment; therefore, dosage adjustments are not necessary for these patients with ceftriaxone dosages up to 2 grams per day. Ceftriaxone was not removed to any significant extent from the plasma by hemodialysis. In 6 of 26 dialysis patients, the elimination rate of ceftriaxone was markedly reduced, suggesting that plasma concentrations of ceftriaxone should be monitored in these patients to determine if dosage adjustments are necessary [see 
                                    Dosage and Administration (2.1)
                                  and 
                                    Warnings and Precautions (5.6)
                                 ].
                              
                                 TABLE 6: Average Pharmacokinetic Parameters of Ceftriaxone in Humans
                              
                              


                           



                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Drug Interactions
                           
                              Interaction with Calcium: Two in vitro studies, one using adult plasma and the other neonatal plasma from umbilical cord blood, have been carried out to assess interaction of ceftriaxone and calcium. Ceftriaxone concentrations up to 1 mM (in excess of concentrations achieved in vivo following administration of 2 grams ceftriaxone infused over 30 minutes) were used in combination with calcium concentrations up to 12 mM (48 mg/dL). Recovery of ceftriaxone from plasma was reduced with calcium concentrations of 6 mM (24 mg/dL) or higher in adult plasma or 4 mM (16 mg/dL) or higher in neonatal plasma. This may be reflective of ceftriaxone-calcium precipitation.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.4 Microbiology
                     
                     
                        
                           
                              


                              



                                 To reduce the development of drug-resistant bacteria and maintain the effectiveness of ceftriaxone and other antibacterial drugs, ceftriaxone should be used only to treat or prevent infections that are proven or strongly suspected to be caused by bacteria. 
                                 (12.4) 
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Mechanism of Action
                           
                              Ceftriaxone is a bactericidal agent that acts by inhibition of bacterial cell wall synthesis. Ceftriaxone has activity in the presence of some beta-lactamases, both penicillinases and cephalosporinases, of Gram-negative and Gram-positive bacteria.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Mechanism of Resistance
                           
                              Resistance to ceftriaxone is primarily through hydrolysis by beta-lactamase, alteration of penicillin-binding proteins (PBPs), and decreased permeability.
                              
                                 Interaction with Other Antimicrobials
                              
                              In an in vitro study antagonistic effects have been observed with the combination of chloramphenicol and ceftriaxone.
                              
                                 Lists of Microorganisms
                              
                              Ceftriaxone has been shown to be active against most isolates of the following bacteria, both in vitro and in clinical infections described in the 
                                    INDICATIONS AND USAGE (1)
                                  section.
                              
                                 Gram-negative Bacteria
												
                                       
                                          Acinetobacter calcoaceticus
                                       
                                       
                                          Enterobacter aerogenes
                                       
                                       
                                          Enterobacter cloacae
                                          
                                       
                                       
                                          Escherichia coli
                                       
                                       
                                          Haemophilus influenzae
                                       
                                       
                                          Haemophilus parainfluenzae
                                       
                                       
                                          Klebsiella oxytoca
                                       
                                       
                                          Klebsiella pneumoniae
                                       
                                       
                                          Moraxella catarrhalis
                                       
                                       
                                          Morganella morganii
                                       
                                       
                                          Neisseria gonorrhoeae
                                       
                                       
                                          Neisseria meningitidis
                                       
                                       
                                          Proteus mirabilis
                                       
                                       
                                          Proteus vulgaris
                                       
                                       
                                          Pseudomonas aeruginosa
                                       
                                       
                                          Serratia marcescens
                                       
                                    
                                 
                                 Gram-positive Bacteria
												
                                       
                                          Staphylococcus aureus
                                       
                                       
                                          Staphylococcus epidermidis  
                                       
                                          Streptococcus pneumoniae
                                       
                                       
                                          Streptococcus pyogenes
                                       
                                       
                                          Viridans group streptococci
                                    
                                 
                                 Anaerobic Bacteria
												
                                       
                                          Bacteroides fragilis
                                       
                                       
                                          Clostridium species
													
                                       
                                          Peptostreptococcus species
                                    
                                 
                              
                              The following in vitro data are available, 
                                    but their clinical significance is unknown
                                 . At least 90 percent of the following microorganisms exhibit an in vitro minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) less than or equal to the susceptible breakpoint for ceftriaxone. However, the efficacy of ceftriaxone in treating clinical infections due to these microorganisms has not been established in adequate and well-controlled clinical trials.
                              
                                 Gram-negative Bacteria
												
                                       
                                          Citrobacter diversus
                                       
                                       
                                          Citrobacter freundii
                                       
                                       
                                          Providencia species (including Providencia rettgeri)
                                       
                                          Salmonella species (including Salmonella typhi)
                                       
                                          Shigella species
                                    
                                 
                                 Gram-positive Bacteria
												
                                       
                                          Streptococcus agalactiae
                                       
                                    
                                 
                                 Anaerobic Bacteria
												
                                       
                                          Porphyromonas (Bacteroides) melaninogenicus 
                                       
                                       
                                          Prevotella (Bacteroides) bivius
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Susceptibility Test Methods
                           
                              When available, the clinical microbiology laboratory should provide the results of in vitro susceptibility test results for antimicrobial drug products used in resident hospitals to the physician as periodic reports that describe the susceptibility profile of nosocomial and community-acquired pathogens. These reports should aid the physician in selecting an antibacterial drug product for treatment.
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Dilution Techniques
                                 
                                    Quantitative methods are used to determine antimicrobial minimal inhibitory concentrations (MICs). These MICs provide estimates of the susceptibility of bacteria to antimicrobial compounds. The MICs should be determined using a standardized test method. 1,3 (broth and/or agar). The MIC values should be interpreted according to the criteria provided in Table 7.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Diffusion Techniques
                                 
                                    Quantitative methods that require measurement of zone diameters also provide reproducible estimates of the susceptibility of bacteria to antimicrobial compounds. The zone size provides an estimate of the susceptibility of bacteria to antimicrobial compounds. The zone size should be determined using a standardized test method. 2,3 This procedure uses paper disks impregnated with 30 mcg ceftriaxone to test the susceptibility of microorganisms to ceftriaxone. The disk diffusion interpretive criteria are provided in Table 7.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Anaerobic Techniques
                                 
                                    For anaerobic bacteria, the susceptibility to ceftriaxone as MICs can be determined by a standardized agar test method.3,4  The MIC values obtained should be interpreted according to the criteria provided in Table 7.
                                    
                                       Table 7: Susceptibility Test Interpretive Criteria for Ceftriaxone
                                    
                                    


                                    


A report of Susceptible (S) indicates that the antimicrobial is likely to inhibit growth of the pathogen if the antimicrobial compound reaches the concentration at the infection site necessary to inhibit growth of the pathogen. A report of Intermediate (I) indicates that the result should be considered equivocal, and if the microorganism is not fully susceptible to alternative, clinically feasible drugs, the test should be repeated. This category implies possible clinical applicability in body sites where the drug product is physiologically concentrated or in situations where a high dosage of drug can be used. This category also provides a buffer zone that prevents small uncontrolled technical factors from causing major discrepancies in interpretation. A report of Resistant (R) indicates that the antimicrobial is not likely to inhibit growth of the pathogen if the antimicrobial compound reaches the concentrations usually achievable at the infection site; other therapy should be selected.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Quality Control
                                 
                                    Standardized susceptibility test procedures require the use of laboratory controls to monitor and ensure the accuracy and precision of supplies and reagents used in the assay and the techniques of the individual performing the test 1,2,3,4. Standard ceftriaxone powder should provide the following range of MIC values noted in Table 8. For the diffusion technique using the 30 mcg disk, the criteria in Table 8 should be achieved.
                                    
                                       Table 8: Acceptable Quality Control Ranges for Ceftriaxone
                                    
                                    


