
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY

               
                  Naproxen is a nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID), with analgesic and antipyretic properties. As with other NSAIDs, its mode of action is not fully understood; however, its ability to inhibit prostaglandin synthesis may be involved in the anti-inflammatory effect.

               
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     PHARMACOKINETICS

                     
                        Although naproxen itself is well absorbed, the sodium salt form is more rapidly absorbed, resulting in higher peak plasma levels for a given dose. Approximately 30% of the total naproxen sodium dose in NAPRELAN® Tablets is present in the dosage form as an immediate release component. The remaining naproxen sodium is coated as microparticles to provide sustained release properties. After oral administration, plasma levels of naproxen are detected within 30 minutes of dosing, with peak plasma levels occurring approximately 5 hours after dosing. The observed terminal elimination half-life of naproxen from both immediate release naproxen sodium and NAPRELAN® Tablets is approximately 15 hours. Steady state levels of naproxen are achieved in 3 days and the degree of naproxen accumulation in the blood is consistent with this.

                        
                        


                     



                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Absorption
                              
                              Naproxen itself is rapidly and completely absorbed from the GI tract with an in vivo bioavailability of 95%. Based on the pharmacokinetic profile, the absorption phase of NAPRELAN® Tablets occurs in the first 4-6 hours after administration. This coincides with disintegration of the tablet in the stomach, the transit of the sustained release microparticles through the small intestine and into the proximal large intestine. An in vivo imaging study has been performed in healthy volunteers that confirms rapid disintegration of the tablet matrix and dispersion of the microparticles.

                              The absorption rate from the sustained release particulate component of NAPRELAN® Tablets is slower than that for conventional naproxen sodium tablets. It is this prolongation of drug absorption processes that maintains plasma levels and allows for once daily dosing.

                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Food Effects
                              
                              No significant food effects were observed when twenty-four subjects were given a single dose of NAPRELAN® Tablets 500 mg either after an overnight fast or 30 minutes after a meal. In common with conventional naproxen and naproxen sodium formulations, food causes a slight decrease in the rate of naproxen absorption following NAPRELAN® Tablets administration.

                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Distribution
                              
                              Naproxen has a volume of distribution of 0.16 L/kg. At therapeutic levels, naproxen is greater than 99% albumin-bound. At doses of naproxen greater than 500 mg/day, there is a less than proportional increase in plasma levels due to an increase in clearance caused by saturation of plasma protein binding at higher doses. However the concentration of unbound naproxen continues to increase proportionally to dose. NAPRELAN® Tablets exhibit similar dose proportional characteristics.

                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Metabolism
                              
                              Naproxen is extensively metabolized to 6-0-desmethyl naproxen and both parent and metabolites do not induce metabolizing enzymes.

                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Elimination
                              
                              The elimination half-life of NAPRELAN® Tablets and conventional naproxen is approximately 15 hours. Steady state conditions are attained after 2-3 doses of NAPRELAN® Tablets. Most of the drug is excreted in the urine, primarily as unchanged naproxen (less than 1%), 6-0-desmethyl naproxen (less than 1%) and their glucuronide or other conjugates (66-92%). A small amount (<5%) of the drug is excreted in the feces. The rate of excretion has been found to coincide closely with the rate of clearance from the plasma. In patients with renal failure, metabolites may accumulate.

                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Special Populations
                              
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Pediatric Use

                              No pediatric studies have been performed with NAPRELAN® Tablets, thus safety of NAPRELAN® Tablets in pediatric populations has not been established.

                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Renal Insufficiency

                              Naproxen pharmacokinetics have not been determined in subjects with renal insufficiency. Given that naproxen is metabolized and conjugates are primarily excreted by the kidneys, the potential exists for naproxen metabolites to accumulate in the presence of renal insufficiency. Elimination of naproxen is decreased in patients with severe renal impairment. Naproxen-containing products are not recommended for use in patients with moderate to severe and severe renal impairment (creatinine clearance <30mL/min)(see WARNINGS – Renal Effects).

                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         