
               
               
               Clinical Pharmacology
               
                  Pharmacokinetics

                     
 Clarithromycin is 
rapidly absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract after oral administration. The 
absolute bioavailability of 250 mg clarithromycin tablets was approximately 50%. 
For a single 500 mg dose of clarithromycin, food slightly delays the onset of 
clarithromycin absorption, increasing the peak time from approximately 2 to 2.5 
hours. Food also increases the clarithromycin peak plasma concentration by about 
24%, but does not affect the extent of clarithromycin bioavailability. Food does 
not affect the onset of formation of the antimicrobially active metabolite, 
14-OH clarithromycin or its peak plasma concentration but does slightly decrease 
the extent of metabolite formation, indicated by an 11% decrease in area under 
the plasma concentration-time curve (AUC). Therefore, clarithromycin tablets may 
be given without regard to food.

                     
 In nonfasting healthy 
human subjects (males and females), peak plasma concentrations were attained 
within 2 to 3 hours after oral dosing. Steady-state peak plasma clarithromycin 
concentrations were attained within 3 days and were approximately 1 to 2 mcg/mL 
with a 250 mg dose administered every 12 hours and 3 to 4 mcg/mL with a 500 mg 
dose administered every 8 to 12 hours. The elimination half-life of 
clarithromycin was about 3 to 4 hours with 250 mg administered every 12 hours 
but increased to 5 to 7 hours with 500 mg administered every 8 to 12 hours. The 
nonlinearity of clarithromycin pharmacokinetics is slight at the recommended 
doses of 250 mg and 500 mg administered every 8 to 12 hours. With a 250 mg every 
12 hours dosing, the principal metabolite, 14-OH clarithromycin, attains a peak 
steady-state concentration of about 0.6 mcg/mL and has an elimination half-life 
of 5 to 6 hours. With a 500 mg every 8 to 12 hours dosing, the peak steady-state 
concentration of 14-OH clarithromycin is slightly higher (up to 1 mcg/mL), and 
its elimination half-life is about 7 to 9 hours. With any of these dosing 
regimens, the steady-state concentration of this metabolite is generally 
attained within 3 to 4 days.

                     
 After a 250 mg tablet 
every 12 hours, approximately 20% of the dose is excreted in the urine as 
clarithromycin, while after a 500 mg tablet every 12 hours, the urinary 
excretion of clarithromycin is somewhat greater, approximately 30%. In 
comparison, after an oral dose of 250 mg (125 mg/5 mL) suspension every 12 
hours, approximately 40% is excreted in urine as clarithromycin. The renal 
clearance of clarithromycin is, however, relatively independent of the dose size 
and approximates the normal glomerular filtration rate. The major metabolite 
found in urine is 14-OH clarithromycin, which accounts for an additional 10% to 
15% of the dose with either a 250 mg or a 500 mg tablet administered every 12 
hours.

                     
 Steady-state 
concentrations of clarithromycin and 14-OH clarithromycin observed following 
administration of 500 mg doses of clarithromycin every 12 hours to adult 
patients with HIV infection were similar to those observed in healthy 
volunteers. In adult HIV-infected patients taking 500 or 1000 mg doses of 
clarithromycin every 12 hours, steady-state clarithromycin Cmax values ranged from 2 to 4 mcg/mL and 5 to 10 mcg/mL, 
respectively.

                     
 The steady-state 
concentrations of clarithromycin in subjects with impaired hepatic function did 
not differ from those in normal subjects; however, the 14-OH clarithromycin 
concentrations were lower in the hepatically impaired subjects. The decreased 
formation of 14-OH clarithromycin was at least partially offset by an increase 
in renal clearance of clarithromycin in the subjects with impaired hepatic 
function when compared to healthy subjects.

                     
 The pharmacokinetics of 
clarithromycin was also altered in subjects with impaired renal function (see 
PRECAUTIONS and DOSAGE AND 
ADMINISTRATION).

                     
 Clarithromycin and the 
14-OH clarithromycin metabolite distribute readily into body tissues and fluids. 
There are no data available on cerebrospinal fluid penetration. Because of high 
intracellular concentrations, tissue concentrations are higher than serum 
concentrations. Examples of tissue and serum concentrations are presented 
below.
 
CONCENTRATION

                     
    (after 250 mg q12h)    
Tissue Type    Tissue    Serum

                     
    (mcg/g)    (mcg/mL)
Tonsil    1.6    0.8
Lung    8.8    1.7

                     
 Clarithromycin 
extended-release tablets provide extended absorption of clarithromycin from the 
gastrointestinal tract after oral administration. Relative to an equal total 
daily dose of immediate-release clarithromycin tablets, clarithromycin 
extended-release tablets provide lower and later steady-state peak plasma 
concentrations but equivalent 24 hour AUC’s for both clarithromycin and its 
microbiologically-active metabolite, 14-OH clarithromycin. While the extent of 
formation of 14-OH clarithromycin following administration of clarithromycin 
extended-release tablets (2 x 500 mg once daily) is not affected by food, 
administration under fasting conditions is associated with approximately 30% 
lower clarithromycin AUC relative to administration with food. Therefore, 
clarithromycin extended-release tablets should be taken with food.

                     
 In healthy human 
subjects, steady-state peak plasma clarithromycin concentrations of 
approximately 2 to 3 mcg/mL were achieved about 5 to 8 hours after oral 
administration of 2 x 500 mg clarithromycin extended-release tablets once daily; 
for 14-OH clarithromycin, steady-state peak plasma concentrations of 
approximately 0.8 mcg/mL were attained about 6 to 9 hours after dosing. 
Steady-state peak plasma clarithromycin concentrations of approximately 1 to 2 
mcg/mL were achieved about 5 to 6 hours after oral administration of a single 
500 mg clarithromycin extended-release tablet once daily; for 14-OH 
clarithromycin, steady-state peak plasma concentrations of approximately 0.6 
mcg/mL were attained about 6 hours after dosing.
   Microbiology

                     
 Clarithromycin exerts 
its antibacterial action by binding to the 50S ribosomal subunit of susceptible 
microorganisms resulting in inhibition of protein synthesis.

                     
 Clarithromycin is active 
in vitro against a variety of aerobic and anaerobic 
gram-positive and gram-negative microorganisms as well as most Mycobacterium avium complex (MAC) microorganisms.

                     
 Additionally, the 14-OH 
clarithromycin metabolite also has clinically significant antimicrobial 
activity. The 14-OH clarithromycin is twice as active against Haemophilus influenzae microorganisms as the parent 
compound. However, for Mycobacterium avium complex 
(MAC) isolates the 14-OH metabolite is 4 to 7 times less active than 
clarithromycin. The clinical significance of this activity against Mycobacterium avium complex is unknown.

                     
 Clarithromycin has been 
shown to be active against most strains of the following microorganisms both 
in vitro and in clinical infections as described in 
the INDICATIONS AND USAGE 
section:

                     
 Aerobic 
Gram-positive Microorganisms

                     
 Staphylococcus aureus

                     
 Streptococcus pneumoniae

                     
 Streptococcus pyogenes

                     
 Aerobic 
Gram-negative Microorganisms

                     
 Haemophilus influenzae

                     
 Haemophilus parainfluenzae

                     
 Moraxella catarrhalis

                     
 Other 
Microorganisms

                     
 Mycoplasma pneumoniae

                     
 Chlamydia pneumoniae (TWAR)

                     
 The following in vitro data are available, but their clinical significance is unknown. 
Clarithromycin exhibits in vitro activity against 
most strains of the following microorganisms; however, the safety and 
effectiveness of clarithromycin in treating clinical infections due to these 
microorganisms have not been established in adequate and well-controlled 
clinical trials.

                     
 Aerobic 
Gram-positive Microorganisms

                     
 Streptococcus agalactiae

                     
 Streptococci (Groups C, F, G)

                     
 Viridans group 
streptococci

                     
 Aerobic 
Gram-negative Microorganisms

                     
 Bordetella pertussis

                     
 Legionella pneumophila

                     
 Pasteurella multocida

                     
 Anaerobic Gram-positive Microorganisms

                     
 Clostridium perfringens

                     
 Peptococcus niger

                     
 Propionibacterium acnes

                     
 Anaerobic Gram-negative Microorganisms

                     
 Prevotella melaninogenica 
(formerly Bacteriodes melaninogenicus)
   Susceptibility Testing   Dilution Techniques

                     
 Quantitative methods are 
used to determine antimicrobial minimum inhibitory concentrations (MICs). These 
MICs provide estimates of the susceptibility of bacteria to antimicrobial 
compounds. The MICs should be determined using a standardized procedure. 
Standardized procedures are based on a dilution method1 
(broth or agar) or equivalent with standardized inoculum concentrations and 
standardized concentrations of clarithromycin powder.

                  
               
               
            
         