
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY

               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action

                     
                        Nitisinone is a competitive inhibitor of 4-hydroxyphenyl-pyruvate dioxygenase, an enzyme upstream of fumarylacetoacetate hydrolase (FAH) in the tyrosine catabolic pathway. By inhibiting the normal catabolism of tyrosine in patients with HT-1, nitisinone prevents the accumulation of the catabolic intermediates maleylacetoacetate and fumarylacetoacetate. In patients with HT-1, these catabolic intermediates are converted to the toxic metabolites succinylacetone and succinylacetoacetate, which are responsible for the observed liver and kidney toxicity. Succinylacetone can also inhibit the porphyrin synthesis pathway leading to the accumulation of 5-aminolevulinate, a neurotoxin responsible for the porphyric crises characteristic of HT-1.

                        Nitisinone inhibits catabolism of the amino acid tyrosine and can result in elevated plasma levels of tyrosine. Therefore, treatment with nitisinone requires restriction of the dietary intake of tyrosine and phenylalanine to prevent the toxicity associated with elevated plasma levels of tyrosine [see Warnings and Precautions (5)].
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics

                     
                        No pharmacokinetic studies of nitisinone have been conducted in children or HT-1 patients.

                        The single-dose pharmacokinetics of nitisinone have been studied in ten healthy male volunteers aged 19-39 years (median 32 years). Nitisinone, 1 mg/kg body weight, was administered as a capsule and a liquid. The median time for maximum plasma concentration was 3 hours for the capsule and 15 minutes for the liquid. The capsule and liquid formulation were found to be bioequivalent based on an analysis of area under the plasma concentration-time curve and maximum plasma concentration (Cmax).

                        The mean terminal plasma half-life of nitisinone in healthy male volunteers was 54 hours.

                        In vitro binding of nitisinone to human plasma proteins is greater than 95%  at 50 μM concentration.

                        In vitro studies have shown that nitisinone is relatively stable in human liver microsomes with minor metabolism possibly mediated by CYP3A4 enzyme.

                        Based on in vitro studies, there is a potential for nitisinone to inhibit CYP2C9 at clinical dose [see Drug Interaction (7)].  Nitisinone is not expected to inhibit CYP 1A2,  2C19,  or 3A4 based on in vitro studies. Nitisinone's potential to inhibit CYP2D6 and CYP2E1 at the clinical dose is unknown due to limited data.

                        The effect of food on the pharmacokinetics of nitisinone has not been studied.

                     
                     
                  
               
            
         