
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
                  No specific interaction studies have been conducted with Exelon Patch (rivastigmine transdermal system).
                  
                     
                  
                  
                     
                  
                  
                     7.1 
                  
                  
                     Effect of Exelon on the Metabolism of Other Drugs
                  
                  Rivastigmine is primarily metabolized through hydrolysis by esterases. Minimal metabolism occurs via the major cytochrome P450 isoenzymes. Based on in-vitro studies, no pharmacokinetic drug interactions with drugs metabolized by the following isoenzyme systems are expected: CYP1A2, CYP2D6, CYP3A4/5, CYP2E1, CYP2C9, CYP2C8, or CYP2C19.
                  No pharmacokinetic interaction was observed between rivastigmine taken orally and digoxin, warfarin, diazepam or fluoxetine in studies in healthy volunteers. The increase in prothrombin time induced by warfarin is not affected by administration of rivastigmine.
                  
                     
                  
                  
                     
                  
                  
                     7.2 
                  
                  
                     Effect of Other Drugs on the Metabolism of Exelon
                  
                  Drugs that induce or inhibit CYP450 metabolism are not expected to alter the metabolism of rivastigmine.
                  Population PK analysis with a database of 625 patients showed that the pharmacokinetics of rivastigmine taken orally were not influenced by commonly prescribed medications such as antacids (n=77), antihypertensives (n=72), ß-blockers (n=42), calcium channel blockers (n=75), antidiabetics (n=21), nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (n=79), estrogens (n=70), salicylate analgesics (n=177), antianginals (n=35) and antihistamines (n=15).
                  
                     
                  
                  
                     
                  
                  
                     7.3 
                  
                  
                     Use with Anticholinergics
                  
                  
                     , 
                  
                  
                     C
                  
                  
                     holinomimetics and 
                  
                  
                     O
                  
                  
                     ther 
                  
                  
                     Cholinesterase I
                  
                  
                     nhibitors
                  
                  In view of its pharmacodynamic effects, rivastigmine should not be given concomitantly with other cholinomimetic drugs and might interfere with the activity of anticholinergic medications. A synergistic effect may be expected when cholinesterase inhibitors are given concurrently with succinylcholine, similar neuromuscular blocking agents or cholinergic agonists such as bethanechol.
               
               
            
         