
               
               
               7  DRUG
INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           Other adrenergic drugs may potentiate effect. Use with caution.
(5.3, 7.1)
                           Xanthine derivatives, steroids, diuretics or non-potassium
sparing diuretics may potentiate hypokalemia or ECG changes. Use with
caution. (7.2, 7.3)
                           MAO inhibitors, tricyclic antidepressants, and drugs that
prolong QTc interval may potentiate effect on cardiovascular system.
Use with extreme caution. (7.4)
                           Beta-blockers may decrease effectiveness. Use with caution
and only when medically necessary. (7.5)  
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 Adrenergic Drugs
                     
                        If additional adrenergic drugs are to be administered
by any route, they should be used with caution because the sympathetic
effects of STRIVERDI RESPIMAT may be potentiated [see Warnings
and Precautions (5.3, 5.5, 5.6, 5.7)].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 Xanthine Derivatives, Steroids, or Diuretics
                     
                        Concomitant treatment with xanthine
derivatives, steroids, or diuretics may potentiate any hypokalemic
effect of STRIVERDI RESPIMAT [see Warnings and Precautions
(5.7)].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3 Non-Potassium Sparing Diuretics
                     
                        The ECG changes and/or hypokalemia that may
result from the administration of non-potassium sparing diuretics
(such as loop or thiazide diuretics) can be acutely worsened by beta-agonists,
especially when the recommended dose of the beta-agonist is exceeded.
 Although the clinical significance of these effects is not known,
caution is advised in the co-administration of beta-agonists with
non-potassium-sparing diuretics.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4 Monoamine Oxidase Inhibitors, Tricyclic Antidepressants, QTc
Prolonging Drugs
                     
                        STRIVERDI RESPIMAT, as with other beta2-agonists,
should be administered with extreme caution to patients being treated
with monoamine oxidase inhibitors or tricyclic antidepressants or
other drugs known to prolong the QTc interval because the action of
adrenergic agonists on the cardiovascular system may be potentiated
by these agents.  Drugs that are known to prolong the QTc interval
may be associated with an increased risk of ventricular arrhythmias.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.5 Beta-Blockers
                     
                        Beta-adrenergic receptor antagonists (beta-blockers)
and STRIVERDI RESPIMAT may interfere with the effect of each other
when administered concurrently.  Beta-blockers not only block the
therapeutic effects of beta-agonists, but may produce severe bronchospasm
in COPD patients.  Therefore, patients with COPD should not normally
be treated with beta-blockers.  However, under certain circumstances,
e.g. as prophylaxis after myocardial infarction, there may be no acceptable
alternatives to the use of beta-blockers in patients with COPD.  In
this setting, cardioselective beta-blockers could be considered, although
they should be administered with caution.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.6 Inhibitors of Cytochrome P450 and P-gp Efflux Transporter
                     
                        In a drug interaction study using
the strong dual CYP and P-gp inhibitor ketoconazole, a 1.7-fold increase
of maximum plasma concentrations and AUC was observed [see
Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)]. STRIVERDI RESPIMAT was evaluated in clinical trials for up to
one year at doses up to twice the recommended therapeutic dose. No
dose adjustment is necessary.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         