
               
               
               12  CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Olodaterol is a long-acting beta2-adrenergic
agonist (LABA).  The compound exerts its pharmacological effects by
binding and activation of beta2-adrenoceptors
after topical administration by inhalation.  Activation of these receptors
in the airways results in a stimulation of intracellular adenyl cyclase,
an enzyme that mediates the synthesis of cyclic-3’, 5’ adenosine monophosphate
(cAMP). Elevated levels of cAMP induce bronchodilation by relaxation
of airway smooth muscle cells.  In vitro studies
have shown that olodaterol has 241-fold greater agonist activity at
beta2-adrenoceptors compared to beta1-adrenoceptors and 2,299-fold greater agonist activity
compared to beta3-adrenoceptors.  The clinical
significance of these findings is unknown.
                        Beta-adrenoceptors are divided into three
subtypes: beta1-adrenoceptors predominantly
expressed on cardiac smooth muscle, beta2-adrenoceptors
predominantly expressed on airway smooth muscle, and beta3-adrenoceptors predominantly expressed on adipose tissue.
Beta2-agonists cause bronchodilation. Although
the beta2-adrenoceptor is the predominant adrenergic
receptor in the airway smooth muscle, it is also present on the surface
of a variety of other cells, including lung epithelial and endothelial
cells and in the heart. The precise function of beta2-receptors in the heart is not known, but their presence raises the
possibility that even highly selective beta2-agonists may have cardiac effects.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        
                           Systemic Safety
                           
The major adverse effects of inhaled beta2-adrenergic agonists occur as a result of excessive activation of
systemic beta-adrenergic receptors. The most common adverse effects
in adults include skeletal muscle tremor and cramps, insomnia, tachycardia,
decreases in serum potassium, and increases in plasma glucose.
                        Changes in serum potassium were
evaluated in COPD patients in double-blind phase 3 studies. In pooled
data, at the recommended 5 mcg dose there was no clinically relevant
change compared to placebo in serum potassium.
                        
                           Electrophysiology
                           
The effect of STRIVERDI RESPIMAT on the QT/QTc interval of the ECG
was investigated in 24 healthy male and female volunteers in a double-blind,
randomized, placebo- and active (moxifloxacin)- controlled study at
single doses of 10, 20, 30, and 50 mcg. Dose-dependent QTcI (individual
subject corrected QT interval) prolongation was observed. The maximum
mean (one-sided 95% upper confidence bound) difference in QTcI from
placebo after baseline correction was 2.5 (5.6) ms, 6.1 (9.2) ms,
7.5 (10.7) ms and 8.5 (11.6) ms following doses of 10, 20, 30 and
50 mcg, respectively.
                        The effect of 5 mcg and 10 mcg  STRIVERDI RESPIMAT on heart rate
and rhythm was assessed using continuous 24-hour ECG recording (Holter
monitoring) in a subset of 772 patients in the 48-week, placebo-controlled
phase 3 trials. There were no dose- or time-related trends or patterns
observed for the magnitudes of mean changes in heart rate or premature
beats. Shifts from baseline to the end of treatment in premature beats
did not indicate meaningful differences between STRIVERDI RESPIMAT
5 mcg, 10 mcg, and placebo.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        Olodaterol showed linear pharmacokinetics. On repeated once-daily
inhalation steady-state of olodaterol plasma concentrations was achieved
after 8 days, and the extent of exposure was increased up to 1.8-fold
as compared to a single dose.
                        
                           Absorption
                           
Olodaterol
reaches maximum plasma concentrations generally within 10 to 20 minutes
following drug inhalation.  In healthy volunteers, the absolute bioavailability
of olodaterol following inhalation was estimated to be approximately
30%, whereas the absolute bioavailability was below 1% when given
as an oral solution. Thus, the systemic availability of olodaterol
after inhalation is mainly determined by lung absorption, while any
swallowed portion of the dose only negligibly contributes to systemic
exposure.
                        
                           Distribution
                           
Olodaterol exhibits multi-compartmental disposition kinetics
after inhalation as well as after intravenous administration. The
volume of distribution is high (1110 L), suggesting extensive distribution
into tissue. In vitro binding of [14C] olodaterol to human plasma proteins is independent of concentration
and is approximately 60%.
                        
                           Metabolism
                           
Olodaterol is substantially
metabolized by direct glucuronidation and by O-demethylation at the
methoxy moiety followed by conjugation. Of the six metabolites identified,
only the unconjugated demethylation product binds to beta2-receptors.  This metabolite, however, is not detectable
in plasma after chronic inhalation of the recommended therapeutic
dose.
                        Cytochrome P450
isozymes CYP2C9 and CYP2C8, with negligible contribution of CYP3A4,
are involved in the O-demethylation of olodaterol, while uridine diphosphate
glycosyl transferase isoforms UGT2B7, UGT1A1, 1A7, and 1A9 were shown
to be involved in the formation of olodaterol glucuronides.
                        
                           Elimination
                           
Total clearance of olodaterol in healthy volunteers is 872 mL/min,
and renal clearance is 173 mL/min. The terminal half-life following
intravenous administration is 22 hours. The terminal half-life following
inhalation in contrast is about 45 hours, indicating that the latter
is determined by absorption rather than by elimination processes.
 However, the effective half-life at daily dose of 5 μg calculated
from Cmax from COPD patients is 7.5 hours.
                        Following intravenous administration
of [14C]-labeled olodaterol, 38% of the
radioactive dose was recovered in the urine and 53% was recovered
in feces. The amount of unchanged olodaterol recovered in the urine
after intravenous administration was 19%. Following oral administration,
only 9% of olodaterol and/or its metabolites was recovered in urine,
while the major portion was recovered in feces (84%). More than 90%
of the dose was excreted within 6 and 5 days following intravenous
and oral administration, respectively. Following inhalation, excretion
of unchanged olodaterol in urine within the dosing interval in healthy
volunteers at steady state accounted for 5% to 7% of the dose.
                        
                           Special Populations
                           
A pharmacokinetic meta-analysis showed that no dose adjustment
is necessary based on the effect of age, gender, and weight on systemic
exposure in COPD patients after inhalation of STRIVERDI RESPIMAT.
                        
                           Renal Impairment
                           
Olodaterol levels were increased by approximately 40%
in subjects with severe renal impairment.  A study in subjects with
mild and moderate renal impairment was not performed.
                        
                           Hepatic Impairment
                           
Subjects with mild and moderate hepatic impairment showed no changes
in Cmax or AUC, nor did protein binding differ
between mild and moderate hepatically impaired subjects and their
healthy controls. A study in subjects with severe hepatic impairment
was not performed. 
                        
                           Drug-Drug Interactions
                           
Drug-drug interaction
studies were carried out using fluconazole as a model inhibitor of
CYP 2C9 and ketoconazole as a potent P-gp (and CYP3A4, 2C8, 2C9) inhibitor.
                        
                           Fluconazole: Co-administration of 400 mg fluconazole once a day for 14 days
had no relevant effect on systemic exposure to olodaterol.
                        
                           Ketoconazole: Co-administration of 400 mg ketoconazole once a day for 14 days
increased olodaterol Cmax by 66% and AUC0-1 by 68%. 
                        
                           Tiotropium: Co-administration of tiotropium
bromide, delivered as fixed-dose combination with olodaterol, for
21 days had no relevant effect on systemic exposure to olodaterol,
and vice versa.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         