
               
               
               
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              •Carbamazepine and other enzyme inducers decrease plasma concentrations of risperidone. Increase the risperidone dose up to double the patient’s usual dose. Titrate slowly. (7.1) 
                           
                              •Fluoxetine, paroxetine, and other CYP 2D6 enzyme inhibitors increase plasma concentrations of risperidone. Reduce the initial dose. Do not exceed a final dose of 8 mg per day of risperidone. (7.1) 
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 Pharmacokinetic-Related Interactions 
                     
                        The dose of risperidone should be adjusted when used in combination with CYP2D6 enzyme inhibitors (e.g., fluoxetine, and paroxetine) and enzyme inducers (e.g., carbamazepine) [see Table 18 and Dosage and Administration (2.5)]. Dose adjustment is not recommended for risperidone when coadministered with ranitidine, cimetidine, amitriptyline or erythromycin [see Table 18].
                        
                        


                     



                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Effect of Risperidone on other Drugs 
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        Lithium
                     
                     
                        Repeated oral doses of risperidone (3 mg twice daily) did not affect the exposure (AUC) or peak plasma concentrations (Cmax) of lithium (n = 13). Dose adjustment for lithium is not recommended.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        Valproate
                     
                     
                        Repeated oral doses of risperidone (4 mg once daily) did not affect the pre-dose or average plasma concentrations and exposure (AUC) of valproate (1000 mg/day in three divided doses) compared to placebo (n = 21). However, there was a 20% increase in valproate peak plasma concentration (Cmax) after concomitant administration of risperidone. Dose adjustment for valproate is not recommended.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        Digoxin
                     
                     
                        Risperidone (0.25 mg twice daily) did not show a clinically relevant effect on the pharmacokinetics of digoxin. Dose adjustment for digoxin is not recommended.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 	Pharmacodynamic-Related Interactions
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Centrally-Acting Drugs and Alcohol
                     
                        Given the primary CNS effects of risperidone, caution should be used when risperidone is taken in combination with other centrally-acting drugs and alcohol.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Drugs with Hypotensive Effects
                     
                        Because of its potential for inducing hypotension, risperidone may enhance the hypotensive effects of other therapeutic agents with this potential.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Levodopa and Dopamine Agonists
                     
                        Risperidone may antagonize the effects of levodopa and dopamine agonists.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Clozapine
                     
                        Chronic administration of clozapine with risperidone may decrease the clearance of risperidone.
                     
                  
               
            
         