
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           If simvastatin is coadministered with amlodipine, do not exceed doses greater than 20 mg daily of simvastatin (7)
                           Antidiabetic drugs: Dosage adjustment of antidiabetic may be required (7)
                           Cholestyramine and colestipol: Reduced absorption of thiazides (12.3)
                           Lithium: Increased risk of lithium toxicity. Monitor serum lithium concentrations during concurrent use. (7)
                           NSAID use may lead to increased risk of renal impairment and loss of anti-hypertensive effect (7)
                           Dual inhibition of the renin-angiotensin system: Increased risk of renal impairment, hypotension, and hyperkalemia (7)
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        No drug interaction studies have been conducted with amlodipine, valsartan and hydrochlorothiazide and other drugs, although studies have been conducted with the individual components. A pharmacokinetic drug-drug interaction study has been conducted to address the potential for pharmacokinetic interaction between the triple combination, amlodipine, valsartan and hydrochlorothiazide, and the corresponding 3 double combinations. No clinically relevant interaction was observed. 
                        
                           Amlodipine 
                        
                        
                           
                              Simvastatin: 
                           Coadministration of simvastatin with amlodipine increases the systemic exposure of simvastatin. Limit the dose of simvastatin in patients on amlodipine to 20 mg daily. 
                        
                           
                              CYP3A4 Inhibitors
                           
                           : Coadministration with CYP3A inhibitors (moderate and strong) result in increased systemic exposure to amlodipine warranting dose reduction. Monitor for symptoms of hypotension and edema when amlodipine is coadministered with CYP3A4 inhibitors to determine the need for dose adjustment. 
                        
                           
                              CYP3A4 Inducers
                           
                           : No information is available on the quantitative effects of CYP3A4 inducers on amlodipine. Blood pressure should be monitored when amlodipine is coadministered with CYP3A4 inducers. 
                        
                           Valsartan 
                        
                        No clinically significant pharmacokinetic interactions were observed when valsartan was coadministered with amlodipine, atenolol, cimetidine, digoxin, furosemide, glyburide, hydrochlorothiazide, or indomethacin. The valsartan-atenolol combination was more antihypertensive than either component, but it did not lower the heart rate more than atenolol alone. 
                        
                           In vitro metabolism studies have indicated that CYP450 mediated drug interaction between valsartan and coadministered drugs are unlikely because of the low extent of metabolism [see Pharmacokinetics – Valsartan, 
                           (12.3)]. 
                        Coadministration of valsartan and warfarin did not change the pharmacokinetics of valsartan or the time-course of the anticoagulant properties of warfarin. 
                        
                           
                              Potassium:
                            Concomitant use of valsartan with other agents that block the renin-angiotensin system, potassium-sparing diuretics (e.g., spironolactone, triamterene, amiloride), potassium supplements, or salt substitutes containing potassium may lead to increases in serum potassium and in heart failure patients to increases in serum creatinine. If co-medication is considered necessary, monitoring of serum potassium is advisable. 
                        
                           
                              Non-Steroidal Anti-Inflammatory Agents including Selective Cyclooxygenase-2 Inhibitors (COX-2 Inhibitors): 
                           
                        
                        In patients who are elderly, volume-depleted (including those on diuretic therapy), or with compromised renal function, coadministration of NSAIDs, including selective COX-2 inhibitors, with angiotensin II receptor antagonists, including valsartan, may result in deterioration of renal function, including possible acute renal failure. These effects are usually reversible. Monitor renal function periodically in patients receiving valsartan and NSAID therapy. 
                        The antihypertensive effect of angiotensin II receptor antagonists, including valsartan may be attenuated by NSAIDs including selective COX-2 inhibitors. 
                        
                           
                              Dual Blockade of the Renin-Angiotensin System (RAS):
                            Dual blockade of the RAS with angiotensin receptor blockers, ACE inhibitors, or aliskiren is associated with increased risks of hypotension, hyperkalemia, and changes in renal function (including acute renal failure) compared to monotherapy. Most patients receiving the combination of two RAS inhibitors do not obtain any additional benefit compared to monotherapy. In general, avoid combined use of RAS inhibitors. Closely monitor blood pressure, renal function, and electrolytes in patients on amlodipine, valsartan and hydrochlorothiazide and other agents that affect the RAS. 
                        Do not coadminister aliskiren with amlodipine, valsartan and hydrochlorothiazide in patients with diabetes. Avoid use of aliskiren with amlodipine, valsartan and hydrochlorothiazide in patients with renal impairment (GFR <60 mL/min).
                        
                           Valsartan-Hydrochlorothiazide
                        
                        
                           Lithium: Increases in serum lithium concentrations and lithium toxicity have been reported during concomitant administration of lithium with angiotensin II receptor antagonists or thiazides. Monitor lithium levels in patients taking amlodipine, valsartan and hydrochlorothiazide.
                        
                           Hydrochlorothiazide 
                        
                        When administered concurrently the following drugs may interact with thiazide diuretics: 
                        
                           
                              Antidiabetic drugs (oral agents and insulin):
                            Dosage adjustment of the antidiabetic drug may be required. 
                        
                           
                              Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs 
                              (NSAIDs and COX-2 selective inhibitors
                           
                           ): When amlodipine, valsartan and hydrochlorothiazide and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory agents are used concomitantly, the patient should be observed closely to determine if the desired effect of diuretic is obtained. 
                        
                           
                              Carbamazepine: May lead to symptomatic hyponatremia. 
                        
                           
                              Ion exchange resins:
                            Staggering the dosage of hydrochlorothiazide and ion exchange resins (e.g., cholestyramine, colestipol) such that hydrochlorothiazide is administered at least 4 hours before or 4 to 6 hours after the administration of resins would potentially minimize the interaction [see CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY (12.3)]. 
                        
                           
                              Cyclosporine: 
                           Concomitant treatment with cyclosporine may increase the risk of hyperuricemia and gout-type complications. 
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         