
               
               
               7. DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
                  No drug interaction studies have been conducted with clonidine hydrochloride extended-release tablets in children. The following have been reported with other oral immediate-release formulations of clonidine.
               
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              •Sedating Drugs: Clonidine may potentiate the CNS-depressive effects of alcohol, barbiturates or other sedating drugs. (7.1)
                           
                           
                              •Tricyclic Antidepressants: May reduce the hypotensive effect of clonidine. (7.2)
                           
                           
                              •Drugs Known to Affect Sinus Node Function or AV Nodal Conduction: Caution is warranted in patients receiving clonidine concomitantly with agents known to affect sinus node function or AV nodal conduction (e.g., digitalis, calcium channel blockers and beta-blockers) due to a potential for additive effects such as bradycardia and AV block. (7.3)
                           
                           
                              •Use with other products containing clonidine: Do not use clonidine hydrochloride extended-release tablets concomitantly with other products containing clonidine (e.g. Catapres®). (7.4)
                           
                           
                              •Antihypertensive drugs: Use caution when coadministered with clonidine hydrochloride extended-release tablets. (7.5)
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 Interactions with CNS-depressant Drugs
                     
                        Clonidine may potentiate the CNS-depressive effects of alcohol, barbiturates or other sedating drugs.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 Interactions with Tricyclic Antidepressants
                     
                        If a patient is receiving clonidine hydrochloride and also taking tricyclic antidepressants the hypotensive effects of clonidine may be reduced.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3 Interactions with Drugs Known to Affect Sinus Node Function or AV Nodal Conduction
                     
                        Due to a potential for additive effects such as bradycardia and AV block, caution is warranted in patients receiving clonidine concomitantly with agents known to affect sinus node function or AV nodal conduction (e.g., digitalis, calcium channel blockers and beta-blockers).
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4 Use with other products containing clonidine
                     
                        Do not use clonidine hydrochloride extended-release tablets concomitantly with other products containing clonidine (e.g. Catapres®).
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.5 Antihypertensive Drugs
                     
                        Use caution when clonidine hydrochloride extended-release tablets are administered concomitantly with antihypertensive drugs, due to the potential for additive pharmacodynamic effects (e.g., hypotension, syncope) [see 
                              Warnings and Precautions (5.2)
                           ].
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         