
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  
                     
                         •Apomorphine – profound hypotension and loss of consciousness. Concomitant use with ondansetron is contraindicated. (7.2)
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 Drugs Affecting Cytochrome P-450 Enzymes
                     
                        Ondansetron does not appear to induce or inhibit the cytochrome P-450 drug-metabolizing enzyme system of the liver. Because ondansetron is metabolized by hepatic cytochrome P-450 drug-metabolizing enzymes (CYP3A4, CYP2D6, CYP1A2), inducers or inhibitors of these enzymes may change the clearance and, hence, the half-life of ondansetron [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)]. On the basis of limited available data, no dosage adjustment is recommended for patients on these drugs.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 Apomorphine
                     
                        Based on reports of profound hypotension and loss of consciousness when apomorphine was administered with ondansetron, the concomitant use of apomorphine with ondansetron is contraindicated [see Contraindications (4)].
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3 Phenytoin, Carbamazepine, and Rifampin
                     
                        In patients treated with potent inducers of CYP3A4 (i.e., phenytoin, carbamazepine, and rifampin), the clearance of ondansetron was significantly increased and ondansetron blood concentrations were decreased. However, on the basis of available data, no dosage adjustment for ondansetron is recommended for patients on these drugs [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4 Tramadol
                     
                        Although there are no data on pharmacokinetic drug interactions between ondansetron and tramadol, data from two small studies indicate that concomitant use of ondansetron may result in reduced analgesic activity of tramadol. Patients on concomitant ondansetron self administered tramadol more frequently in these studies, leading to an increased cumulative dose in patient controlled administration (PCA) of tramadol.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.5 Serotonergic Drugs
                     
                        Serotonin syndrome (including altered mental status, autonomic instability, and neuromuscular symptoms) has been described following the concomitant use of 5-HT3 receptor antagonists and other serotonergic drugs, including selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) and serotonin and noradrenaline reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs) [see Warnings and Precautions (5.3)].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.6 Chemotherapy
                     
                        In humans, carmustine, etoposide, and cisplatin do not affect the pharmacokinetics of ondansetron.
                        In a crossover study in 76 pediatric patients, intravenous ondansetron did not increase blood levels of high-dose methotrexate.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.7 Temazepam
                     
                        The coadministration of ondansetron had no effect on the pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of temazepam.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.8 Alfentanil and Atracurium
                     
                        Ondansetron does not alter the respiratory depressant effects produced by alfentanil or the degree of neuromuscular blockade produced by atracurium. Interactions with general or local anesthetics have not been studied.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         