
               
               
               
                  CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY 
               
               
                  
                     Pharmacokinetics 
                     
                        

                     The absorption of demeclocycline is slower than that of tetracycline. The time to reach the peak concentration is about 4 hours. After a 150 mg oral dose of demeclocycline tablet, the mean concentrations at 1 hour and 3 hours are 0.46 and 1.22 µg/mL (n = 6), respectively.  The serum half-life ranges between 10 and 16 hours. When demeclocycline hydrochloride is given concomitantly with some dairy products, or antacids containing aluminum, calcium, or magnesium, the extent of absorption is reduced by more than 50%. Demeclocycline hydrochloride penetrates well into various body fluids and tissues. The percent of demeclocycline hydrochloride bound to plasma protein is about 40% using a dialysis equilibrium method and 90% using an ultra-filtration method. Demeclocycline hydrochloride, like other tetracyclines, is concentrated in the liver and excreted into the bile where it is found in much higher concentrations than in the blood. The rate of demeclocycline hydrochloride renal clearance (35 mL/min/1.73 m2) is less than half that of tetracycline. Following a single 150 mg dose of demeclocycline hydrochloride in normal volunteers, 44% (n = 8) was excreted in urine and 13% and 46%, respectively, were excreted in feces in two patients within 96 hours as active drug.

                     

                     Microbiology

                        

                     
                     Mechanism of Action

                     The tetracyclines are primarily bacteriostatic and are thought to exert their antimicrobial effect by the inhibition of protein synthesis.  The tetracyclines, including demeclocycline have a similar antimicrobial spectrum of activity against a wide range of gram-negative and gram-positive organisms.  

                        
Mechanism(s) of Resistance

                     Resistance to tetracyclines may be mediated by efflux, alteration in the target site of tetracycline, enzymatic inactivation, and decreased  bacterial permeability to the tetracycline or a combination of these mechanisms.

                     

                     Cross Resistance

                     Cross-resistance between antibiotics of the tetracycline family occurs.

                     
Demeclocycline has been shown to be active against most isolates of the following bacteria, in vitro and/or in clinical infections as described in the INDICATIONS AND USAGE section.

                     
Gram-positive bacteria

                     Bacillus anthracis
Listeria monocytogenes
Staphylococcus aureus
Streptococcus pneumoniae
                  
                  Gram-negative bacteria

                     Bartonella bacilliformis
                     

                     Brucella species

                     Calymmatobacterium granulomatis
Campylobacter fetus
Francisella tularensis
Haemophilus ducreyi
Haemophilus influenzae
Neisseria gonorrhoeae
Vibrio cholerae
Yersinia pestis

                        

                     
                  
                  Because isolates of the following groups of gram-negative bacteria have been shown to be resistant to tetracyclines, culture and susceptibility testing are especially recommended:
                  
                     Acinetobacter species

                     Enterobacter aerogenes
Escherichia coli
Klebsiella species

                     Shigella species
                  Other microorganisms

                     Actinomyces israelii
Borrelia recurrentis
Chlamydia psittaci
Chlamydia trachomatis
Clostridium species
Entamoeba species
Fusobacterium fusiforme
Mycoplasma pneumoniae
Propionibacterium acnes
Rickettsiae
Treponema pallidum subspecies pallidum
Treponema pallidum subspecies pertenue
Ureaplasma urealyticum
                  
                  
                     Susceptibility Test Methods 
                  
                  When available, the clinical microbiology laboratory should provide the results of in vitro susceptibility test results for antimicrobial drug products used in resident hospitals to the physician as periodic reports that describe the susceptibility profile of nosocomial and community-acquired pathogens. These reports should aid the physician in selecting an antibacterial drug product for treatment.
                  
                     Dilution Techniques
                  
                  Quantitative methods are used to determine antimicrobial minimum inhibitory concentrations (MICs).  These MICs provide estimates of the susceptibility of bacteria to antimicrobial compounds.  The MICs should be determined using a standardized test method (broth and/or agar)1,2,3.  The MIC values should be interpreted according to the criteria in Table 1.
                  
                     Diffusion techniques 
                  Quantitative methods that require measurement of zone diameters can also provide reproducible estimates of the susceptibility of bacteria to antimicrobial compounds. The zone size provides an estimate of the susceptibility of bacteria to antimicrobial compounds. The zone size should be determined using a standardized test method.2,4 This procedure uses paper disks impregnated with 30 mcg tetracycline to test the susceptibility of microorganisms to tetracycline. The disc diffusion interpretive criteria are provided in Table 1.

                  

                  

A report of Susceptible indicates that the antimicrobial is likely to inhibit growth of the pathogen if the antimicrobial compound reaches the concentrations at the infection site necessary to inhibit growth of the pathogen. A report of Intermediate indicates that the result should be considered equivocal, and, if the microorganism is not fully susceptible to alternative, clinically feasible drugs, the test should be repeated. This category implies possible clinical applicability in body sites where the drug product is physiologically concentrated or in situations where a high dosage of the drug product can be used. This category also provides a buffer zone that prevents small uncontrolled technical factors from causing major discrepancies in interpretation. A report of Resistant indicates that the antimicrobial is not likely to inhibit growth of the pathogen if the antimicrobial compound reaches the concentrations usually achievable at the infection site; other therapy should be selected.




                  

                  Quality Control

                  Standardized susceptibility test procedures require the use of laboratory controls to monitor and ensure the accuracy and precision of supplies and reagents used in the assay, and the techniques of the individuals performing the test.1,2,3,4 Standard tetracycline powder should provide the following range of MIC values noted in Table 2. For the diffusion technique using the 30 mcg tetracycline disk, the criteria in Table 2 should be achieved.

                  


