
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
                  Olaparib is primarily metabolized by CYP3A.
               
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              •CYP3A Inhibitors:  Avoid concomitant use of strong and moderate CYP3A inhibitors.  If the inhibitor cannot be avoided, reduce the dose. (2.3, 7.2)
                           
                              •CYP3A Inducers:  Avoid concomitant use of strong and moderate CYP3A inducers.  If a moderate CYP3A inducer cannot be avoided, be aware of a potential for decreased efficacy. (7.3)
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 Anticancer Agents
                     
                        Clinical studies of Lynparza in combination with other myelosuppressive anticancer agents, including DNA damaging agents, indicate a potentiation and prolongation of myelosuppressive toxicity.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 Drugs that may Increase Olaparib Plasma Concentrations
                     
                        In patients (N=57), co-administration of itraconazole, a strong CYP3A inhibitor, increased AUC of olaparib by 2.7-fold.  A moderate CYP3A inhibitor, fluconazole, is predicted to increase the AUC of olaparib by 2-fold. 
                        Avoid concomitant use of strong CYP3A inhibitors (e.g., itraconazole, telithromycin, clarithromycin, ketoconazole, voriconazole, nefazodone, posaconazole, ritinovir, lopinavir/ritinovir, indinavir, saquinavir, nelfinavir, boceprevir, telaprevir) and moderate CYP3A inhibitors (e.g., amprenavir, aprepitant, atazanavir, ciprofloxacin, crizotinib, darunavir/ritonavir, diltiazem, erythromycin, fluconazole, fosamprenavir, imatinib, verapamil).  If the strong or moderate CYP3A inhibitors must be co-administered, reduce the dose of Lynparza [see
                           
                              Dosage and Administration (2.4)
                           
                           ].
                        Avoid grapefruit and Seville oranges during Lynparza treatment [see 
                           
                              Dosage and Administration (2.4)
                           
                            and 
                           
                              Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)
                           
                           ].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3 Drugs that may Decrease Olaparib Plasma Concentrations
                     
                        In patients (N=22), co-administration of rifampicin, a strong CYP3A inducer, decreased AUC of olaparib by 87%.  A moderate CYP3A inducer, efavirenz, is predicted to decrease the AUC of olaparib by 50-60%.
                        Avoid concomitant use of strong CYP3A inducers (e.g., phenytoin, rifampicin, carbamazepine, St. John’s Wort) and moderate CYP3A4 inducers (e.g., bosentan, efavirenz, etravirine, modafinil, nafcillin).  If a moderate CYP3A inducer cannot be avoided, be aware of a potential for decreased efficacy of Lynparza [see
                           
                              Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)
                           
                           ].
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         