
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Lynparza is an inhibitor of poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP) enzymes, including PARP1, PARP2, and PARP3.  PARP enzymes are involved in normal cellular homeostasis, such as DNA transcription, cell cycle regulation, and DNA repair.  Olaparib has been shown to inhibit growth of select tumor cell lines in vitro and decrease tumor growth in mouse xenograft models of human cancer both as monotherapy or following platinum-based chemotherapy.  Increased cytotoxicity and anti-tumor activity following treatment with olaparib were noted in cell lines and mouse tumor models with deficiencies in BRCA.  In vitro studies have shown that olaparib-induced cytotoxicity may involve inhibition of PARP enzymatic activity and increased formation of PARP-DNA complex, resulting in disruption of cellular homeostasis and cell death.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        
                           Absorption
                        
                        Following oral administration of olaparib via the capsule formulation, absorption is rapid with peak plasma concentrations typically achieved between 1 to 3 hours after dosing.  On multiple dosing there is no marked accumulation (accumulation ratio of 1.4 – 1.5 for twice daily dosing), with steady state exposures achieved within 3 to 4 days. 
                        Limited data suggest that the systemic exposure (AUC) of olaparib increases less than proportionally with dose over the dose range of 100 to 400 mg, but the PK data were variable across trials.
                        Co-administration with a high fat meal slowed the rate (Tmax delayed by 2 hours) of absorption, but did not significantly alter the extent of olaparib absorption (mean AUC increased by approximately 20%).
                        
                           Distribution
                        
                        Olaparib had a mean (± standard deviation) apparent volume of distribution at steady state of 167 ± 196 L after a single 400 mg dose of olaparib.  The in vitro protein binding of olaparib at plasma concentrations achieved following dosing at 400 mg twice daily is approximately 82%.
                        
                           Metabolism
                        
                        
                           In vitro, CYP3A4 was shown to be the enzyme primarily responsible for the metabolism of olaparib.
                        Following oral dosing of 14C-olaparib to female patients, unchanged olaparib accounted for the majority of the circulating radioactivity in plasma (70%).  It was extensively metabolized with unchanged drug accounting for 15% and 6% of radioactivity in urine and feces, respectively.  The majority of the metabolism is attributable to oxidation reactions with a number of the components produced undergoing subsequent glucuronide or sulfate conjugation.
                        
                           Excretion
                        
                        A mean (± standard deviation) terminal plasma half-life of 11.9 ± 4.8 hours and apparent plasma clearance of 8.6 ± 7.1L/h were observed after a single 400 mg dose of olaparib.
                        Following a single dose of 14C-olaparib, 86% of the dosed radioactivity was recovered within a 7-day collection period, 44% via the urine and 42% via the feces.  The majority of the material was excreted as metabolites.
                        Based on preliminary data from a dedicated renal impairment trial, the mean AUC and Cmax of olaparib increased by 1.5- and 1.2-fold, respectively, when olaparib was dosed in patients with mild renal impairment (CLcr = 50-80 mL/min; N=14) compared to those with normal renal function (CLcr >80 mL/min; N=8). There are no data in patients with CLcr <50 mL/min or in patients on dialysis.
                        
                           Drug Interactions 
                        
                        
                           In vitro, olaparib was an inhibitor of CYP3A4 and an inducer of CYP2B6 at higher concentrations than are clinically achieved.  Olaparib produced little/no inhibition of other CYP isozymes.  In vitro studies have shown that olaparib is a substrate of CYP3A4.
                        Based on the data from a drug-interaction trial (N=57), the AUC and Cmax of olaparib increased by 2.7-and 1.4-fold, respectively, when olaparib was administered in combination with itraconazole, a strong CYP3A inhibitor.  Simulations using physiologically-based pharmacokinetic (PBPK) models suggested that a moderate CYP3A inhibitor (fluconazole) may increase the AUC and Cmax of olaparib by 2-and 1.1-fold, respectively.
                        Based on the data from a drug-interaction trial (N=22), the AUC and Cmax of olaparib decreased by 87% and 71%, respectively, when olaparib was administered in combination with rifampicin, a strong CYP3A inducer.  Simulations using PBPK models suggested that a moderate CYP3A inducer (efavirenz) may decrease the AUC and Cmax of olaparib by 50 - 60% and 20 - 30%, respectively.
                        
                           In vitro studies have shown that olaparib is a substrate of P-gp and an inhibitor of BCRP, OATP1B1, OCT1, OCT2, OAT3, MATE1 and MATE2K. The clinical relevance of these findings is unknown.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         