
                     
                     
                     Drug Interactions

                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           CNS-Active Drugs

                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Ethanol:  An additive effect on psychomotor performance was seen with coadministration of eszopiclone and ethanol 0.70 g/kg for up to 4 hours after ethanol administration.

                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Paroxetine:  Coadministration of single doses of eszopiclone 3 mg and paroxetine 20 mg daily for 7 days produced no pharmacokinetic or pharmacodynamic interaction.

                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Lorazepam:  Coadministration of single doses of eszopiclone 3 mg and lorazepam 2 mg did not have clinically relevant effects on the pharmacodynamics or pharmacokinetics of either drug.

                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Olanzapine:  Coadministration of eszopiclone 3 mg and olanzapine 10 mg produced a decrease in DSST scores.  The interaction was pharmacodynamic; there was no alteration in the pharmacokinetics of either drug.

                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Drugs That Inhibit CYP3A4 (Ketoconazole)

                           
                              CYP3A4 is a major metabolic pathway for elimination of eszopiclone.  The AUC of eszopiclone was increased 2.2-fold by coadministration of ketoconazole, a potent inhibitor of CYP3A4, 400 mg daily for 5 days.  Cmax and t1/2 were increased 1.4-fold and 1.3-fold, respectively.  Other strong inhibitors of CYP3A4 (e.g., itraconazole, clarithromycin, nefazodone, troleandomycin, ritonavir, nelfinavir) would be expected to behave similarly.

                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Drugs That Induce CYP3A4 (Rifampicin)

                           
                              Racemic zopiclone exposure was decreased 80% by concomitant use of rifampicin, a potent inducer of CYP3A4.  A similar effect would be expected with eszopiclone.

                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Drugs Highly Bound To Plasma Protein

                           
                              Eszopiclone is not highly bound to plasma proteins (52-59% bound); therefore, the disposition of eszopiclone is not expected to be sensitive to alterations in protein binding.  Administration of eszopiclone 3 mg to a patient taking another drug that is highly protein-bound would not be expected to cause an alteration in the free concentration of either drug.

                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Drugs With A Narrow Therapeutic Index

                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Digoxin:  A single dose of eszopiclone 3 mg did not affect the pharmacokinetics of digoxin measured at steady state following dosing of 0.5 mg twice daily for one day and 0.25 mg daily for the next 6 days.

                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Warfarin:  Eszopiclone 3 mg administered daily for 5 days did not affect the pharmacokinetics of (R)- or (S)-warfarin, nor were there any changes in the pharmacodynamic profile (prothrombin time) following a single 25 mg oral dose of warfarin.

                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               