
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  
                  
                  Oxybutynin chloride exerts a direct antispasmodic effect on smooth muscle and inhibits the muscarinic action of acetylcholine on smooth muscle. Oxybutynin chloride exhibits only one-fifth of the anticholinergic activity of atropine on the rabbit detrusor muscle, but four to ten times the antispasmodic activity. No blocking effects occur at skeletal neuromuscular junctions or autonomic ganglia (antinicotinic effects).
                  Oxybutynin chloride relaxes bladder smooth muscle. In patients with conditions characterized by involuntary bladder contractions, cystometric studies have demonstrated that oxybutynin increases bladder (vesical) capacity, diminishes the frequency of uninhibited contractions of the detrusor muscle, and delays the initial desire to void. Oxybutynin thus decreases urgency and the frequency of both incontinent episodes and voluntary urination.
                  Antimuscarinic activity resides predominantly in the R-isomer. A metabolite, desethyloxybutynin, has pharmacological activity similar to that of oxybutynin in in vitro studies.
                  
 

                  
                  
                  Following the first dose of oxybutynin chloride extended release tablets, oxybutynin plasma concentrations rise for 4 to 6 hours; thereafter steady concentrations are maintained for up to 24 hours, minimizing fluctuations between peak and trough concentrations associated with oxybutynin.
                  The relative bioavailabilities of R- and S-oxybutynin from oxybutynin chloride extended release tablets are 156% and 187%, respectively, compared with oxybutynin. The mean pharmacokinetic parameters for R- and S-oxybutynin are summarized in Table 1. The plasma concentration-time profiles for R- and S-oxybutynin are similar in shape; Figure 1 shows the profile for R-oxybutynin.
                  


                  



                     
                  
                  Steady-state oxybutynin plasma concentrations are achieved by Day 3 of repeated oxybutynin chloride extended release tablet dosing, with no observed drug accumulation or change in oxybutynin and desethyloxybutynin pharmacokinetic parameters.
                  Pharmacokinetic information for pediatric patients 5 to 15 years of age with symptoms of detrusor overactivity associated with a neurological condition (e.g., spina bifida) is approved for Alza Corporation's oxybutynin chloride extended release tablets. However, due to Alza Corporation's marketing exclusivity rights, this drug product is not labeled for pediatric use.
                  
 

                  
                  
                  The rate and extent of absorption and metabolism of oxybutynin are similar under fed and fasted conditions.
                  
 

                  
                  
                  Oxybutynin is widely distributed in body tissues following systemic absorption. The volume of distribution is 193 L after intravenous administration of 5 mg oxybutynin chloride. Both enantiomers of oxybutynin are highly bound (>99%) to plasma proteins. Both enantiomers of N-desethyloxybutynin are also highly bound (>97%) to plasma proteins. The major binding protein is alpha-1 acid glycoprotein.
                  
 

                  
                  
                  Oxybutynin is metabolized primarily by the cytochrome P450 enzyme systems, particularly CYP3A4 found mostly in the liver and gut wall. Its metabolic products include phenylcyclohexylglycolic acid, which is pharmacologically inactive, and desethyloxybutynin, which is pharmacologically active. Following oxybutynin chloride extended release tablet administration, plasma concentrations of R- and S-desethyloxybutynin are 73% and 92%, respectively, of concentrations observed with oxybutynin.
                  
 

                  
                  
                  Oxybutynin is extensively metabolized by the liver, with less than 0.1% of the administered dose excreted unchanged in the urine. Also, less than 0.1% of the administered dose is excreted as the metabolite desethyloxybutynin.
                  
 

                  
                  
                  Pharmacokinetic parameters of oxybutynin and desethyloxybutynin (Cmax and AUC) following administration of 5 to 20 mg of oxybutynin chloride extended release tablets are dose proportional.
                  
 

                  
                  
                  The pharmacokinetics of oxybutynin chloride extended release tablets were similar in all patients studied (up to 78 years of age).
                  
 

                  
                  
                  Pharmacokinetic information for pediatric patients 5 to 15 years of age with symptoms of detrusor overactivity associated with a neurological condition (e.g., spina bifida) is approved for Alza Corporation's oxybutynin chloride extended release tablets. However, due to Alza Corporation's marketing exclusivity rights, this drug product is not labeled for pediatric use.
                  
 

                  
                  
                  There are no significant differences in the pharmacokinetics of oxybutynin in healthy male and female volunteers following administration of oxybutynin chloride extended release tablets.
                  
 

                  
                  
                  Available data suggest that there are no significant differences in the pharmacokinetics of oxybutynin based on race in healthy volunteers following administration of oxybutynin chloride extended release tablets.
                  
 

                  
                  
                  There is no experience with the use of oxybutynin chloride extended release tablets in patients with renal insufficiency.
                  
 

                  
                  
                  There is no experience with the use of oxybutynin chloride extended release tablets in patients with hepatic insufficiency.
                  
 

                  
                  
                  See
                         PRECAUTIONS: Drug Interactions
                     .
                  
 

               
               
               
                  
                     MM2
                     
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         