
               
               
               
12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY

               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
12.1 Mechanism of Action

                     
                        KRYSTEXXA is a uric acid specific enzyme which is a recombinant uricase and achieves its therapeutic effect by catalyzing the oxidation of uric acid to allantoin, thereby lowering serum uric acid. Allantoin is an inert and water soluble purine metabolite. It is readily eliminated, primarily by renal excretion.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
12.2 Pharmacodynamics

                     
                        Approximately 24 hours following the first dose of KRYSTEXXA, mean plasma uric acid levels for subjects in the KRYSTEXXA groups were 0.7 mg/dL for the KRYSTEXXA 8 mg every 2 weeks group. In comparison, the mean plasma uric acid level for the placebo group was 8.2 mg/dL.
                        In a single-dose, dose-ranging trial, following 1-hour intravenous infusions of 0.5, 1, 2, 4, 8 or 12 mg of pegloticase in 24 patients with symptomatic gout (n=4 subjects/dose group), plasma uric acid decreased with increasing pegloticase dose or concentrations. The duration of suppression of plasma uric acid appeared to be positively associated with pegloticase dose. Sustained decrease in plasma uric acid below the solubility concentration of 6 mg/dL for more than 300 hours was observed with doses of 8 mg and 12 mg.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
12.3 Pharmacokinetics

                     
                        Pegloticase levels were determined in serum based on measurements of uricase enzyme activity.
                        Following single intravenous infusions of 0.5 mg to 12 mg pegloticase in 23 patients with symptomatic gout, maximum serum concentrations of pegloticase increased in proportion to the dose administered.
                        The population pharmacokinetic analysis showed that age, sex, weight, and creatinine clearance did not influence the pharmacokinetics of pegloticase. Significant covariates included in the model for determining clearance and volume of distribution were found to be body surface area and anti-pegloticase antibodies.
                        The pharmacokinetics of pegloticase has not been studied in children and adolescents.
                        No formal studies were conducted to examine the effects of either renal or hepatic impairment on pegloticase pharmacokinetics.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         