
               
               
               7. DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                             Avoid concurrent use of doxorubicin hydrochloride with inhibitors and inducers of CYP3A4, CYP2D6, and/or P-gp (7.1).
                             Do not administer doxorubicin hydrochloride in combination with trastuzumab due to increased risk of cardiac dysfunction (5.1, 7.2).
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     7.1 Effect of CYP3A4 Inhibitors, Inducers and P-gp
                     
                        Doxorubicin is a major substrate of cytochrome P450 CYP3A4 and CYP2D6, and P-glycoprotein (P-gp). Clinically significant interactions have been reported with inhibitors of CYP3A4, CYP2D6, and/or P-gp (e.g., verapamil), resulting in increased concentration and clinical effect of doxorubicin. Inducers of CYP3A4 (e.g., phenobarbital, phenytoin, St. John's Wort) and P-gp inducers may decrease the concentration of doxorubicin. Avoid concurrent use of doxorubicin hydrochloride with inhibitors and inducers of CYP3A4, CYP2D6, or P-gp.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     7.2 Trastuzumab
                     
                        Concurrent use of trastuzumab and doxorubicin hydrochloride results in an increased risk of cardiac dysfunction. Avoid concurrent administration of doxorubicin and trastuzumab. The appropriate interval for administering doxorubicin following trastuzumab therapy has not been determined [see Warnings and Precautions (5.1)].
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     7.3 Paclitaxel
                     
                        Paclitaxel, when given prior to doxorubicin hydrochloride, increases the plasma-concentrations of doxorubicin and its metabolites. Administer doxorubicin hydrochloride prior to paclitaxel if used concomitantly.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     7.4 Dexrazoxane
                     
                        Do not administer dexrazoxane as a cardioprotectant at the initiation of doxorubicin hydrochloride  containing chemotherapy regimens. In a randomized trial in women with metastatic breast cancer, initiation of dexrazoxane with doxorubicin hydrochloride-based chemotherapy resulted in a significantly lower tumor response rate (48% vs. 63%; p=0.007) and shorter time to progression than in women who received doxorubicin hydrochloride-based chemotherapy alone.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     7.5 6-Mercaptopurine
                     
                        Doxorubicin hydrochloride may potentiate 6-mercaptopurine-induced hepatotoxicity. In 11 patients with refractory leukemia treated with 6-mercaptopurine (500 mg/m2 intravenously daily for 5 days per cycle every 2-3 weeks) and doxorubicin hydrochloride (50 mg/m2 intravenous once per cycle every 2-3 weeks) alone or with vincristine and prednisone, all developed hepatic dysfunction manifested by elevations of total serum bilirubin, alkaline phosphatase and aspartate aminotransferase.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         