
               
               
               12  CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1  Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Lenalidomide is an analogue of thalidomide with immunomodulatory, antiangiogenic, and antineoplastic properties.  Lenalidomide inhibits proliferation and induces apoptosis of certain hematopoietic tumor cells including multiple myeloma, mantle cell lymphoma, and del (5q) myelodysplastic syndromes in vitro. Lenalidomide causes a delay in tumor growth in some in vivo nonclinical hematopoietic tumor models including multiple myeloma.  Immunomodulatory properties of lenalidomide include activation of T cells and natural killer (NK) cells, increased numbers of NKT cells, and inhibition of pro-inflammatory cytokines (e.g., TNF-α and IL-6) by monocytes. In multiple myeloma cells, the combination of lenalidomide and dexamethasone synergizes the inhibition of cell proliferation and the induction of apoptosis.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2  Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        The effect of lenalidomide on the QTc interval was evaluated in 60 healthy male subjects in a randomized, thorough QT study with placebo and positive controls.  At a dose two times the maximum recommended dose, lenalidomide does not prolong the QTc interval to any clinically relevant extent. The largest upper bound of the 2-sided 90% CI for the mean differences between lenalidomide and placebo was below 10 ms.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3  Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        Absorption
                        Lenalidomide is rapidly absorbed following oral administration. Following single and multiple doses of REVLIMID in patients with MM or MDS the maximum plasma concentrations occurred between 0.5 and 6 hours post-dose. The single and multiple dose pharmacokinetic disposition of lenalidomide is linear with AUC and Cmax values increasing proportionally with dose. Multiple dosing at the recommended dose-regimen does not result in drug accumulation.
                        Systemic exposure (AUC) of lenalidomide in MM and MDS patients with normal or mild renal function (CLcr ≥ 60 mL/min) is approximately 60% higher as compared to young healthy male subjects.  
                        Administration of a single 25 mg dose of REVLIMID with a high-fat meal in healthy subjects reduces the extent of absorption, with an approximate 20% decrease in AUC and 50% decrease in Cmax.  In the trials where the efficacy and safety were established for REVLIMID, the drug was administered without regard to food intake.  REVLIMID can be administered with or without food. 
                        Population pharmacokinetic analyses show that the oral absorption rate of lenalidomide in patients with MCL is similar to that observed in patients with MM or MDS.
                        Distribution
                        In vitro (14C)-lenalidomide binding to plasma proteins is approximately 30%.
                        Lenalidomide is present in semen at 2 hours (1379 ng/ejaculate) and 24 hours (35 ng/ejaculate) after the administration of REVLIMID 25 mg daily.
                        Metabolism 
                        Lenalidomide -undergoes limited metabolism.  Unchanged lenalidomide is the predominant circulating component in humans.  Two identified metabolites are 5-hydroxy-lenalidomide and N-acetyl-lenalidomide; each constitutes less than 5% of parent levels in circulation.
                        Elimination
                        Elimination is primarily renal. Following a single oral administration of [14C]-lenalidomide (25 mg) to healthy subjects, approximately 90% and 4% of the radioactive dose is eliminated within ten days in urine and feces, respectively. Approximately 82% of the radioactive dose is excreted as lenalidomide in the urine within 24 hours.  Hydroxy-lenalidomide and N-acetyl-lenalidomide represent 4.59% and 1.83% of the excreted dose, respectively.  The renal clearance of lenalidomide exceeds the glomerular filtration rate. 
                        The mean half-life of lenalidomide is 3 hours in healthy subjects and 3 to 5 hours in patients with MM, MDS or MCL.
                        Drug Interactions
                        Co-administration of single or multiple doses of dexamethasone (40 mg) has no clinically relevant effect on the multiple dose pharmacokinetics of REVLIMID (25 mg). 
                        
                           In vitro, lenalidomide is a substrate, but is not an inhibitor of P-glycoprotein (P-gp). In healthy volunteers, co-administration of REVLIMID (25 mg) after multiple doses of a P-gp inhibitor such as quinidine (600 mg twice daily) does not result in a clinically significant increase in the Cmax and AUC of REVLIMID. In healthy volunteers, co-administration of the P-gp inhibitor/substrate, temsirolimus (25 mg), with REVLIMID (25 mg) does not significantly alter the pharmacokinetics of REVLIMID, temsirolimus, or its metabolite, sirolimus.
                        
                           In vitro studies demonstrated that REVLIMID is not a substrate of human breast cancer resistance protein (BCRP), multidrug resistance protein (MRP) transporters MRP1, MRP2, or MRP3, organic anion transporters (OAT) OAT1 and OAT3, organic anion transporting polypeptide 1B1 (OATP1B1 or OATP2), organic cation transporters (OCT) OCT1 and OCT2, multidrug and toxin extrusion protein (MATE) MATE1, and organic cation transporters novel (OCTN) OCTN1 and OCTN2. Lenalidomide is not an inhibitor of bile salt export pump (BSEP), BCRP, MRP2, OAT1, OAT3, OATP1B1, OATP1B3, or OCT2. Lenalidomide does not inhibit bilirubin glucuronidation formation in human liver microsomes with UGT1A1 genotyped as UGT1A1*1/*1, UGT1A1*1/*28, and UGT1A1*28/*28.
                        Specific Populations
                        
                           Patients with Renal Impairment: The pharmacokinetics of lenalidomide were studied in patients with renal impairment due to nonmalignant conditions. In this study, 5 patients with mild renal impairment (creatinine clearance 57-74 mL/min), 6 patients with moderate renal impairment (creatinine clearance 33-46 mL/min), 6 patients with severe renal impairment (creatinine clearance 17-29 mL/min), and 6 patients with end stage renal disease requiring dialysis were administered a single oral 25-mg dose of REVLIMID. As creatinine clearance decreased from mild to severe impairment, half-life increased and drug clearance decreased linearly. Patients with moderate and severe renal impairment had a 3-fold increase in half-life and a 66% to 75% decrease in drug clearance compared to healthy subjects. Patients on hemodialysis (n=6) given a single, 25-mg dose of lenalidomide has an approximate 4.5-fold increase in half-life and an 80% decrease in drug clearance compared to healthy subjects. Approximately 30% of the drug in body was removed during a 4-hour hemodialysis session.
                        In MM patients, those patients with mild renal impairment had an AUC 56% greater than those with normal renal function.
                        Adjustment of the starting dose of REVLIMID is recommended in patients with moderate or severe (CLcr < 60 mL/min) renal impairment and in patients on dialysis [see Dosage and Administration (2.4)].
                        
                           Elderly Patients:  No dedicated clinical studies have been conducted to evaluate pharmacokinetics of lenalidomide in the elderly.  Population pharmacokinetic analyses included patients with ages ranging from 39 to 85 years old and show that age does not influence the disposition of lenalidomide.
                        
                           Patients with Hepatic Disease: Population pharmacokinetic analyses included patients with mild hepatic impairment (N = 16, total bilirubin >1 to ≤ 1.5 x ULN or AST > ULN) and show that mild hepatic impairment does not influence the disposition of lenalidomide.  There are no data available for patients with moderate to severe hepatic impairment.
                        
                           Pediatric: No pharmacokinetic data are available in patients below the age of 18 years.
                        
                           Other Intrinsic Factors: Population pharmacokinetic analyses show that body weight (33-135 kg), gender, race, and type of hematological malignancies (MM, MDS or MCL) do not have a clinically relevant effect on lenalidomide clearance in adult patients.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         