
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        TANZEUM is an agonist of the GLP-1 receptor and augments glucose-dependent insulin secretion. TANZEUM also slows gastric emptying.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        TANZEUM lowers fasting glucose and reduces postprandial glucose excursions in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus. The majority of the observed reduction in fasting plasma glucose occurs after a single dose, consistent with the pharmacokinetic profile of albiglutide. In a Phase II trial in Japanese patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus who received TANZEUM 30 mg, a reduction (22%) in postprandial glucose AUC(0-3 h) was observed at steady state (Week 16) compared with placebo following a mixed meal.
                        A single dose of TANZEUM 50 mg subcutaneous (SC) did not impair glucagon response to low glucose concentrations. 
                        
                           Gastric Motility
                        
                        TANZEUM slowed gastric emptying compared with placebo for both solids and liquids when albiglutide 100 mg (2 times the maximum approved dosage) was administered as a single dose in healthy subjects.
                        
                           Cardiac Electrophysiology
                        
                        At doses up to the maximum recommended dose (50 mg), TANZEUM does not prolong QTc to any clinically relevant extent.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        
                           Absorption
                        
                        Following SC administration of a single 30-mg dose to subjects with type 2 diabetes mellitus, maximum concentrations of albiglutide were reached at 3 to 5 days post-dosing. The mean peak concentration (Cmax) and mean area under the time-concentration curve (AUC) of albiglutide were 1.74 mcg/mL and 465 mcg.h/mL, respectively, following a single dose of 30 mg albiglutide in type 2 diabetes mellitus subjects. Steady-state exposures are achieved following 4 to 5 weeks of once-weekly administration. Exposures at the 30-mg and 50-mg dose levels were consistent with a dose-proportional increase. Similar exposure is achieved with SC administration of albiglutide in the abdomen, thigh, or upper arm. The absolute bioavailability of albiglutide following SC administration has not been evaluated.
                        
                           Distribution
                        
                        The mean estimate of apparent volume of distribution of albiglutide following SC administration is 11 L. As albiglutide is an albumin fusion molecule, plasma protein binding has not been assessed. 
                        
                           Metabolism
                        
                        Albiglutide is a protein for which the expected metabolic pathway is degradation to small peptides and individual amino acids by ubiquitous proteolytic enzymes. Classical biotransformation studies have not been performed. Because albiglutide is an albumin fusion protein, it likely follows a metabolic pathway similar to native human serum albumin which is catabolized primarily in the vascular endothelium.
                        
                           Elimination
                        
                        The mean apparent clearance of albiglutide is 67 mL/h with an elimination half-life of approximately 5 days, making albiglutide suitable for once-weekly administration.
                        
                           Specific Patient Populations
                        
                        
                           Age, Gender, Race, and Body Weight: Based on the population pharmacokinetic analysis with data collected from 1,113 subjects, age, gender, race, and body weight had no clinically relevant effect on the pharmacokinetics of albiglutide.
                        
                           Pediatric: No pharmacokinetic data are available in pediatric patients.
                        
                           Renal: In a population pharmacokinetic analysis including a Phase III trial in patients with mild, moderate, and severe renal impairment, exposures were increased by approximately 30% to 40% in severe renal impairment compared with those observed in type 2 diabetic patients with normal renal function.
                        
                           Hepatic: No clinical trials were conducted to examine the effects of mild, moderate, or severe hepatic impairment on the pharmacokinetics of albiglutide. Therapeutic proteins such as albiglutide are catabolized by widely distributed proteolytic enzymes, which are not restricted to hepatic tissue; therefore, changes in hepatic function are unlikely to have any effect on the elimination of albiglutide.
                        
                           Drug Interactions
                        
                        In multiple-dose, drug-drug interaction trials no significant change in systemic exposures of the co-administered drugs were observed, except simvastatin (see Table 3). When albiglutide was co-administered with simvastatin, Cmax of simvastatin and its active metabolite simvastatin acid was increased by approximately 18% and 98%, respectively. In the same trial, AUC of simvastatin decreased by 40% and AUC of simvastatin acid increased by 36%. Clinical relevance of these changes has not been established (see Table 3).
                        Additionally, no clinically relevant pharmacodynamic effects on luteinizing hormone, follicle-stimulating hormone, or progesterone were observed when albiglutide and a combination oral contraceptive were co-administered. Albiglutide did not significantly alter the pharmacodynamic effects of warfarin as measured by the international normalized ratio (INR).
                        
                           Table 3. Effect of Albiglutide on Systemic Exposure of Co-administered Drugs
                        
                        


                        



                           
                               QW = Once weekly.
                           
                               
                              a	Single dose unless otherwise noted.
                           
                               
                              b	AUC	inf	 for drugs given as a single dose and AUC	24h	 for drugs given as multiple doses.
                           
                               
                              c	Subjects received low-dose oral contraceptive for two 28-day treatment cycles (21 days active/7 days placebo).
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         