
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              •Concomitant administration of diclofenac and aspirin is not generally recommended because of the potential of increased adverse effects including increased GI bleeding. (7.1)
                           
                              •Concomitant use of anticoagulants and diclofenac have a risk of serious GI bleeding higher than users of either drug alone. (7.2)
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 Aspirin
                     
                        When diclofenac is administered with aspirin, the binding of diclofenac to protein is reduced, although the clearance of free diclofenac is not altered. The clinical significance of this interaction is not known; however, as with other NSAIDs, concomitant administration of diclofenac and aspirin is not generally recommended because of the potential of increased adverse effects.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 Anticoagulants
                     
                        The effects of anticoagulants such as warfarin and NSAIDs on GI bleeding are synergistic, such that users of both drugs together have a risk of serious GI bleeding higher than users of either drug alone. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3 ACE-Inhibitors
                     
                        NSAIDs may diminish the antihypertensive effect of angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors. This interaction should be given consideration in patients taking NSAIDs concomitantly with ACE-inhibitors.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4 Diuretics
                     
                        Clinical studies, as well as post-marketing observations, have shown that NSAIDs can reduce the natriuretic effect of furosemide and thiazides in some patients. The response has been attributed to inhibition of renal prostaglandin synthesis. During concomitant therapy with NSAIDs, the patient should be observed closely for signs of renal failure 
                              [see Warnings and Precautions (5.6)]
                           , as well as to assure diuretic efficacy.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.5 Lithium
                     
                        NSAIDs have produced an elevation of plasma lithium levels and a reduction in renal lithium clearance. The mean minimum lithium concentration increased 15% and the renal clearance was decreased by approximately 20%. These effects have been attributed to inhibition of renal prostaglandin synthesis by the NSAID. Thus, when NSAIDs, including diclofenac, and lithium are administered concurrently, patients should be observed carefully for signs of lithium toxicity.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.6 Methotrexate
                     
                        NSAIDs have been reported to competitively inhibit methotrexate accumulation in rabbit kidney slices. This may indicate that they could enhance the toxicity of methotrexate. Caution should be used when NSAIDs, including diclofenac, are administered concomitantly with methotrexate. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.7 Cyclosporine
                     
                        Diclofenac, like other NSAIDs, may affect renal prostaglandins and increase the toxicity of certain drugs. Therefore concomitant therapy with diclofenac may increase cyclosporine’s nephrotoxicity. Caution should be used when diclofenac is administered concomitantly with cyclosporine.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.8 Oral Nonsteroidal Anti-inflammatory Drugs
                     
                        Specific interaction studies of VOLTAREN® GEL and oral NSAIDs were not performed. Also, the clinical trials of VOLTAREN® GEL prohibited concomitant use of oral NSAIDS. There is systemic exposure to diclofenac following normal use of Voltaren® Gel, up to 6% of the systemic levels of a single oral dose of diclofenac sodium. 
                              [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)]
                           Therefore, concomitant administration of VOLTAREN® GEL with oral NSAIDs or aspirin may result in increased adverse NSAID effects.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.9 Topical Treatments
                     
                        Concomitant use of VOLTAREN® GEL with other topical products, including topical medications, sunscreens, lotions, moisturizers, and cosmetics, on the same skin site has not been tested and should be avoided because of the potential to alter local tolerability and absorption.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         