
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           Carefully monitor prothrombin time (PT) and International Normalized Ratio (INR) in patients concurrently administered ISTODAX and Coumadin derivatives (7.1).
                           Strong CYP3A4 inhibitors may increase concentrations of ISTODAX and should be avoided (7.2).
                           Potent CYP3A4 inducers may decrease concentrations of ISTODAX and should be avoided (7.2).
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1    Coumadin or Coumadin Derivatives
                     
                        Prolongation of PT and elevation of INR were observed in a patient receiving ISTODAX concomitantly with warfarin.  Although the interaction potential between ISTODAX and Coumadin or Coumadin derivatives has not been formally studied, physicians should carefully monitor PT and INR in patients concurrently administered ISTODAX and Coumadin or Coumadin derivatives [See Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2   Drugs that Inhibit or Induce Cytochrome P450 3A4 Enzymes
                     
                        Romidepsin is metabolized by CYP3A4.  Although there are no formal drug interaction studies for ISTODAX, strong CYP3A4 inhibitors (e.g., ketoconazole, itraconazole, clarithromycin, atazanavir, indinavir, nefazodone, nelfinavir, ritonavir, saquinavir, telithromycin, voriconazole) may increase concentrations of romidepsin.  Therefore, co-administration with strong CYP3A4 inhibitors should be avoided if possible.  Caution should be exercised with concomitant use of moderate CYP3A4 inhibitors.
                        Co-administration of potent CYP3A4 inducers (e.g., dexamethasone, carbamazepine, phenytoin, rifampin, rifabutin, rifapentine, phenobarbital) may decrease concentrations of romidepsin and should be avoided if possible.  Patients should also refrain from taking St. John's Wort.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3   Drugs that Inhibit Drug Transport Systems
                     
                        Romidepsin is a substrate of the efflux transporter P-glycoprotein (P-gp, ABCB1).  If ISTODAX is administered with drugs that inhibit P-gp, increased concentrations of romidepsin are likely, and caution should be exercised.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         