
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Subjective Effects
                     
                        Comparisons of buprenorphine with full agonists such as methadone and hydromorphone suggest that sublingual buprenorphine produces typical opioid agonist effects which are limited by a ceiling effect.
                        In non-dependent subjects, acute sublingual doses of buprenorphine and naloxone sublingual tablets produced opioid agonist effects, which reached a maximum between doses of 8 mg and 16 mg of buprenorphine HCl sublingual tablets. The effects of 16 mg buprenorphine and naloxone HCl sublingual tablets were similar to those produced by 16 mg buprenorphine HCl sublingual tablets (buprenorphine alone).
                        Opioid agonist ceiling effects were also observed in a double-blind, parallel group, dose ranging comparison of single doses of buprenorphine sublingual solution (1, 2, 4, 8, 16, or 32 mg), placebo, and a full agonist control at various doses. The treatments were given in ascending dose order at intervals of at least one week to 16 opioid-experienced, non-dependent subjects. Both drugs produced typical opioid agonist effects. For all the measures for which the drugs produced an effect, buprenorphine produced a dose-related response but, in each case, there was a dose that produced no further effect. In contrast, the highest dose of the full agonist control always produced the greatest effects. Agonist objective rating scores remained elevated for the higher doses of buprenorphine (8 to 32 mg) longer than for the lower doses and did not return to baseline until 48 hours after drug administrations. The onset of effects appeared more rapidly with buprenorphine than with the full agonist control, with most doses nearing peak effect after 100 minutes for buprenorphine compared to 150 minutes for the full agonist control.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Physiologic Effects
                     
                        Buprenorphine in intravenous (2 mg, 4 mg, 8 mg, 12 mg and 16 mg) and sublingual (12 mg) doses has been administered to non-dependent subjects to examine cardiovascular, respiratory and subjective effects at doses comparable to those used for treatment of opioid dependence. Compared with placebo, there were no statistically significant differences among any of the treatment conditions for blood pressure, heart rate, respiratory rate, O2 saturation or skin temperature across time. Systolic BP was higher in the 8 mg group than placebo (3 hour AUC values). Minimum and maximum effects were similar across all treatments. Subjects remained responsive to low voice and responded to computer prompts. Some subjects showed irritability, but no other changes were observed.
                        The respiratory effects of sublingual buprenorphine were compared with the effects of methadone in a double-blind, parallel group, dose ranging comparison of single doses of buprenorphine sublingual solution (1, 2, 4, 8, 16, or 32 mg) and oral methadone (15, 30, 45, or 60 mg) in non-dependent, opioid-experienced volunteers. In this study, hypoventilation not requiring medical intervention was reported more frequently after buprenorphine doses of 4 mg and higher than after methadone. Both drugs decreased O2 saturation to the same degree.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Effect of Naloxone
                     
                        Physiologic and subjective effects following acute sublingual administration of buprenorphine and naloxone sublingual tablets and buprenorphine HCl sublingual tablets were similar at equivalent dose levels of buprenorphine. Naloxone, in the buprenorphine and naloxone sublingual formulation, had no clinically significant effect when administered by the sublingual route, although blood levels of the drug were measurable.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Pharmacokinetics
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Absorption
                           
                              Plasma levels of buprenorphine increased with the sublingual dose of buprenorphine HCl sublingual tablets and buprenorphine and naloxone sublingual tablets, and plasma levels of naloxone increased with the sublingual dose of buprenorphine and naloxone sublingual tablets (Table 1). There was a wide inter-patient variability in the sublingual absorption of buprenorphine and naloxone, but within subjects the variability was low. Both Cmax and AUC of buprenorphine increased in a linear fashion with the increase in dose (in the range of 4 to 16 mg), although the increase was not directly dose proportional.
                              Naloxone did not affect the pharmacokinetics of buprenorphine and both buprenorphine HCl sublingual tablets and buprenorphine and naloxone sublingual tablets deliver similar plasma concentrations of buprenorphine. The levels of naloxone were too low to assess dose-proportionality. At the three naloxone doses of 1 mg, 2 mg, and 4 mg, levels above the limit of quantitation (0.05 ng/mL) were not detected beyond 2 hours in seven of eight subjects. In one individual, at the 4 mg dose, the last measurable concentration was at 8 hours. Within each subject (for most of the subjects), across the doses there was a trend toward an increase in naloxone concentrations with increase in dose. Mean peak naloxone levels ranged from 0.11 to 0.28 ng/mL in the dose range of 1 to 4 mg.
                              


                           



                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Distribution
                           
                              Buprenorphine is approximately 96% protein bound, primarily to alpha and beta globulin.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Metabolism
                           
                              Buprenorphine undergoes both N-dealkylation to norbuprenorphine and glucuronidation. The N-dealkylation pathway is mediated by cytochrome P-450 3A4 isozyme. Norbuprenorphine, an active metabolite, can further undergo glucuronidation.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Elimination
                           
                              A mass balance study of buprenorphine showed complete recovery of radiolabel in urine (30%) and feces (69%) collected up to 11 days after dosing. Almost all of the dose was accounted for in terms of buprenorphine, norbuprenorphine, and two unidentified buprenorphine metabolites. In urine, most of buprenorphine and norbuprenorphine was conjugated (buprenorphine, 1% free and 9.4% conjugated; norbuprenorphine, 2.7% free and 11% conjugated). In feces, almost all of the buprenorphine and norbuprenorphine were free (buprenorphine, 33% free and 5% conjugated; norbuprenorphine, 21% free and 2% conjugated).
                              Buprenorphine has a mean elimination half-life from plasma of 37 h.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Special Populations
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Hepatic Disease
                           
                              The effect of hepatic impairment on the pharmacokinetics of buprenorphine and naloxone is unknown. Since both drugs are extensively metabolized, the plasma levels will be expected to be higher in patients with moderate and severe hepatic impairment. However, it is not known whether both drugs are affected to the same degree. Therefore, in patients with hepatic impairment dosage should be adjusted and patients should be observed for symptoms of precipitated opioid withdrawal.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Renal Disease
                           
                              No differences in buprenorphine pharmacokinetics were observed between 9 dialysis-dependent and 6 normal patients following intravenous administration of 0.3 mg buprenorphine.
                              The effects of renal failure on naloxone pharmacokinetics are unknown.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Drug-Drug Interactions
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           CYP 3A4 Inhibitors and Inducers 
                           
                              A pharmacokinetic interaction study of ketoconazole (400 mg/day), a potent inhibitor of CYP 3A4, in 12 patients stabilized on buprenorphine and naloxone sublingual [8 mg (n=1) or 12 mg (n=5) or 16 mg (n=6)] resulted in increases in buprenorphine mean Cmax values (from 4.3 to 9.8, 6.3 to 14.4 and 9 to 17.1) and mean AUC values (from 30.9 to 46.9, 41.9 to 83.2 and 52.3 to 120) respectively. Subjects receiving buprenorphine HCl sublingual tablets or buprenorphine and naloxone sublingual tablets should be closely monitored and may require dose-reduction if inhibitors of CYP 3A4 such as azole antifungal agents (e.g. ketoconazole), macrolide antibiotics (e.g., erythromycin) and HIV protease inhibitors (e.g. ritonavir, indinavir and saquinavir) are co-administered. The interaction of buprenorphine with CYP 3A4 inducers has not been investigated; therefore it is recommended that patients receiving buprenorphine HCl sublingual tablets or buprenorphine and naloxone sublingual tablets should be closely monitored if inducers of CYP 3A4 (e.g. phenobarbital, carbamazepine, phenytoin, rifampicin) are co-administered (see WARNINGS).
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         