
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           CNS depressants: May increase the risk of respiratory depression (7.1)
                           Muscle relaxants: May enhance the neuromuscular blocking action of skeletal muscle relaxants and produce respiratory depression (7.2) 

                           Mixed agonist/antagonist opioid analgesics: May reduce the analgesic effect and/or may precipitate withdrawal symptoms (7.3) 

                           Cimetidine: May increase respiratory and CNS depression (7.4) 

                           Anticholinergics: May increase the risk of urinary retention, severe constipation, or paralytic ileus (7.6)
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 Central Nervous System (CNS) Depressants
                     
                        Morphine should be administered cautiously to avoid additive effects when other central nervous system depressants, including other narcotic analgesics, general anesthetics, phenothiazines, tricyclic antidepressants, tranquilizers, sedatives, hypnotics, antiemetics, and alcohol are given concomitantly. When given concomitantly the risks of respiratory depression, hypotension, profound sedation and coma are increased.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 Muscle Relaxants
                     
                        Morphine sulfate may enhance the neuromuscular blocking action of skeletal muscle relaxants and produce an increased degree of respiratory depression. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3 Mixed Agonist/Antagonist Opioid Analgesics
                     
                        Do not administer mixed agonist/antagonist analgesics (i.e., pentazocine, nalbuphine, and butorphanol) to patients who have received or are receiving a course of therapy with a pure opioid agonist analgesic such as morphine sulfate injection. In these patients, mixed agonist/antagonist analgesics may reduce the analgesic effect and/or may precipitate withdrawal symptoms.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4 Cimetidine
                     
                        Concomitant administration of morphine sulfate injection and cimetidine has been reported to precipitate apnea, confusion, and muscle twitching in an isolated report. Monitor patients for increased respiratory and CNS depression when receiving cimetidine concomitantly with morphine sulfate injection.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.5 Monoamine Oxidase Inhibitors (MAOIs)
                     
                        MAOIs markedly potentiate the action of morphine sulfate injection. Allow at least 14 days after stopping treatment with MAOIs before initiating treatment with morphine sulfate injection. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.6 Anticholinergics
                     
                        Anticholinergics or other medications with anticholinergic activity when used concurrently with opioid analgesics may result in increased risk of urinary retention, severe constipation, or paralyltic ileus.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         