
               
               
               DRUG INTERACTIONS
               The net effects of drug interactions with lamotrigine are summarized in Table 3 (see alsoDOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION).

                  

                  Oral Contraceptives:

                  In 16 female volunteers, an oral contraceptive preparation containing 30 mcg ethinylestradiol and 150 mcg levonorgestrel increased the apparent clearance of lamotrigine (300 mg/day) by approximately 2-fold with a mean decrease in AUC of 52% and in Cmax of 39%. In this study, trough serum lamotrigine concentrations gradually increased and were approximately 2-fold higher on average at the end of the week of the inactive preparation compared to trough lamotrigine concentrations at the end of the active hormone cycle.
Gradual transient increases in lamotrigine plasma levels (approximate 2-fold increase) occurred during the week of inactive hormone preparation ("pill-free" week) for women not also taking a drug that increased the clearance of lamotrigine (carbamazepine, phenytoin, phenobarbital, primidone, or rifampin). The increase in lamotrigine plasma levels will be greater if the dose of Lamotrigine is increased in the few days before or during the "pill-free" week. Increases in lamotrigine plasma levels could result in dose-dependent adverse effects (seePRECAUTIONS: Concomitant Use With Oral Contraceptives).
In the same study, co-administration of lamotrigine (300 mg/day) in 16 female volunteers did not affect the pharmacokinetics of the ethinylestradiol component of the oral contraceptive preparation. There was a mean decrease in the AUC and Cmax of the levonorgestrel component of 19% and 12%, respectively. Measurement of serum progesterone indicated that there was no hormonal evidence of ovulation in any of the 16 volunteers, although measurement of serum FSH, LH, and estradiol indicated that there was some loss of suppression of the hypothalamic-pituitary-ovarian axis.
The effects of doses of lamotrigine other than 300 mg/day have not been systematically evaluated in controlled clinical trials.
The clinical significance of the observed hormonal changes on ovulatory activity is unknown. However, the possibility of decreased contraceptive efficacy in some patients cannot be excluded. Therefore, patients should be instructed to promptly report changes in their menstrual pattern (e.g., break-through bleeding).
Dosage adjustments will be necessary for most women receiving estrogen-containing oral contraceptive preparations (seeDOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION: Special Populations: Women and Oral Contraceptives).

                  Other Hormonal Contraceptives or Hormone Replacement Therapy:
                  
The effect of other hormonal contraceptive preparations or hormone replacement therapy on the pharmacokinetics of lamotrigine has not been systematically evaluated. It has been reported that ethinylestradiol, not progestogens, increased the clearance of lamotrigine up to 2-fold, and the progestin only pills had no effect on lamotrigine plasma levels. Therefore, adjustments to the dosage of Lamotrigine in the presence of progestogens alone will likely not be needed.

                  Bupropion:
                  
The pharmacokinetics of a 100-mg single dose of lamotrigine in healthy volunteers (n = 12) were not changed by co-administration of bupropion sustained-release formulation (150 mg twice a day) starting 11 days before lamotrigine.

                  Carbamazepine:
                  
Lamotrigine has no appreciable effect on steady-state carbamazepine plasma concentration. Limited clinical data suggest there is a higher incidence of dizziness, diplopia, ataxia, and blurred vision in patients receiving carbamazepine with Lamotrigine than in patients receiving other AEDs with lamotrigine (seeADVERSE REACTIONS). The mechanism of this interaction is unclear. The effect of lamotrigine on plasma concentrations of carbamazepine-epoxide is unclear. In a small subset of patients (n = 7) studied in a placebo-controlled trial, Lamotrigine had no effect on carbamazepine-epoxide plasma concentrations, but in a small, uncontrolled study (n = 9), carbamazepine-epoxide levels increased.
The addition of carbamazepine decreases lamotrigine steady-state concentrations by approximately 40%.

                  Felbamate:
                  
In a study of 21 healthy volunteers, coadministration of felbamate (1,200 mg twice daily) with Lamotrigine (100 mg twice daily for 10 days) appeared to have no clinically relevant effects on the pharmacokinetics of lamotrigine.

                  

                  Folate Inhibitors:
                  
Lamotrigine is a weak inhibitor of dihydrofolate reductase. Prescribers should be aware of this action when prescribing other medications that inhibit folate metabolism.

                  Gabapentin:
                  
Based on a retrospective analysis of plasma levels in 34 patients who received Lamotrigine both with and without gabapentin, gabapentin does not appear to change the apparent clearance of lamotrigine.

                  Levetiracetam:
                  
Potential drug interactions between levetiracetam and lamotrigine were assessed by evaluating serum concentrations of both agents during placebo-controlled clinical trials. These data indicate that Lamotrigine does not influence the pharmacokinetics of levetiracetam and that levetiracetam does not influence the pharmacokinetics of lamotrigine.

                  Lithium:
                  
The pharmacokinetics of lithium were not altered in healthy subjects (n = 20) by co-administration of Lamotrigine (100 mg/day) for 6 days.

                  Olanzapine:
                  
The AUC and Cmax of olanzapine were similar following the addition of olanzapine (15 mg once daily) to Lamotrigine (200 mg once daily) in healthy male volunteers (n = 16) compared to the AUC and Cmax in healthy male volunteers receiving olanzapine alone (n = 16).
In the same study, the AUC and Cmax of lamotrigine was reduced on average by 24% and 20%, respectively, following the addition of olanzapine to Lamotrigine in healthy male volunteers compared to those receiving Lamotrigine alone. This reduction in lamotrigine plasma concentrations is not expected to be clinically relevant.

                  Oxcarbazepine:
                  
The AUC and Cmax of oxcarbazepine and its active 1 0-monohydroxy oxcarbazepine metabolite were not significantly different following the addition of oxcarbazepine (600 mg twice daily) to Lamotrigine (200 mg once daily) in healthy male volunteers (n = 13) compared to healthy male volunteers receiving oxcarbazepine alone (n = 13).
In the same study, the AUC and Cmax of lamotrigine were similar following the addition of oxcarbazepine (600 mg twice daily) to Lamotrigine in healthy male volunteers compared to those receiving Lamotrigine alone. Limited clinical data suggest a higher incidence of headache, dizziness, nausea, and somnolence with coadministration of Lamotrigine and oxcarbazepine compared to Lamotrigine alone or oxcarbazepine alone.

                  Phenobarbital, Primidone:
                  
The addition of phenobarbital or primidone decreases lamotrigine steady-state concentrations by approximately 40%.

                  Phenytoin:
                  
Lamotrigine has no appreciable effect on steady-state phenytoin plasma concentrations in patients with epilepsy. The addition of phenytoin decreases lamotrigine steady state concentrations by approximately 40%.

                  Pregabalin:
                  
Steady-state trough plasma concentrations of lamotrigine were not affected by concomitant pregabalin (200 mg 3 times daily) administration. There are no pharmacokinetic interactions between lamotrigine and pregabalin.

                  Rifampin:
                  
In 10 male volunteers, rifampin (600 mg/day for 5 days) significantly increased the apparent clearance of a single 25 mg dose of lamotrigine by approximately 2-fold (AUC decreased by approximately 40%).

                  Topiramate:
                  
Topiramate resulted in no change in plasma concentrations of lamotrigine. Administration of Lamotrigine resulted in a 15% increase in topiramate concentrations.

                  Valproate:
                  
When lamotrigine was administered to healthy volunteers (n = 18) receiving valproate, the trough steady-state valproate plasma concentrations decreased by an average of 25% over a 3-week period, and then stabilized. However, adding Lamotrigine to the existing therapy did not cause a change in valproate plasma concentrations in either adult or pediatric patients in controlled clinical trials.

                  
The addition of valproate increased lamotrigine steady-state concentrations in normal volunteers by slightly more than 2-fold. In one study, maximal inhibition of lamotrigine clearance was reached at valproate doses between 250 mg/day and 500 mg/day and did not increase as the valproate dose was further increased.

                  

                  Zonisamide:
                  
In a study of 18 patients with epilepsy, coadministration of zonisamide (200 to 400 mg/day) with Lamotrigine (150 to 500 mg/day) for 35 days had no significant effect on the pharmacokinetics of lamotrigine.

                  

                  Known Inducers or Inhibitors of Glucuronidation:
                  
Drugs other than those listed above have not been systematically evaluated in combination with lamotrigine. Since lamotrigine is metabolized predominately by glucuronic acid conjugation, drugs that are known to induce or inhibit glucuronidation may affect the apparent clearance of lamotrigine, and doses of lamotrigine may require adjustment based on clinical response.

                  

                  Other:
                  
Results of in vitro experiments suggest that clearance of lamotrigine is unlikely to be reduced by concomitant administration of amitriptyline, clonazepam, clozapine, fluoxetine, haloperidol, lorazepam, phenelzine, risperidone, sertraline, or trazodone (seeCLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY: Pharmacokinetics and Drug Metabolism). Results of in vitro experiments suggest that lamotrigine does not reduce the clearance of drugs eliminated predominantly by CYP2D6 (seeCLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY).

                  
Table 3. Summary of Drug Interactions With Lamotrigine

                  *From adjunctive clinical trials and volunteer studies.Net effects were estimated by comparing the mean clearance values obtained in adjunctive clinical trials and volunteers studies.The effect of other hormonal contraceptive preparations or hormone replacement therapy on the pharmacokinetics of lamotrigine has not been systematically evaluated in clinical trials and the effect may not be similar to that seen with the ethinylestradiol/ levonorgestrel combinations.Modest decrease in levonorgestrel (seePRECAUTIONS: Drug Interactions: Oral Contraceptives).Not administered, but an active metabolite of carbamazepine.#Slight decrease, not expected to be clinically relevant.Not administered, but an active metabolite of oxcarbazepine.Slight increase not expected to be clinically relevant.DrugDrug Plasma Concentration With Adjunctive  Lamotrigine*Lamotrigine Plasma Concentration With  Adjunctive DrugsOral contraceptives (e.g., ethinylestradiol/levonorgestrel)
                  BupropionNot assessedCarbamazepine (CBZ)CBZ epoxide
                  #FelbamateNot assessedGabapentinNot assessedLevetiracetamLithiumNot assessedOlanzapineOxcarbazepine1 0-monohydroxy oxcarbazepine metabolitePhenobarbital/primidonePhenytoin (PHT)PregabalinRifampinNot assessedTopiramateValproateValproate + PHT and/or CBZNot assessedZonisamideNot assessed

                  Drug/Laboratory Test Interactions:
None known.

                  
                  

               
               
            
         