
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Adalimumab binds specifically to TNF-alpha and blocks its interaction with the p55 and p75 cell surface TNF receptors. Adalimumab also lyses surface TNF expressing cells in vitro in the presence of complement. Adalimumab does not bind or inactivate lymphotoxin (TNF-beta). TNF is a naturally occurring cytokine that is involved in normal inflammatory and immune responses. Elevated levels of TNF are found in the synovial fluid of patients with RA, JIA, PsA, and AS and play an important role in both the pathologic inflammation and the joint destruction that are hallmarks of these diseases. Increased levels of TNF are also found in psoriasis plaques. In Ps, treatment with HUMIRA may reduce the epidermal thickness and infiltration of inflammatory cells. The relationship between these pharmacodynamic activities and the mechanism(s) by which HUMIRA exerts its clinical effects is unknown. 
                        Adalimumab also modulates biological responses that are induced or regulated by TNF, including changes in the levels of adhesion molecules responsible for leukocyte migration (ELAM-1, VCAM-1, and ICAM-1 with an IC50 of 1-2 X 10-10M).
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        After treatment with HUMIRA, a decrease in levels of acute phase reactants of inflammation (C-reactive protein [CRP] and erythrocyte sedimentation rate [ESR]) and serum cytokines (IL-6) was observed compared to baseline in patients with rheumatoid arthritis. A decrease in CRP levels was also observed in patients with Crohn’s disease and ulcerative colitis. Serum levels of matrix metalloproteinases (MMP-1 and MMP-3) that produce tissue remodeling responsible for cartilage destruction were also decreased after HUMIRA administration. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        The maximum serum concentration (Cmax) and the time to reach the maximum concentration (Tmax) were 4.7 ± 1.6 µg/mL and 131 ± 56 hours respectively, following a single 40 mg subcutaneous administration of HUMIRA to healthy adult subjects. The average absolute bioavailability of adalimumab estimated from three studies following a single 40 mg subcutaneous dose was 64%.  The pharmacokinetics of adalimumab were linear over the dose range of 0.5 to 10.0 mg/kg following a single intravenous dose.
                        The single dose pharmacokinetics of adalimumab in RA patients were determined in several studies with intravenous doses ranging from 0.25 to 10 mg/kg.  The distribution volume (Vss) ranged from 4.7 to 6.0 L. The systemic clearance of adalimumab is approximately 12 mL/hr. The mean terminal half-life was approximately 2 weeks, ranging from 10 to 20 days across studies.  Adalimumab concentrations in the synovial fluid from five rheumatoid arthritis patients ranged from 31 to 96% of those in serum.
                        In RA patients receiving 40 mg HUMIRA every other week, adalimumab mean steady-state trough concentrations of approximately 5 µg/mL and 8 to 9 µg/mL, were observed without and with methotrexate (MTX), respectively.  MTX reduced adalimumab apparent clearance after single and multiple dosing by 29% and 44% respectively, in patients with RA. Mean serum adalimumab trough levels at steady state increased approximately proportionally with dose following 20, 40, and 80 mg every other week and every week subcutaneous dosing.  In long-term studies with dosing more than two years, there was no evidence of changes in clearance over time.
                        Adalimumab mean steady-state trough concentrations were slightly higher in psoriatic arthritis patients treated with 40 mg HUMIRA every other week (6 to 10 µg/mL and 8.5 to 12 µg/mL, without and with MTX, respectively) compared to the concentrations in RA patients treated with the same dose.
                        The pharmacokinetics of adalimumab in patients with AS were similar to those in patients with RA.
                        In patients with CD, the loading dose of 160 mg HUMIRA on Week 0 followed by 80 mg HUMIRA on Week 2 achieves mean serum adalimumab trough levels of approximately 12 µg/mL at Week 2 and Week 4. Mean steady-state trough levels of approximately 7 µg/mL were observed at Week 24 and Week 56 in CD patients after receiving a maintenance dose of 40 mg HUMIRA every other week. 
                        In patients with UC, the loading dose of 160 mg HUMIRA on Week 0 followed by 80 mg HUMIRA on Week 2 achieves mean serum adalimumab trough levels of approximately 12 µg/mL at Week 2 and Week 4. Mean steady-state trough level of approximately 8 µg/mL was observed at Week 52 in UC patients after receiving a dose of 40 mg HUMIRA every other week, and approximately 15 µg/mL at Week 52 in UC patients who increased to a dose of 40 mg HUMIRA every week.
                        In patients with Ps, the mean steady-state trough concentration was approximately 5 to 6 µg/mL during HUMIRA 40 mg every other week monotherapy treatment.
                        Population pharmacokinetic analyses in patients with RA revealed that there was a trend toward higher apparent clearance of adalimumab in the presence of anti-adalimumab antibodies, and lower clearance with increasing age in patients aged 40 to >75 years.
                        Minor increases in apparent clearance were also predicted in RA patients receiving doses lower than the recommended dose and in RA patients with high rheumatoid factor or CRP concentrations. These increases are not likely to be clinically important.
                        No gender-related pharmacokinetic differences were observed after correction for a patient’s body weight. Healthy volunteers and patients with rheumatoid arthritis displayed similar adalimumab pharmacokinetics.
                        No pharmacokinetic data are available in patients with hepatic or renal impairment.
                        In Study JIA-I for patients with polyarticular JIA who were 4 to 17 years of age, the mean steady-state trough serum adalimumab concentrations for patients weighing <30 kg receiving 20 mg HUMIRA subcutaneously every other week as monotherapy or with concomitant MTX were 6.8 µg/mL and 10.9 µg/mL, respectively. The mean steady-state trough serum adalimumab concentrations for patients weighing ≥30 kg receiving 40 mg HUMIRA subcutaneously every other week as monotherapy or with concomitant MTX were 6.6 µg/mL and 8.1 µg/mL, respectively. In Study JIA-II for patients with polyarticular JIA who were 2 to <4 years of age or 4 years of age and older weighing <15 kg, the mean steady-state trough serum adalimumab concentrations for patients receiving HUMIRA subcutaneously every other week as monotherapy or with concomitant MTX were 6.0 µg/mL and 7.9 µg/mL, respectively.
                        In pediatric subjects with CD weighing ≥ 40 kg, the mean ±SD serum adalimumab concentrations were 15.7±6.5 mcg/mL at Week 4 following subcutaneous doses of 160 mg at Week 0 and 80 mg at Week 2 and the mean ±SD steady-state trough serum adalimumab concentrations were 10.5±6.0 mcg/mL at Week 52 following subcutaneous doses of 40 mg every other week. In pediatric subjects with CD weighing < 40 kg, the mean ±SD serum adalimumab concentrations were 10.6±6.1 mcg/mL at Week 4 following subcutaneous doses of 80 mg at Week 0 and 40 mg at Week 2 and the mean ±SD steady-state trough serum adalimumab concentrations were 6.9±3.6 mcg/mL at Week 52 following subcutaneous doses of 20 mg every other week.  
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         