
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              Abatacept: Increased risk of serious infection (5.1, 5.11, 7.2)
                           
                              Anakinra: Increased risk of serious infection (5.1, 5.7, 7.2)
                           
                              Live vaccines: Avoid use with HUMIRA (5.10, 7.3)
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 Methotrexate
                     
                        HUMIRA has been studied in rheumatoid arthritis (RA) patients taking concomitant methotrexate (MTX). Although MTX  reduced the apparent adalimumab clearance, the data do not suggest the need for dose adjustment of either HUMIRA or MTX [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 Biological Products 
                     
                        In clinical studies in patients with RA, an increased risk of serious infections has been seen with the combination of TNF blockers with anakinra or abatacept, with no added benefit; therefore, use of HUMIRA with abatacept or anakinra is not recommended in patients with RA [see Warnings and Precautions (5.7 and 5.11)].  A higher rate of serious infections has also been observed in patients with RA treated with rituximab who received subsequent treatment with a TNF blocker. There is insufficient information regarding the concomitant use of HUMIRA and other biologic products for the treatment of RA, PsA, AS, CD, UC, and Ps. Concomitant administration of HUMIRA with other biologic DMARDS (e.g., anakinra and abatacept) or other TNF blockers is not recommended based upon the possible increased risk for infections and other potential pharmacological interactions.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3 Live Vaccines
                     
                        Avoid the use of live vaccines with HUMIRA [see Warnings and Precautions (5.10)].
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4 Cytochrome P450 Substrates
                     
                        The formation of CYP450 enzymes may be suppressed by increased levels of cytokines (e.g., TNFα, IL-6) during chronic inflammation. It is possible for a molecule that antagonizes cytokine activity, such as adalimumab, to influence the formation of CYP450 enzymes. Upon initiation or discontinuation of HUMIRA in patients being treated with CYP450 substrates with a narrow therapeutic index, monitoring of the effect (e.g., warfarin) or drug concentration (e.g., cyclosporine or theophylline) is recommended and the individual dose of the drug product may be adjusted as needed.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         