
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  Leuprolide acetate is a long-acting GnRH analog.  A single injection of LUPRON DEPOT–3 Month 11.25 mg will result in an initial stimulation followed by a prolonged suppression of pituitary gonadotropins. Repeated dosing at quarterly (LUPRON DEPOT–3 Month 11.25 mg) intervals results in decreased secretion of gonadal steroids; consequently, tissues and functions that depend on gonadal steroids for their maintenance become quiescent.  This effect is reversible on discontinuation of drug therapy.
                  Leuprolide acetate is not active when given orally.
               
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Pharmacokinetics
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Absorption
                           
                              Following a single injection of the three month formulation of LUPRON DEPOT–3 Month 11.25 mg in female subjects, a mean plasma leuprolide concentration of 36.3 ng/mL was observed at 4 hours.  Leuprolide appeared to be released at a constant rate following the onset of steady-state levels during the third week after dosing and mean levels then declined gradually to near the lower limit of detection by 12 weeks.  The mean (± standard deviation) leuprolide concentration from 3 to 12 weeks was 0.23 ± 0.09 ng/mL. However, intact leuprolide and an inactive major metabolite could not be distinguished by the assay which was employed in the study. The initial burst, followed by the rapid decline to a steady-state level, was similar to the release pattern seen with the monthly formulation.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Distribution
                           
                              The mean steady-state volume of distribution of leuprolide following intravenous bolus administration to healthy male volunteers was 27 L. In vitro binding to human plasma proteins ranged from 43% to 49%.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Metabolism
                           
                              In healthy male volunteers, a 1 mg bolus of leuprolide administered intravenously revealed that the mean systemic clearance was 7.6 L/h, with a terminal elimination half-life of approximately 3 hours based on a two compartment model.
                              In rats and dogs, administration of 14C‑labeled leuprolide was shown to be metabolized to smaller inactive peptides, a pentapeptide (Metabolite I), tripeptides (Metabolites II and III) and a dipeptide (Metabolite IV). These fragments may be further catabolized.
                              In a pharmacokinetic/pharmacodynamic study of endometriosis patients, intramuscular 11.25 mg LUPRON DEPOT (n=19) every 12 weeks or intramuscular 3.75 mg LUPRON DEPOT (n=15) every 4 weeks was administered for 24 weeks.  There was no statistically significant difference in changes of serum estradiol concentration from baseline between the 2 treatment groups.
                              M-I plasma concentrations measured in 5 prostate cancer patients reached maximum concentration 2 to 6 hours after dosing and were approximately 6% of the peak parent drug concentration.  One week after dosing, mean plasma M-I concentrations were approximately 20% of mean leuprolide concentrations.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Excretion
                           
                              Following administration of LUPRON DEPOT 3.75 mg to 3 patients, less than 5% of the dose was recovered as parent and M-I metabolite in the urine.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Special Populations
                           
                              The pharmacokinetics of the drug in hepatically and renally impaired patients have not been determined.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Drug Interactions
                           
                              No pharmacokinetic-based drug-drug interaction studies have been conducted with LUPRON DEPOT.  However, because leuprolide acetate is a peptide that is primarily degraded by peptidase and not by cytochrome P-450 enzymes as noted in specific studies, and the drug is only about 46% bound to plasma proteins, drug interactions would not be expected to occur.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         