
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              •Moderate CYP3A inhibitors (e.g., diltiazem, verapamil, erythromycin): Limit Ranexa to 500 mg twice daily. (7.1)
                           
                              •P-gp inhibitors (e.g., cyclosporine): Ranolazine exposure increased. Titrate Ranexa based on clinical response. (7.1)
                           
                              •CYP3A substrates: Limit simvastatin to 20 mg when used with Ranexa. Doses of other sensitive CYP3A substrates (e.g., lovastatin) and CYP3A substrates with narrow therapeutic range (e.g., cyclosporine, tacrolimus, sirolimus) may need to be reduced with Ranexa. (7.2)
                           
                              •Drugs transported by P-gp or metabolized by CYP2D6 (e.g., digoxin, tricyclic antidepressants): May need reduced doses of these drugs when used with Ranexa. (7.2)
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 Effects of Other Drugs on Ranolazine
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                    Strong CYP3A Inhibitors
                                 
                              
                              Do not use Ranexa with strong CYP3A inhibitors, including ketoconazole, itraconazole, clarithromycin, nefazodone, nelfinavir, ritonavir, indinavir, and saquinavir [see Contraindications (4), Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                    Moderate CYP3A Inhibitors
                                 
                              
                              Limit the dose of Ranexa to 500 mg twice daily in patients on moderate CYP3A inhibitors, including diltiazem, verapamil, erythromycin, fluconazole, and grapefruit juice or grapefruit-containing products [see Dosage and Administration (2.2), Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                              
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                    P-gp Inhibitors
                                 
                              
                              Concomitant use of Ranexa and P-gp inhibitors, such as cyclosporine, may result in increases in ranolazine concentrations. Titrate Ranexa based on clinical response in patients concomitantly treated with predominant P-gp inhibitors such as cyclosporine [see Dosage and Administration (2.2)].
                              
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                    CYP3A Inducers
                                 
                              
                              Do not use Ranexa with CYP3A inducers such as rifampin, rifabutin, rifapentin, phenobarbital, phenytoin, carbamazepine, and St. John's wort [see Contraindications (4), Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 Effects of Ranolazine on Other Drugs
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                    Drugs Metabolized by CYP3A
                                 
                              
                              Limit the dose of simvastatin in patients on any dose of Ranexa to 20 mg once daily, when ranolazine is co-administered. Dose adjustment of other sensitive CYP3A substrates (e.g., lovastatin) and CYP3A substrates with a narrow therapeutic range (e.g., cyclosporine, tacrolimus, sirolimus) may be required as Ranexa may increase plasma concentrations of these drugs [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                    Drugs Transported by P-gp
                                 
                              
                              Concomitant use of ranolazine and digoxin results in increased exposure to digoxin. The dose of digoxin may have to be adjusted [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                              
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                    Drugs Metabolized by CYP2D6
                                 
                              
                              The exposure to CYP2D6 substrates, such as tricyclic antidepressants and antipsychotics, may be increased during co-administration with Ranexa, and lower doses of these drugs may be required.
                              
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         