
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1	Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Hunter syndrome (Mucopolysaccharidosis II, MPS II) is an X-linked recessive disease caused by insufficient levels of the lysosomal enzyme iduronate-2-sulfatase.  This enzyme cleaves the terminal 2-O-sulfate moieties from the glycosaminoglycans (GAG) dermatan sulfate and heparan sulfate.  Due to the missing or defective iduronate-2-sulfatase enzyme in patients with Hunter syndrome, GAG progressively accumulate in the lysosomes of a variety of cells, leading to cellular engorgement, organomegaly, tissue destruction, and organ system dysfunction.
                        ELAPRASE is intended to provide exogenous enzyme for uptake into cellular lysosomes.  Mannose-6-phosphate (M6P) residues on the oligosaccharide chains allow binding of the enzyme to the M6P receptors on the cell surface, leading to cellular internalization of the enzyme, targeting to intracellular lysosomes and subsequent catabolism of accumulated GAG.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        Decreases in urinary GAG levels were observed following treatment with ELAPRASE.  The responsiveness of urinary GAG to dosage alterations of ELAPRASE is unknown, and the relationship of urinary GAG to other measures of clinical response has not been established.    Patients who tested positive for anti-idursulfase antibodies (Ab) experienced a less pronounced decrease in urinary GAG levels [see Adverse Reactions (6.2) and Clinical Studies (14.1, 14.2)].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                    Clinical Trials in Patients 5 Years and Older
                                 
                              
                              The pharmacokinetic characteristics of idursulfase were evaluated in 59 patients with Hunter syndrome.  The serum concentration of idursulfase was quantified using an antigen-specific ELISA assay.  The area under the concentration-time curve (AUC) increased in a greater than dose proportional manner as the dose increased from 0.15 mg/kg to 1.5 mg/kg following a single 1-hour infusion of ELAPRASE.  The pharmacokinetic parameters at the recommended dose regimen (0.5 mg/kg ELAPRASE administered weekly as a 3-hour infusion) were determined at Week 1 and Week 27 in 10 patients 7.7 to 27 years of age (Table 3).  There were no apparent differences in PK parameter values between Week 1 and Week 27 regardless of the antibody status in these patients. 
                              


                           



                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                    Clinical Trial in Patients 7 Years and Younger
                                 
                              
                              Idursulfase pharmacokinetics was evaluated in 27 patients with Hunter syndrome 16 months to 7.5 years of age who received ELAPRASE 0.5 mg/kg once weekly as a 3-hour infusion.  The presence of anti-idursulfase antibody (Ab) was associated with a reduced systemic exposure of idursulfase.  Eight of the 18 Ab-positive patients had no measurable idursulfase concentrations.  An additional 9 Ab-positive patients had decreased Cmax, AUC, and t1/2 at Week 27 compared to Week 1 (Table 4).  Idursulfase pharmacokinetics was similar between Week 1 and Week 27 in Ab-negative patients (Table 4). 
                              


                              


All patients with the complete gene deletion or large gene rearrangement genotype (n = 8) developed Ab at Week 27.  Five of these eight patients had no measurable idursulfase concentrations at Week 27, and three had a lower systemic exposure at Week 27 compared to Week 1.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         