
               
               
               Drug Interactions
               
                  CYP3A4 Inhibitors
                  Felodipine is metabolized by CYP3A4. Coadministration of CYP3A4 inhibitors (e.g., ketoconazole, itraconazole, erythromycin, grapefruit juice, cimetidine) with felodipine may lead to several-fold increases in the plasma levels of felodipine, either due to an increase in bioavailability or due to a decrease in metabolism. These increases in concentration may lead to increased effects, (lower blood pressure and increased heart rate). These effects have been observed with coadministration of itraconazole (a potent CYP3A4 inhibitor). Caution should be used when CYP3A4 inhibitors are coadministered with felodipine. A conservative approach to dosing felodipine should be taken. The following specific interactions have been reported:
                  Itraconazole
                  Coadministration of another extended-release formulation of felodipine with itraconazole resulted in approximately 8-fold increase in the AUC, more than 6-fold increase in the Cmax, and 2-fold prolongation in the half-life of felodipine.
                  Erythromycin
                  Coadministration of felodipine with erythromycin resulted in approximately 2.5-fold increase in the AUC and Cmax, and about 2-fold prolongation in the half-life of felodipine.
                  Grapefruit Juice
                  Coadministration of felodipine with grapefruit juice resulted in more than 2-fold increase in the AUC and Cmax, but no prolongation in the half-life of felodipine.
                  Cimetidine
                  Coadministration of felodipine with cimetidine (a non-specific CYP-450 inhibitor) resulted in an increase of approximately 50% in the AUC and the Cmax, of felodipine.
                  Beta-Blocking Agents
                  A pharmacokinetic study of felodipine in conjunction with metoprolol demonstrated no significant effects on the pharmacokinetics of felodipine. The AUC and Cmax of metoprolol, however, were increased approximately 31 and 38%, respectively. In controlled clinical trials, however, beta-blockers including metoprolol were concurrently administered with felodipine and were well tolerated.
                  Digoxin
                  When given concomitantly with felodipine extended-release the pharmacokinetics of digoxin in patients with heart failure were not significantly altered.
                  Anticonvulsants
                  In a pharmacokinetic study, maximum plasma concentrations of felodipine were considerably lower in epileptic patients on long-term anticonvulsant therapy (e.g. phenytoin, carbamazepine, or phenobarbital) than in healthy volunteers. In such patients, the mean area under the felodipine plasma concentration-time curve was also reduced to approximately 6% of that observed in healthy volunteers. Since a clinically significant interaction may be anticipated, alternative antihypertensive therapy should be considered in these patients.
                  Tacrolimus
                  Felodipine may increase the blood concentration of tacrolimus. When given concomitantly with felodipine, the tacrolimus blood concentration should be followed and the tacrolimus dose may need to be adjusted.
                  Other Concomitant Therapy
                  In healthy subjects there were no clinically significant interactions when felodipine was given concomitantly with indomethacin or spironolactone.
                  Interaction with Food
                  See CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY: Pharmacokinetics and Metabolism.
               
               
            
         