
                     
                     
                     Drug Interactions
                     
                        Both pharmacodynamic and pharmacokinetic interactions have been reported with benzodiazepines. In particular, triazolam produces additive CNS depressant effects when co-administered with other psychotropic medications, anticonvulsants, antihistamines, ethanol, and other drugs which themselves produce CNS depression.
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Drugs that Inhibit Triazolam Metabolism Via Cytochrome P450 3A
                           
                              The initial step in triazolam metabolism is hydroxylation catalyzed by cytochrome P450 3A (CYP 3A). Drugs which inhibit this metabolic pathway may have a profound effect on the clearance of triazolam (see CONTRAINDICATIONS and WARNINGS for additional drugs of this type). Triazolam is contraindicated with ketoconazole, itraconazole, and nefazodone.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Drugs and Other Substances Demonstrated to be CYP 3A Inhibitors of Possible Clinical Significance on the Basis of Clinical Studies Involving Triazolam (caution is recommended during co-administration with triazolam)
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    Isoniazid
                                 
                                 
                                    Co-administration of isoniazid increased the maximum plasma concentration of triazolam by 20%, decreased clearance by 42%, and increased half-life by 31%.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    Oral Contraceptives
                                 
                                 
                                    Co-administration of oral contraceptives increased maximum plasma concentration by 6%, decreased clearance by 32%, and increased half-life by 16%.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    Grapefruit Juice
                                 
                                 
                                    Co-administration of grapefruit juice increased the maximum plasma concentration of triazolam by 25%, increased the area under the concentration curve by 48%, and increased half-life by 18%.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Drugs Demonstrated to be CYP 3A Inhibitors on the Basis of Clinical Studies Involving Benzodiazepines Metabolized Similarly to Triazolam or on the Basis of In Vitro Studies with Triazolam or Other Benzodiazepines (caution is recommended during co-administration with triazolam)
                           
                              Available data from clinical studies of benzodiazepines other than triazolam suggest a possible drug interaction with triazolam for the following: fluvoxamine, diltiazem, and verapamil. Data from in vitro studies of triazolam suggest a possible drug interaction with triazolam for the following: sertraline and paroxetine. Data from in vitro studies of benzodiazepines other than triazolam suggest a possible drug interaction with triazolam for the following: ergotamine, cyclosporine, amiodarone, nicardipine, and nifedipine. Caution is recommended during co-administration of any of these drugs with triazolam (see WARNINGS).
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Drugs that Affect Triazolam Pharmacokinetics by Other Mechanisms
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    Ranitidine
                                 
                                 
                                    Co-administration of ranitidine increased the maximum plasma concentration of triazolam by 30%, increased the area under the concentration curve by 27%, and increased half-life by 3.3%. Caution is recommended during co-administration with triazolam.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               