
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                     
                        Endogenous estrogens are largely responsible for the development and maintenance of the female reproductive system and secondary sexual characteristics. Although circulating estrogens exist in a dynamic equilibrium of metabolic interconversions, estradiol is the principal intracellular human estrogen and is substantially more potent than its metabolites, estrone and estriol, at the receptor level.
                        The primary source of estrogen in normally cycling adult women is the ovarian follicle, which secretes 70 to 500 mcg of estradiol daily, depending on the phase of the menstrual cycle. After menopause, most endogenous estrogen is produced by conversion of androstenedione, which is secreted by the adrenal cortex, to estrone in the peripheral tissues. Thus, estrone and the sulfate conjugated form, estrone sulfate, are the most abundant circulating estrogens in postmenopausal women. 
                        Estrogens act through binding to nuclear receptors in estrogen-responsive tissues. To date, two estrogen receptors have been identified. These vary in proportion from tissue to tissue.
                        Circulating estrogens modulate the pituitary secretion of the gonadotropins, luteinizing hormone (LH) and FSH through a negative feedback mechanism. Estrogens act to reduce the elevated levels of these hormones seen in postmenopausal women.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                     
                     
                        There are no pharmacodynamic data for Femring.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                     
                        
                           Absorption
                        
                        Estradiol acetate is hydrolyzed to estradiol which is absorbed through the vaginal mucosa as evidenced by the mean time to maximum concentration (tmax) for estradiol of about 1 hour (range 0.25 to 1.5 hrs). After achieving the Cmax the estradiol concentration starts declining during the first 24 to 48 hours and then at a relatively constant rate for the remainder of the 3‑month dosing interval (see Figure 1 for results from rings stored for 16 months). In vitro studies have shown that this initial release is higher as the rings age upon storage. 
                        
                           Figure 1.  Mean serum estradiol concentrations following multiple dose administration of Femring (0.05 mg/day estradiol) (second dose administered at 13 weeks) (inset: mean (±SD) of serum concentration-time profile for dose 1 from 0-24 hours)
                        
                        
                           
                              
                           
                        
                        Following administration of Femring (0.05 mg/day estradiol), average serum estradiol concentration was 40.6 pg/mL; the corresponding apparent in vivo estradiol delivery rate was 0.052 mg/day. Following administration of Femring (0.10 mg/day estradiol), average serum estradiol concentration was 76 pg/mL; apparent in vivo delivery rate was 0.097 mg/day. Results are summarized in Table 2 below.
                        


                        


*Relative Standard Deviation, 1Study 1, 2Study 2, 3Study 3, 4--Not determined

                           
Consistent with the avoidance of first pass metabolism achieved by vaginal estradiol administration, serum estradiol concentrations were slightly higher than estrone concentrations.  
                        
                           Distribution
                        
                        The distribution of exogenous estrogens is similar to that of endogenous estrogens. Estrogens are widely distributed in the body and are generally found in higher concentrations in the sex hormone target organs. Estrogens circulate in the blood largely bound to SHBG and albumin.
                        
                           Metabolism
                        
                        Exogenous estrogens are metabolized in the same manner as endogenous estrogens. Circulating estrogens exist in a dynamic equilibrium of metabolic interconversions. These transformations take place mainly in the liver. Estradiol is converted reversibly to estrone, and both can be converted to estriol, which is a major urinary metabolite. Estrogens also undergo enterohepatic recirculation via sulfate and glucuronide conjugation in the liver, biliary secretion of conjugates into the intestine, and hydrolysis in the intestine followed by reabsorption. In postmenopausal women, a significant proportion of the circulating estrogens exist as sulfate conjugates, especially estrone sulfate, which serves as a circulating reservoir for the formation of more active estrogens.
                        
                           Excretion
                        
                        Estradiol, estrone, and estriol are excreted in the urine along with glucuronide and sulfate conjugates.   
                        The estradiol apparent elimination half-life value is 21 to 26 hours.
                        
                           Use in Specific Populations
                        
                        No pharmacokinetic studies were conducted with Femring in specific populations, including women with renal or hepatic impairment.
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           Figure 1
                           
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         