
                     
                     
                     Drug Interactions
                     
                        In controlled clinical studies, adrenergic beta-receptor
									blockers have been frequently administered concomitantly with
									CARDENE. The combination is well tolerated.
                                    Beta-Blockers:
                        
                        Cimetidine increases CARDENE plasma levels. Patients
								receiving the two drugs concomitantly should be carefully monitored.
                                    Cimetidine:
                        
                        Some calcium blockers may increase the concentration of
									digitalis preparations in the blood. CARDENE usually does not alter
									the plasma levels of digoxin; however, serum digoxin levels should be
									evaluated after concomitant therapy with CARDENE is initiated.
                                    Digoxin:
                        
                        Severe hypotension has been reported during
									fentanyl anesthesia with concomitant use of a beta-blocker and a calcium
									channel blocker. Even though such interactions were not seen during
									clinical studies with CARDENE, an increased volume of circulating fluids
									might be required if such an interaction were to occur.
                                    Fentanyl Anesthesia:
                        
                        Concomitant administration of nicardipine and cyclosporine
									results in elevated plasma cyclosporine levels. Plasma concentrations
									of cyclosporine should therefore be closely monitored, and its dosage
									reduced accordingly, in patients treated with nicardipine.
                                    Cyclosporine:
                        
                        When therapeutic concentrations of furosemide, propranolol, dipyridamole,
									warfarin, quinidine or naproxen were added to human plasma (in vitro),
									the plasma protein binding of CARDENE was not altered.
                     
                     
                  
               