
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Nicardipine is a calcium entry blocker (slow channel blocker or calcium
									ion antagonist) that inhibits the transmembrane influx of calcium ions
									into cardiac muscle and smooth muscle without changing serum
									calcium concentrations. The contractile processes of cardiac muscle
									and vascular smooth muscle are dependent upon the movement of
									extracellular calcium ions into these cells through specific ion channels.
									The effects of nicardipine are more selective to vascular smooth muscle
									than cardiac muscle. In animal models, nicardipine produces relaxation
									of coronary vascular smooth muscle at drug levels that cause little or no
									negative inotropic effect.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Pharmacokinetics and Metabolism
                     
                        Nicardipine is completely absorbed following oral doses administered as
									capsules, and the systemic bioavailability is about 35% following a 30-mg oral dose at steady-state. The pharmacokinetics of nicardipine are
									nonlinear due to saturable hepatic first-pass metabolism.
                        Following oral administration of CARDENE SR, plasma levels are
									detectable as early as 20 minutes and maximal plasma levels are
									achieved as a broad peak generally between 1 and 4 hours. The
									average terminal plasma half-life of nicardipine is 8.6 hours. Following
									oral administration increasing doses result in disproportionate increases
									in plasma levels. Steady-state C values following 30-, 45- and 60-mg
									doses every 12 hours averaged 13.4, 34.0, and 58.4 ng/mL, respectively.
									Hence, increasing the dose twofold increases maximum plasma levels
									4-fold to 5-fold. A similar disproportionate increase is observed with
									AUC. In comparison with equivalent daily doses of CARDENE capsules,
									CARDENE SR shows a significant reduction in C . CARDENE SR also
									has somewhat lower bioavailability than CARDENE except at the highest
									dose. Minimum plasma levels produced by equivalent daily doses are
									similar. CARDENE SR thus exhibits significantly reduced fluctuation in
									plasma levels in comparison to CARDENE capsules.
                                    max
                           max
                        
                        When CARDENE SR was administered with a high-fat breakfast, mean
									C was 45% lower, AUC was 25% lower and trough levels were 75%
									higher than when CARDENE SR was given in the fasting state. Thus,
									taking CARDENE SR with the meal reduced the fluctuation in plasma
									levels. Clinical trials establishing the safety and efficacy of CARDENE
									SR were carried out in patients without regard to the timing of meals.
                                    max
                        
                        Nicardipine is highly protein bound (>95%) in human plasma over a wide
								concentration range.
                        Nicardipine is metabolized extensively by the liver; less than 1% of
									intact drug is detected in the urine. Following a radioactive oral dose in
									solution, 60% of the radioactivity was recovered in the urine and 35% in
									feces. Most of the dose (over 90%) was recovered within 48 hours of
									dosing. Nicardipine does not induce its own metabolism and does not
									induce hepatic microsomal enzymes.
                        Nicardipine plasma levels following administration of CARDENE SR
									in hypertensive patients with moderate renal impairment (creatinine
									clearance 10 to 55 mL/min) were significantly higher following a single-oral
									dose and at steady-state than in hypertensive patients with mildly
									impaired renal function (creatinine clearance >55 mL/min). After 45-mg
									CARDENE SR bid at steady-state, C and AUC were 2-fold to 3-fold
									higher in the patients with moderate renal impairment. Plasma levels
									in patients with mildly impaired renal function were similar to those in
									normal subjects.
                                    max
                        
                        In patients with severe renal impairment undergoing routine hemodialysis,
									plasma levels following a single dose of CARDENE SR were not
									significantly different from those patients with mildly impaired renal
									function.
                        Because nicardipine is extensively metabolized by the liver, the plasma
									levels of the drug are influenced by changes in hepatic function. Following
									administration of CARDENE capsules, nicardipine plasma levels were
									higher in patients with severe liver disease (hepatic cirrhosis confirmed
									by liver biopsy or presence of endoscopically-confirmed esophageal
									varices) than in normal subjects. After 20-mg CARDENE bid at steady-state,
									C and AUC were 1.8-fold and 4-fold higher, and the terminal
									half-life was prolonged to 19 hours in these patients. CARDENE SR has
									not been studied in patients with severe liver disease.
                                    max
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Geriatric Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        The pharmacokinetics of CARDENE SR in elderly hypertensive subjects
									(mean age 70 years) were compared to those in younger hypertensive
									subjects (mean age 44 years). After a single dose and after 1 week of
									dosing with CARDENE SR there were no significant differences in C ,
									T , AUC or clearance between the young and elderly subjects. In both
									groups of subjects, steady-state plasma levels were significantly higher
									than following a single dose. In the elderly subjects, a disproportional
									increase in plasma levels with dose was observed similar to that observed
									in normal subjects.
                                    max
                           max
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Hemodynamics
                     
                        In man, nicardipine produces a significant decrease in systemic vascular
									resistance. The degree of vasodilation and the resultant hypotensive
									effects are more prominent in hypertensive patients. In hypertensive
									patients, nicardipine reduces the blood pressure at rest and during
									isometric and dynamic exercise. In normotensive patients, a small
									decrease of about 9 mm Hg in systolic and 7 mm Hg in diastolic blood
									pressure may accompany this fall in peripheral resistance. An increase
									in heart rate may occur in response to the vasodilation and decrease in
									blood pressure, and in a few patients this heart rate increase may be
									pronounced. In clinical studies mean heart rate at time of peak plasma
									levels was usually increased by 5 to 10 beats per minute compared to
									placebo, with the greater increases at higher doses, while there was no
									difference from placebo at the end of the dosing interval. Hemodynamic
									studies following intravenous dosing in patients with coronary artery
									disease and normal or moderately abnormal left ventricular function have
									shown significant increases in ejection fraction and cardiac output with
									no significant change, or a small decrease, in left ventricular end-diastolic
									pressure (LVEDP). Although there is evidence that nicardipine increases
									coronary blood flow, there is no evidence that this property plays any
									role in its effectiveness in stable angina. In patients with coronary artery
									disease, intracoronary administration of nicardipine caused no direct
									myocardial depression. CARDENE does, however, have a negative
									inotropic effect in some patients with severe left ventricular dysfunction
									and could, in patients with very impaired function, lead to worsened
									failure.
                        “Coronary Steal,” the detrimental redistribution of coronary blood flow
									in patients with coronary artery disease (diversion of blood from under-perfused
									areas toward better perfused areas), has not been observed
									during nicardipine treatment. On the contrary, nicardipine has been
									shown to improve systolic shortening in normal and hypokinetic segments
									of myocardial muscle, and radionuclide angiography has confirmed that
									wall motion remained improved during an increase in oxygen demand.
									Nonetheless, occasional patients have developed increased angina upon
									receiving nicardipine. Whether this represents steal in those patients, or
									is the result of increased heart rate and decreased diastolic pressure, is
									not clear.
                        In patients with coronary artery disease nicardipine improves L.V. diastolic
									distensibility during the early filling phase, probably due to a faster rate
									of myocardial relaxation in previously under-perfused areas. There is
									little or no effect on normal myocardium, suggesting the improvement is
									mainly by indirect mechanisms such as afterload reduction and reduced
									ischemia. Nicardipine has no negative effect on myocardial relaxation at
									therapeutic doses. The clinical consequences of these properties are as
									yet undemonstrated.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Electrophysiologic Effects
                     
                        In general, no detrimental effects on the cardiac conduction system were
									seen with the use of CARDENE.
                        Nicardipine increased the heart rate when given intravenously during
									acute electrophysiologic studies and prolonged the corrected QT interval
									to a minor degree. The sinus node recovery times and SA conduction
									times were not affected by the drug. The PA, AH and HV intervals* and
									the functional and effective refractory periods of the atrium were not
									prolonged by nicardipine and the relative and effective refractory periods
									of the His-Purkinje system were slightly shortened after intravenous
									nicardipine.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Renal Function
                     
                        There is a transient increase in electrolyte excretion, including sodium.
									CARDENE does not cause generalized fluid retention, as measured by
									weight changes.
                        *PA=conduction time from high to low right atrium, AH=conduction time
									from low right atrium to His bundle deflection or AV nodal conduction
									time, HV=conduction time through the His bundle and the bundle branch-Purkinje system.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Effects in Hypertension
                     
                        CARDENE SR produced decreases in both systolic and diastolic
									blood pressure throughout the dosing interval in clinical trials. The
									antihypertensive efficacy of CARDENE SR administered twice daily has
									been demonstrated using in-clinic blood pressure measures in placebo-controlled
									trials involving patients with mild to moderate hypertension
									and in trials using 12 or 24 hour ambulatory blood pressure monitoring.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         