
               
               
               7. DRUG INTERACTIONS

               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           Concomitant administration of diclofenac and aspirin is not generally recommended because of the potential of increased adverse effects including increased GI bleeding. (7.1)

                           Concomitant use of anticoagulants and diclofenac have a risk of serious GI bleeding higher than users of either drug alone. (7.2)

                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 Aspirin

                     
                        When administered with aspirin, diclofenac's protein binding is reduced.  The clinical significance of this interaction is not known; however, as with other NSAIDs, concomitant administration of Zipsor and aspirin is not generally recommended because of the potential of increased adverse effects.

                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 Anticoagulants

                     
                        The effects of anticoagulants such as of warfarin and NSAIDs on GI bleeding are synergistic, such that users of both drugs together have a risk of serious GI bleeding higher than that with use of either drug alone.

                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3 ACE-inhibitors

                     
                        NSAIDs may diminish the antihypertensive effect of angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors.  This interaction should be given consideration in patients taking Zipsor concomitantly with ACE-inhibitors.

                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4 Diuretics

                     
                        Clinical studies, as well as post-marketing observations, have shown that NSAIDs can reduce the natriuretic effect of furosemide and thiazides in some patients.  This response has been attributed to inhibition of renal prostaglandin synthesis.  During concomitant therapy of Zipsor and diuretics, observe patients closely for signs of renal failure [see Warnings and Precautions (5.6)], as well as to assure diuretic efficacy.

                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.5 Lithium

                     
                        NSAIDs have produced an elevation of plasma lithium levels and a reduction in renal lithium clearance.  The mean minimum lithium concentration increased 15% and the renal clearance was decreased by approximately 20%.  These effects have been attributed to inhibition of renal prostaglandin synthesis by the NSAID.  Thus, when Zipsor and lithium are administered concurrently, observe patients carefully for signs of lithium toxicity.

                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.6 Methotrexate

                     
                        NSAIDs have been reported to competitively inhibit methotrexate accumulation in rabbit kidney slices.  This indicates that NSAIDs may enhance the toxicity of methotrexate.  Use caution when Zipsor is administered concomitantly with methotrexate.

                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.7 Cyclosporine

                     
                        Diclofenac, like other NSAIDs, may affect renal prostaglandins and increase the toxicity of certain drugs.  Therefore, concomitant therapy with Zipsor may increase cyclosporine's nephrotoxicity.  Use caution when Zipsor is administered concomitantly with cyclosporine.

                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.8  Inhibitors or Substrates of Cytochrome P450 2C9 Other Considerations

                     
                        Diclofenac is metabolized predominantly by cytochrome P450 2C9.  Co-administration of diclofenac with another drug medication known to be metabolized by or that which inhibits Cytochrome P450 2C9 may unpredictably affect the pharmacokinetics of diclofenac or the co-administered drug medication.  Caution should be used to evaluate each patient's medical history when consideration is given to prescribing Zipsor [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].

                     
                     
                  
               
            
         