
               
               
               12. CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY

               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action

                     
                        Zipsor is an NSAID that exhibits anti-inflammatory, analgesic, and antipyretic activities in animal models.  The mechanism of action of Zipsor, like that of other NSAIDs, is not completely understood but may involve inhibition of the cyclooxygenase (COX-1 and COX-2) pathways.  Diclofenac's mechanism may also be related to prostaglandin synthetase inhibition.  The analgesic mechanism of action needs further elucidation.

                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics

                     
                        The pharmacokinetics of Zipsor was assessed in 24 healthy, normal volunteers who received 25 mg Zipsor under fasting conditions.  The mean pharmacokinetic parameters for Zipsor are shown in Table 2.

                        


                     



                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Absorption
                              
                              Diclofenac is 100% absorbed after oral administration compared to IV administration as measured by urine recovery.  However, due to first-pass metabolism, only about 50% of the absorbed dose is systemically available.  After repeated oral administration, no accumulation of diclofenac in plasma occurred.

                              The extent of diclofenac absorption is not significantly affected when Zipsor is taken with food.  However, the rate of absorption is reduced by food, as indicated by a two-fold increase of Tmax and a 47% decrease in Cmax.

                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Distribution
                              
                              The apparent volume of distribution (V/F) of diclofenac potassium is 1.3 L/kg.

                              Diclofenac is more than 99% bound to human serum proteins, primarily to albumin.  Serum protein binding is constant over the concentration range (0.15-105 μg/mL) achieved with recommended doses.

                              Diclofenac diffuses into and out of the synovial fluid.  Diffusion into the joint occurs when plasma levels are higher than those in the synovial fluid, after which the process reverses and synovial fluid levels are higher than plasma levels.  It is not known whether diffusion into the joint plays a role in the effectiveness of diclofenac.

                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Metabolism
                              
                              Five diclofenac metabolites have been identified in human plasma and urine.  The metabolites include 4'-hydroxy-, 5-hydroxy-, 3'-hydroxy-, 4',5-dihydroxy- and 3'-hydroxy-4'-methoxy diclofenac.  The major diclofenac metabolite, 4'-hydroxy-diclofenac, has very weak pharmacologic activity.  The formation of 4'-hydroxy diclofenac is primarily mediated by CPY2C9.  Both diclofenac and its oxidative metabolites undergo glucuronidation or sulfation followed by biliary excretion.  Acylglucuronidation mediated by UGT2B7 and oxidation mediated by CPY2C8 may also play a role in diclofenac metabolism.  CYP3A4 is responsible for the formation of minor metabolites, 5-hydroxy and 3'-hydroxy- diclofenac.  In patients with renal dysfunction, peak concentrations of metabolites 4'-hydroxy-and 5-hydroxy-diclofenac were approximately 50% and 4% of the parent compound after single oral dosing compared to 27% and 1% in normal healthy subjects.

                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Excretion
                              
                              Diclofenac is eliminated through metabolism and subsequent urinary and biliary excretion of the glucuronide and the sulfate conjugates of the metabolites.  Little or no free unchanged diclofenac is excreted in the urine.  Approximately 65% of the dose is excreted in the urine, and approximately 35% in the bile as conjugates of unchanged diclofenac plus metabolites.  Because renal elimination is not a significant pathway of elimination for unchanged diclofenac, dosing adjustment in patients with mild to moderate renal dysfunction is not necessary.  The terminal half-life of unchanged diclofenac is approximately 1 hour.

                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Special Populations
                              
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Pediatric:  The pharmacokinetics of Zipsor has not been investigated in pediatric patients.

                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Race:  Pharmacokinetic differences due to race have not been studied.

                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Hepatic Impairment:  Hepatic metabolism accounts for almost 100% of diclofenac elimination, so patients with hepatic disease may require reduced doses of Zipsor compared to patients with normal hepatic function.

                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Renal Impairment:  Diclofenac pharmacokinetics has been investigated in subjects with renal insufficiency.  In patients with renal impairment (inulin clearance 60-90, 30-60, and <30 mL/min; N=6 in each group), AUC values and elimination rate were comparable to those in healthy subjects.

                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         