
                     
                     
                     Drug Interactions
                     
                        Limited PK and/or PD studies investigating possible interactions between anagrelide and other medicinal products have been conducted. interaction studies in humans have demonstrated that digoxin and warfarin do not affect the PK properties of anagrelide, nor does anagrelide affect the PK properties of digoxin or warfarin.
                                    In vivo
                        
                        In two clinical interaction studies in healthy subjects, coadministration of single-dose anagrelide 1 mg and aspirin 900 mg or repeat-dose anagrelide 1 mg once daily and aspirin 75 mg once daily showed greater anti-platelet aggregation effects than administration of aspirin alone. Coadministered anagrelide 1 mg and aspirin 900 mg single-doses had no effect on bleeding time, prothrombin time (PT) or activated partial thromboplastin time (aPTT).
                                    ex vivo
                        
                        Analyses of an ongoing observational study in patients with ET suggest the rate of major hemorrhagic events (MHEs) in patients treated with anagrelide is higher than in those subjects treated with another cytoreductive treatment. The majority of the major hemorrhagic events occurred in patients who were also receiving concomitant anti-aggregatory treatment (primarily, aspirin). Therefore, the potential risks of the concomitant use of anagrelide with aspirin should be assessed, particularly in patients with a high risk profile for hemorrhage, before treatment is initiated.
                        Drug interaction studies have not been conducted with the other common medications used concomitantly with anagrelide in clinical trials which were acetaminophen, furosemide, iron, ranitidine, hydroxyurea, and allopurinol.
                        Anagrelide is metabolized at least in part by CYP1A2. It is known that CYP1A2 is inhibited by several medicinal products, including fluvoxamine, and such medicinal products could theoretically adversely influence the clearance of anagrelide. Anagrelide demonstrates some limited inhibitory activity towards CYP1A2 which may present a theoretical potential for interaction with other coadministered medicinal products sharing that clearance mechanism e.g., theophylline.
                        Anagrelide is an inhibitor of cyclic AMP PDE III. The effects of medicinal products with similar properties such as inotropes milrinone, enoximone, amrinone, olprinone and cilostazol may be exacerbated by anagrelide.
                        There is a single case report which suggests that sucralfate may interfere with anagrelide absorption.
                        Food has no clinically significant effect on the bioavailability of anagrelide.
                     
                     
                  
               