
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Absorption:
                     
                        
                           
Ciprofloxacin given as an oral tablet is rapidly and well absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract after oral administration. The absolute bioavailability is approximately 70% with no substantial loss by first pass metabolism. Ciprofloxacin maximum serum concentrations and area under the curve are shown in the chart for the 250 mg to 1000 mg dose range.  
                        


                        


Maximum serum concentrations are attained 1 to 2 hours after oral dosing. Mean concentrations 12 hours after dosing with 250, 500, or 750 mg are 0.1, 0.2, and 0.4 μg/mL, respectively. The serum elimination half-life in subjects with normal renal function is approximately 4 hours. Serum concentrations increase proportionately with doses up to 1000 mg.

                           
A 500 mg oral dose given every 12 hours has been shown to produce an area under the serum concentration time curve (AUC) equivalent to that produced by an intravenous infusion of 400 mg ciprofloxacin given over 60 minutes every 12 hours. A 750 mg oral dose given every 12 hours has been shown to produce an AUC at steady-state equivalent to that produced by an intravenous infusion of 400 mg given over 60 minutes every 8 hours. A 750 mg oral dose results in a Cmaxsimilar to that observed with a 400 mg I.V. dose. A 250 mg oral dose given every 12 hours produces an AUC equivalent to that produced by an infusion of 200 mg ciprofloxacin given every 12 hours.        
                        


                        



                           a AUC 0-12h
                           

                           bAUC 24h=AUC0-12h x 2 

                           cAUC 24h=AUC0-8h x 3 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Distribution:
                     
                        
                           
The binding of ciprofloxacin to serum proteins is 20 to 40% which is not likely to be high enough to cause significant protein binding interactions with other drugs.
                        After oral administration, ciprofloxacin is widely distributed throughout the body. Tissue concentrations often exceed serum concentrations in both men and women, particularly in genital tissue including the prostate. Ciprofloxacin is present in active form in the saliva, nasal and bronchial secretions, mucosa of the sinuses, sputum, skin blister fluid, lymph, peritoneal fluid, bile, and prostatic secretions. Ciprofloxacin has also been detected in lung, skin, fat, muscle, cartilage, and bone. The drug diffuses into the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF); however, CSF concentrations are generally less than 10% of peak serum concentrations. Low levels of the drug have been detected in the aqueous and vitreous humors of the eye.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Metabolism:
                     
                        
                           
Four metabolites have been identified in human urine which together account for approximately 15% of an oral dose. The metabolites have antimicrobial activity, but are less active than unchanged ciprofloxacin. Ciprofloxacin is an inhibitor of human cytochrome P450 1A2 (CYP1A2) mediated metabolism. Coadministration of ciprofloxacin with other drugs primarily metabolized by CYP1A2 results in increased plasma concentrations of these drugs and could lead to clinically significant adverse events of the coadministered drug (see CONTRAINDICATIONS; WARNINGS; PRECAUTIONS: Drug Interactions).
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Excretion:
                     
                        
                           
The serum elimination half-life in subjects with normal renal function is approximately 4 hours. Approximately 40 to 50% of an orally administered dose is excreted in the urine as unchanged drug. After a 250 mg oral dose, urine concentrations of ciprofloxacin usually exceed 200 μg/mL during the first two hours and are approximately 30 μg/mL at 8 to 12 hours after dosing. The urinary excretion of ciprofloxacin is virtually complete within 24 hours after dosing. The renal clearance of ciprofloxacin, which is approximately 300 mL/minute, exceeds the normal glomerular filtration rate of 120 mL/minute. Thus, active tubular secretion would seem to play a significant role in its elimination. Co-administration of probenecid with ciprofloxacin results in about a 50% reduction in the ciprofloxacin renal clearance and a 50% increase in its concentration in the systemic circulation. Although bile concentrations of ciprofloxacin are several fold higher than serum concentrations after oral dosing, only a small amount of the dose administered is recovered from the bile as unchanged drug. An additional 1 to 2% of the dose is recovered from the bile in the form of metabolites. Approximately 20 to 35% of an oral dose is recovered from the feces within 5 days after dosing. This may arise from either biliary clearance or transintestinal elimination.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Drug-drug Interactions:
                     
                        
                           
When Ciprofloxacin Tablets USP, 250 mg, 500 mg and 750 mg is given concomitantly with food, there is a delay in the absorption of the drug, resulting in peak concentrations that occur closer to 2 hours after dosing rather than 1 hour. The overall absorption of Ciprofloxacin Tablets USP, 250 mg, 500 mg and 750 mg however, is not substantially affected. Concurrent administration of antacids containing magnesium hydroxide or aluminum hydroxide may reduce the bioavailability of ciprofloxacin by as much as 90%. (See PRECAUTIONS.)
                        The serum concentrations of ciprofloxacin and metronidazole were not altered when these two drugs were given concomitantly.
                        Concomitant administration with tizanidine is contraindicated. (See CONTRAINDICATIONS.)
                        Concomitant administration of ciprofloxacin with theophylline decreases the clearance of theophylline resulting in elevated serum theophylline levels and increased risk of a patient developing CNS or other adverse reactions. Ciprofloxacin also decreases caffeine clearance and inhibits the formation of paraxanthine after caffeine administration. (See WARNINGS: PRECAUTIONS.)
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Special Populations:
                     
                        
                           
Pharmacokinetic studies of the oral (single dose) and intravenous (single and multiple dose) forms of ciprofloxacin indicate that plasma concentrations of ciprofloxacin are higher in elderly subjects (> 65 years) as compared to young adults. Although the Cmax is increased 16- 40%, the increase in mean AUC is approximately 30%, and can be at least partially attributed to decreased renal clearance in the elderly. Elimination half-life is only slightly (~20%) prolonged in the elderly. These differences are not considered clinically significant. (See PRECAUTIONS: Geriatric Use.)
                        In patients with reduced renal function, the half-life of ciprofloxacin is slightly prolonged. Dosage adjustments may be required. (See DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION.)
                        In preliminary studies in patients with stable chronic liver cirrhosis, no significant changes in ciprofloxacin pharmacokinetics have been observed. The kinetics of ciprofloxacin in patients with acute hepatic insufficiency, however, have not been fully elucidated.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     MICROBIOLOGY
                     
                        
                           
Ciprofloxacin has in vitro activity against a wide range of gram-negative and gram-positive microorganisms. The bactericidal action of ciprofloxacin results from inhibition of the enzymes topoisomerase II (DNA gyrase) and topoisomerase IV, which are required for bacterial DNA replication, transcription, repair, and recombination. The mechanism of action of fluoroquinolones, including ciprofloxacin, is different from that of penicillins, cephalosporins, aminoglycosides, macrolides, and tetracyclines; therefore, microorganisms resistant to these classes of drugs may be susceptible to ciprofloxacin and other quinolones. There is no known cross-resistance between ciprofloxacin and other classes of antimicrobials. In vitro resistance to ciprofloxacin develops slowly by multiple step mutations.
                        Ciprofloxacin is slightly less active when tested at acidic pH. The inoculum size has little effect when tested in vitro. The minimal bactericidal concentration (MBC) generally does not exceed the minimal inhibitory concentration (MIC) by more than a factor of 2.
                        Ciprofloxacin has been shown to be active against most strains of the following microorganisms, both in vitro and in clinical infections as described in the INDICATIONS AND USAGE section of the package insert for Ciprofloxacin Hydrochloride Tablets USP, 250mg, 500mg and 750mg.
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Aerobic gram-positive microorganisms
                           
                              
                                 
                                    
Enterococcus faecalis (Many strains are only moderately susceptible.) 

                                 Staphylococcus aureus (methicillin-susceptible strains only) 

                                 Staphylococcus epidermidis (methicillin-susceptible strains only)

                                 Staphylococcus saprophyticus 
Streptococcus pneumoniae (penicillin-susceptible strains only)
                                 

                                 Streptococcus pyogenes
                              
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Aerobic gram-negative microorganisms
                           
                              
                                 

                                 Campylobacter jejuni                                Proteus mirabilis
Citrobacter diversus                                 Proteus vulgaris
Citrobacter freundii                                 Providencia rettgeri
Enterobacter cloacae                             Providencia stuartii
Escherichia coli                                     Pseudomonas aeruginosa
Haemophilus influenzae                        Salmonella typhi
Haemophilus parainfluenzae                Serratia marcescens 
                                 

                                 Klebsiella pneumoniae                         Shigella boydii
Moraxella catarrhalis                          Shigella dysenteriae
Morganella morganii                          Shigella flexneri
Neisseria gonorrhoeae                       Shigella sonnei
                                 

                                 
Ciprofloxacin has been shown to be active against Bacillus anthracis both in vitro and by use of serum levels as a surrogate marker (see 
                                    INDICATIONS AND USAGE
                                 and 
                                    INHALATIONAL ANTHRAX – ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
                                 ).

                                 
The following in vitro data are available, 
                                    but their clinical significance is unknown
                                 .

                                 
Ciprofloxacin exhibits in vitro minimum inhibitory concentrations (MICs) of 1 μg/mL or less against most (≥ 90%) strains of the following microorganisms; however, the safety and effectiveness of ciprofloxacin in treating clinical infections due to these microorganisms have not been established in adequate and well-controlled clinical trials. 
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Aerobic gram-positive microorganisms
                           
                              
                                 
                                    
Staphylococcus haemolyticus 
Staphylococcus hominis 
Streptococcus pneumoniae (penicillin-resistant strains only)  
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Aerobic gram-negative microorganisms
                           
                              
                                 

                                 Acinetobacter Iwoffii                   Pasteurella multocida       
Aeromonas hydrophila               Salmonella enteritidis
Edwardsiella tarda                    Vibrio cholerae
Enterobacter aerogenes            Vibrio parahaemolyticus
Klebsiella oxytoca                     Vibrio vulnificus
Legionella pneumophila            Yersinia enterocolitica
                                 

                                 
Most strains of Burkholderia cepacia and some strains of Stenotrophomonas maltophilia are resistant to ciprofloxacin as are most anaerobic bacteria, including Bacteroides fragilis and Clostridium difficile.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Susceptibility Tests
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Dilution Techniques:
                           
                              
                                 
Quantitative methods are used to determine antimicrobial minimum inhibitory concentrations (MICs). These MICs provide estimates of the susceptibility of bacteria to antimicrobial compounds. The MICs should be determined using a standardized procedure. Standardized procedures are based on a dilution method1 (broth or agar) or equivalent with standardized inoculum concentrations and standardized concentrations of ciprofloxacin powder. The MIC values should be interpreted according to the following criteria:

                                 
For testing aerobic microorganisms other than Haemophilus influenzae , Haemophilus parainfluenzae, and Neisseria gonorrhoeae
                                 a:
                              


                              



                                 

                                 a These interpretive standards are applicable only to broth microdilution susceptibility tests with streptococci using cation-adjusted Mueller-Hinton broth with 2-5% lysed horse blood.

                                 
For testing Haemophilus influenzae and Haemophilus parainfluenzae
                                 b:
                              


                              



                                 

                                 b This interpretive standard is applicable only to broth microdilution susceptibility tests with Haemophilus influenzae and Haemophilus parainfluenzae using Haemophilus Test Medium.1
                                 

                                 
The current absence of data on resistant strains precludes defining any results other than “Susceptible”. Strains yielding MIC results suggestive of a “nonsusceptible” category should be submitted to a reference laboratory for further testing.

                                 
For testing Neisseria gonorrhoeae
                                 c:
                              


                              



                                 

                                 c This interpretive standard is applicable only to agar dilution test with GC agar base and 1% defined growth supplement.

                                 
A report of “Susceptible” indicates that the pathogen is likely to be inhibited if the antimicrobial compound in the blood reaches the concentrations usually achievable. A report of “Intermediate” indicates that the result should be considered equivocal, and, if the microorganism is not fully susceptible to alternative, clinically feasible drugs, the test should be repeated. This category implies possible clinical applicability in body sites where the drug is physiologically concentrated or in situations where high dosage of drug can be used. This category also provides a buffer zone, which prevents small uncontrolled technical factors from causing major discrepancies in interpretation. A report of “Resistant” indicates that the pathogen is not likely to be inhibited if the antimicrobial compound in the blood reaches the concentrations usually achievable; other therapy should be selected.

                                 
Standardized susceptibility test procedures require the use of laboratory control microorganisms to control the technical aspects of the laboratory procedures. Standard ciprofloxacin powder should provide the following MIC values:
                              


                              



                                 

                                 a This quality control range is applicable to only H. influenzae ATCC 49247 tested by a broth microdilution procedure using Haemophilus Test Medium (HTM)1.

                                 b 
                                 C. jejuni ATCC 33560 tested by broth microdilution procedure using cation adjusted Mueller Hinton broth with 2.5-5% lysed horse blood in a microaerophilic environment at 36-37°C for 48 hours and for 42°C at 24 hours2, respectively.

                                 c 
                                 N. gonorrhoeae ATCC 49226 tested by agar dilution procedure using GC agar and 1% defined growth supplement in a 5% CO2 environment at 35-37°C for 20-24 hours3.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Diffusion Techniques:
                           
                              
                                 
Quantitative methods that require measurement of zone diameters also provide reproducible estimates of the susceptibility of bacteria to antimicrobial compounds. One such standardized procedure3 requires the use of standardized inoculum concentrations. This procedure uses paper disks impregnated with 5-μg ciprofloxacin to test the susceptibility of microorganisms to ciprofloxacin.
                              Reports from the laboratory providing results of the standard single-disk susceptibility test with a 5-μg ciprofloxacin disk should be interpreted according to the following criteria:
                              
                                 

                                 
For testing Enterobacteriaceae, Enterococcus faecalis, methicillin-susceptible Staphylococcus species, penicillin-susceptible Streptococcus pneumoniae, Streptococcus pyogenes, and Pseudomonas aeruginosa
                                 a:
                              


                              



                                 

                                 a These zone diameter standards are applicable only to tests performed for streptococci using Mueller-Hinton agar supplemented with 5% sheep blood incubated in 5% CO2.

                                 
For testing Haemophilus influenzae and Haemophilus parainfluenzae
                                 b: 

                              
                              


                              



                                 

                                 b This zone diameter standard is applicable only to tests with Haemophilus influenzae and Haemophilus parainfluenzae using Haemophilus Test Medium (HTM).3
                                 

                                 
The current absence of data on resistant strains precludes defining any results other than “Susceptible”. Strains yielding zone diameter results suggestive of a “nonsusceptible” category should be submitted to a reference laboratory for further testing.

                                 
For testing Neisseria gonorrhoeae
                                 c: 
                              


                              



                                 

                                 c This zone diameter standard is applicable only to disk diffusion tests with GC agar base and 1% defined growth supplement.

                                 
Interpretation should be as stated above for results using dilution techniques. Interpretation involves correlation of the diameter obtained in the disk test with the MIC for ciprofloxacin.

                                 
As with standardized dilution techniques, diffusion methods require the use of laboratory control microorganisms that are used to control the technical aspects of the laboratory procedures. For the diffusion technique, the 5-μg ciprofloxacin disk should provide the following zone diameters in these laboratory test quality control strains: 
                              


                              



                                 

                                 a These quality control limits are applicable to only H. influenzae ATCC 49247 testing using Haemophilus Test Medium (HTM).3
                                 

                                 b These quality control limits are applicable only to tests conducted with N. gonorrhoeae ATCC 49226 performed by disk diffusion using GC agar base and 1% defined growth supplement.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         