
                     
                     
                     Drug Interactions
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Potassium Supplements and Potassium-Sparing Diuretics
                           
                              As noted above (Serum Electrolyte Imbalances), the net effect of moexipril hydrochloride/hydrochlorothiazide may be to elevate a patient’s serum potassium, to reduce it, or to leave it unchanged. Potassium-sparing diuretics (spironolactone, amiloride, triamterene) or potassium supplements can increase the risk of hyperkalemia. If concomitant use of such agents is indicated, they should be given with caution, and the patient’s serum potassium should be monitored.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Oral Anticoagulants
                           
                              Interaction studies with warfarin failed to identify any clinically important effect of moexipril monotherapy on the serum concentrations of the anticoagulant or on its anticoagulant effect.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Lithium
                           
                              Increased serum lithium levels and symptoms of lithium toxicity have been reported in patients receiving ACE inhibitors during therapy with lithium. Because renal clearance of lithium is reduced by thiazides, the risk of lithium toxicity is presumably raised further when, as in therapy with moexipril hydrochloride/hydrochlorothiazide, a thiazide diuretic is coadministered with the ACE inhibitor. These drugs should be coadministered with caution, and frequent monitoring of serum lithium levels is recommended.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Gold
                           
                              Nitritoid reactions (symptoms include facial flushing, nausea, vomiting and hypotension) have been reported rarely in patients on therapy with injectable gold (sodium aurothiomalate) and concomitant ACE inhibitor therapy including moexipril hydrochloride/hydrochlorothiazide. 
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Alcohol, Barbiturates, or Narcotics
                           
                              Potentiation of orthostatic hypotension may occur in patients on thiazide diuretic therapy with concomitant use of alcohol, barbiturates, or narcotics.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Antidiabetic Agents
                           
                              Use of thiazide diuretics concomitantly with antidiabetic agents (oral agents and insulin) may require dosage adjustment of the antidiabetic agent. Moexipril has been used in clinical trials concomitantly with oral hypoglycemic agents and there was no evidence of any clinically important adverse interactions.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Cholestyramine and Colestipol Resins
                           
                              Absorption of hydrochlorothiazide is impaired in the presence of anionic exchange resins. Single doses of either cholestyramine or colestipol resins bind the hydrochlorothiazide and reduce its absorption from the gastrointestinal tract by up to 85% and 43%, respectively.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Corticosteroids, ACTH
                           
                              Use of thiazide diuretics concomitantly with corticosteroids or ACTH may intensify electrolyte depletion, particularly hypokalemia.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Pressor Amines
                           
                              Thiazide diuretics may decrease arterial responsiveness to pressor amines (e.g., norepinephrine), but not enough to preclude effectiveness of the pressor agent for therapeutic use.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Skeletal Muscle Relaxants, Nondepolarizing
                           
                              Thiazide diuretics may increase the responsiveness to tubocurarine.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Non-Steroidal Anti-Inflammatory Agents Including Selective Cyclooxygenase-2 Inhibitors (COX-2 Inhibitors)
                           
                              In patients who are elderly, volume-depleted (including those on diuretic therapy), or with compromised renal function, coadministration of NSAIDs, including selective COX-2 inhibitors, with ACE inhibitors, including moexipril, may result in deterioration of renal function, including possible acute renal failure. These effects are usually reversible. Monitor renal function periodically in patients receiving moexipril and NSAID therapy.
                              The antihypertensive effect of ACE inhibitors and hydrochlorothiazide, as well as the diuretic and natriuretic effects of hydrochlorothiazide, may be attenuated by NSAIDs.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Dual Blockade of the Renin-Angiotensin System (RAS)
                           
                              Dual blockade of the RAS with angiotensin receptor blockers, ACE inhibitors, or aliskiren is associated with increased risks of hypotension, hyperkalemia, and changes in renal function (including acute renal failure) compared to monotherapy. Closely monitor blood pressure, renal function and electrolytes in patients on moexipril hydrochloride/hydrochlorothiazide and other agents that affect the RAS. 
                              Do not coadminister aliskiren with moexipril hydrochloride/hydrochlorothiazide in patients with diabetes. Avoid use of aliskiren with moexipril hydrochloride/hydrochlorothiazide in patients with renal impairment (GFR < 60 mL/min).
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Other Agents
                           
                              No clinically important pharmacokinetic interactions occurred when moexipril was administered concomitantly with digoxin or cimetidine.
                              Moexipril has been used in clinical trials concomitantly with calcium-channel-blocking agents, diuretics, H2 blockers, digoxin, and cholesterol-lowering agents. There was no evidence of clinically important adverse interactions. In general, ACE inhibitors have less than additive effects with beta-adrenergic blockers, presumably because both work by inhibiting the renin-angiotensin system.
                              Coadministration of propantheline or guanabenz increased the absorption of hydrochlorothiazide.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               