
               
               
               12	CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1	Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Gadoxetate disodium is a paramagnetic compound and develops a magnetic moment when placed in a magnetic field.  The relatively large magnetic moment produced by gadoxetate disodium results in a local magnetic field, yielding enhanced relaxation rates (shortening of relaxation times) of water protons in the vicinity of the paramagnetic agent, which leads to an increase in signal intensity (brightening) of blood and tissue.
                        In MRI, visualization of normal and pathological tissue depends in part on variations in the radiofrequency signal intensity that occur with 1) differences in proton density; 2) differences of the spin-lattice or longitudinal relaxation times (T1); and 3) differences in the spin-spin or transverse relaxation time (T2). When placed in a magnetic field, gadoxetate disodium decreases the T1 and T2 relaxation time in target tissue. At the recommended dose, the effect is observed with greatest sensitivity in T1-weighted MR sequences.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2	Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        EOB-DTPA forms a stable complex with the paramagnetic gadolinium ion with a thermodynamic stability of log KGdL=‑23.46. Gadoxetate disodium is a highly water-soluble, hydrophilic compound with a lipophilic moiety, the ethoxybenzyl group (EOB). Gadoxetate disodium shows a weak (<10%), transient protein binding and the relaxivity in plasma is about 8.7 L/mmol/sec at pH 7, 39°C and 0.47 T.
                        Gadoxetate disodium is selectively taken up by hepatocytes [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)] resulting in increased signal intensity in liver tissue [see Dosage and Administration (2.3)].
                        EOVIST exhibits a biphasic mode of action: first, distribution in the extracellular space after bolus injection and subsequently, selective uptake by hepatocytes (and biliary excretion) due to the lipophilic (EOB) moiety.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3	Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        
                           Distribution
                        
                        After intravenous administration, the plasma concentration time profile of gadoxetate disodium is characterized by a bi-exponential decline.  The total distribution volume of gadoxetate disodium at steady state is about 0.21 L/kg (extracellular space); plasma protein binding is less than 10%.  Gadoxetate disodium does not penetrate the intact blood-brain barrier and it does diffuse through the placental barrier [see Nonclinical Toxicology (13.2)].
                        
                           Elimination
                        
                        Gadoxetate disodium is equally eliminated via the renal and hepatobiliary routes.  The mean terminal elimination half-life of gadoxetate disodium (0.01 to 0.1 mmol/kg) has been observed in healthy volunteers of 22–39 years of age to be 0.91 to 0.95 hour.  Clearance appeared to decrease slightly with increasing age.  The pharmacokinetics are dose-linear up to a dose of 0.4 mL/kg (0.1 mmol/kg), which is 4 times the recommended dose [see Use in Specific Populations (8.4, 8.5, 8.6, and
                              8.7)].
                        
                        A total serum clearance (Cltot) was 250 mL/min, whereas the renal clearance (Clr) corresponds to about 120 mL/min, a value similar to the glomerular filtration rate in healthy subjects.
                        
                           Metabolism
                        
                        Gadoxetate disodium is not metabolized.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         