
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        The precise mechanism by which alemtuzumab exerts its therapeutic effects in multiple sclerosis is unknown but is presumed to involve binding to CD52, a cell surface antigen present on T and B lymphocytes, and on natural killer cells, monocytes, and macrophages. Following cell surface binding to T and B lymphocytes, alemtuzumab results in antibody-dependent cellular cytolysis and complement-mediated lysis.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Effects of LEMTRADA on the Lymphocyte Population
                              
                              LEMTRADA depletes circulating T and B lymphocytes after each treatment course. In clinical trials, the lowest cell counts occurred 1 month after a course of treatment at the time of the first post-treatment blood count. Lymphocyte counts then increased over time: B cell counts usually recovered within 6 months; T cell counts increased more slowly and usually remained below baseline 12 months after treatment. Approximately 60% of patients had total lymphocyte counts below the lower limit of normal 6 months after each treatment course and 20% had counts below the lower limit of normal after 12 months.
                              Reconstitution of the lymphocyte population varies for the different lymphocyte subtypes. At Month 1 in clinical trials, the mean CD4+ lymphocyte count was 40 cells per microliter, and, at Month 12, 270 cells per microliter. At 30 months, approximately half of patients had CD4+ lymphocyte counts that remained below the lower limit of normal.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Cardiac Electrophysiology
                              
                              In a study of 53 MS patients, alemtuzumab 12 mg per day for 5 days caused no changes in the QTc interval greater than 20ms. An average 22 to 26 beats-per-minute increase in heart rate was observed for at least 2 hours after the first but not subsequent infusions.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        The pharmacokinetics of LEMTRADA were evaluated in a total of 148 patients with relapsing forms of MS who received 12 mg/day on 5 consecutive days, followed by 12 mg/day on 3 consecutive days 12 months following the first treatment course. 
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Absorption
                              
                              Serum concentrations increased with each consecutive dose within a treatment course, with the highest observed concentrations occurring following the last infusion of a treatment course. The mean maximum concentration was 3014 ng/mL on Day 5 of the first treatment course, and 2276 ng/mL on Day 3 of the second treatment course. 
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Distribution
                              
                              LEMTRADA is largely confined to the blood and interstitial space with a central volume of distribution of 14.1 L.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Elimination
                              
                              The elimination half-life was approximately 2 weeks and was comparable between courses. The serum concentrations were generally undetectable (< 60 ng/mL) within approximately 30 days following each treatment course.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Specific Populations
                              
                              Age, race, or gender had no effect on the pharmacokinetics of LEMTRADA.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         