
               
               
               
                  12     CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1     Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Tobramycin is an aminoglycoside antibiotic [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.4)].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3     Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        
                           Absorption
                        
                        TOBI Podhaler contains tobramycin, a cationic polar molecule that does not readily cross epithelial membranes.  TOBI Podhaler is specifically formulated for administration by oral inhalation.  The systemic exposure to tobramycin after inhalation of TOBI Podhaler is expected to result from pulmonary absorption of the dose fraction delivered to the lungs as tobramycin and is not absorbed to any appreciable extent when administered via the oral route.
                        
                           Serum Concentrations
                        
                        After inhalation of a 112 mg single dose (4 times 28 mg capsules) of TOBI Podhaler in cystic fibrosis patients, the maximum serum concentration (Cmax) of tobramycin was 1.02 ± 0.53 mcg/mL (mean ± SD) and the median time to reach the peak concentration (Tmax) was 1 hour.  In comparison, after inhalation of a single 300 mg dose of TOBI, Cmax was 1.04 ± 0.58 mcg/mL and median Tmax was 1 hour.  The extent of systemic exposure (AUC0-12) was also similar: 4.6 ± 2.0 mcg∙h/mL following the 112 mg TOBI Podhaler dose and 4.8 ± 2.5 mcg∙h/mL following the 300 mg TOBI dose.  At the end of a 4-week dosing cycle of TOBI Podhaler (112 mg twice-daily), the maximum serum concentration of tobramycin 1 hour after dosing ranged from 1.48 ± 0.69 mcg/mL to 1.99 ± 0.59 mcg/mL (mean ± SD).
                        
                           Sputum Concentrations
                        
                        After inhalation of a 112 mg single dose (4 times 28 mg capsules) of TOBI Podhaler in cystic fibrosis patients, sputum Cmax of tobramycin was 1048 ± 1080 mcg/g (mean ± SD). In comparison, after inhalation of a single 300 mg dose of TOBI, sputum Cmax was 737 ± 1028 mcg/g. The variability in pharmacokinetic parameters was higher in sputum as compared to serum.
                        
                           Distribution
                        
                        A population pharmacokinetic analysis for TOBI Podhaler in cystic fibrosis patients estimated the apparent volume of distribution of tobramycin in the central compartment to be 85.1 L for a typical cystic fibrosis (CF) patient.
                        Binding of tobramycin to serum proteins is negligible.
                        
                           Metabolism
                        
                        Tobramycin is not metabolized and is primarily excreted unchanged in the urine.
                        
                           Elimination
                        
                        Tobramycin is eliminated from the systemic circulation primarily by glomerular filtration of the unchanged compound.  Systemically absorbed tobramycin following TOBI Podhaler administration is also expected to be eliminated principally by glomerular filtration.
                        The apparent terminal half-life of tobramycin in serum after inhalation of a 112 mg single dose of TOBI Podhaler was approximately 3 hours in cystic fibrosis patients and consistent with the half-life of tobramycin after TOBI inhalation.
                        A population pharmacokinetic analysis for TOBI Podhaler in cystic fibrosis patients aged 6 to 58 years estimated the apparent serum clearance of tobramycin to be 14.5 L/h. No clinically relevant covariates that were predictive of tobramycin clearance were identified from this analysis.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.4     Microbiology
                     
                        
                           Mechanism of Action
                        
                        Tobramycin is an aminoglycoside antimicrobial produced by Streptomyces tenebrarius. It acts primarily by disrupting protein synthesis leading to altered cell membrane permeability, progressive disruption of the cell envelope, and eventual cell death.
                        Tobramycin has in vitro activity against Gram-negative bacteria including P. aeruginosa.  It is bactericidal in vitro at peak concentrations equal to or slightly greater than the minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC).
                        
                           Susceptibility Testing
                        
                        Interpretive criteria for inhaled antibacterial products are not defined. The in vitro antimicrobial susceptibility test methods used to determine the susceptibility for parenteral tobramycin therapy can be used to monitor the susceptibility of P. aeruginosa isolated from cystic fibrosis patients.(1, 2, 3)  The relationship between in vitro susceptibility test results and clinical outcome with TOBI Podhaler therapy is not clear.  A single sputum sample from a cystic fibrosis patient may contain multiple morphotypes of P. aeruginosa and each morphotype may require a different concentration of tobramycin to inhibit its growth in vitro. Patients should be monitored for changes in tobramycin susceptibility.
                        
                           Development of Resistance
                        
                        In clinical studies, some increases from baseline to the end of the treatment period were observed in the tobramycin MIC for P. aeruginosa morphotypes. In general, a higher percentage of patients treated with TOBI Podhaler had increases in tobramycin MIC compared with placebo or patients treated with TOBI inhalation solution.
                        The clinical significance of changes in MICs for P. aeruginosa has not been clearly established in the treatment of cystic fibrosis patients.
                        
                           Cross-Resistance
                        
                        Some emerging resistance to aztreonam, ceftazidime, ciprofloxacin, imipenem, or meropenem were observed in the TOBI Podhaler clinical trials. As other anti-pseudomonal antibiotics were concomitantly utilized in many patients in the clinical trials, the association with TOBI Podhaler is not clear.
                        
                           Other
                        
                        No trends were observed in the isolation of treatment-emergent bacterial respiratory pathogens (Burkholderia cepacia, Stenotrophomonas maltophilia, Staphylococcus aureus, and Achromobacter xylosoxidans).
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         