
                           
                           
                           
                              Drug interactions: Effects of other drugs on verapamil pharmacokinetics
                           
                           
                              
                                 In vitro metabolic studies indicate that verapamil is metabolized by cytochrome P450, CYP3A4, CYP1A2, and CYP2C. Clinically significant interactions have been reported with inhibitors of CYP3A4 (eg, erythromycin, ritonavir) causing elevation of plasma levels of verapamil while inducers of CYP3A4 (eg, rifampin) have caused a lowering of plasma levels of verapamil. Hypotension, bradyarrhythmias, and lactic acidosis have been observed in patients receiving concurrent telithromycin, an antibiotic in the ketolide class of antibiotics.
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 HMG-CoA Reductase Inhibitors
                                 
                                    The use of HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors that are CYP3A4 substrates in combination with verapamil has been associated with reports of myopathy/rhabdomyolysis.
                                    Co-administration of multiple doses of 10 mg of verapamil with 80 mg simvastatin resulted in exposure to simvastatin 2.5-fold that following simvastatin alone.  Limit the dose of simvastatin in patients on verapamil to 10 mg daily.  Limit the daily dose of lovastatin to 40 mg.  Lower starting and maintenance doses of other CYP3A4 substrates (e.g., atorvastatin) may be required as verapamil may increase the plasma concentration of these drugs.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Beta Blockers
                                 
                                    Concomitant therapy with beta-adrenergic blockers and verapamil may result in additive negative effects on heart rate, atrioventricular conduction, and/or cardiac contractility. The combination of sustained-release verapamil and beta-adrenergic blocking agents has not been studied.  However, there have been reports of excess bradycardia and AV block, including complete heart block, when the combination has been used for the treatment of hypertension.
                                    For hypertensive patients, the risk of combined therapy may outweigh the potential benefits.  The combination should be used only with caution and close monitoring.
                                    Asymptomatic bradycardia (36 beats/min) with a wandering atrial pacemaker has been observed in a patient receiving concomitant timolol (a beta-adrenergic blocker) eyedrops and oral verapamil.
                                    A decrease in metoprolol clearance has been reported when verapamil and metoprolol were administered together.  A similar effect has not been observed when verapamil and atenolol are given together.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Clonidine
                                 
                                    Sinus bradycardia resulting in hospitalization and pacemaker insertion has been reported in association with the use of clonidine concurrently with verapamil.  Monitor heart rate in patients receiving concomitant verapamil and clonidine.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Digitalis
                                 
                                    Consider reducing digoxin dose when verapamil and digoxin are to be given together.  Monitor digoxin level periodically during therapy.  Chronic verapamil treatment can increase serum digoxin levels by 50% to 75% during the first week of therapy, and this can result in digitalis toxicity.  In patients with hepatic cirrhosis the influence of verapamil on digoxin pharmacokinetics is magnified.  Verapamil may reduce total body clearance and extrarenal clearance of digoxin by 27% and 29%, respectively.  If digoxin toxicity is suspected, suspend or discontinue digoxin therapy. 
                                    In previous clinical trials with other verapamil formulations related to the control of ventricular response in patients taking digoxin who had atrial fibrillation or atrial flutter, ventricular rates below 50/min at rest occurred in 15% of patients, and asymptomatic hypotension occurred in 5% of patients.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Antihypertensive Agents
                                 
                                    Verapamil administered concomitantly with oral antihypertensive agents (e.g., vasodilators, angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors, diuretics, beta blockers) will usually have an additive effect on lowering blood pressure. Patients receiving these combinations should be appropriately monitored. Concomitant use of agents that attenuate alpha-adrenergic function with verapamil may result in reduction in blood pressure that is excessive in some patients.  Such an effect was observed in one study following the concomitant administration of verapamil and prazosin.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Antiarrhythmic Agents
                                 
                                    Disopyramide: Until data on possible interactions between verapamil and disopyramide phosphate are obtained, disopyramide should not be administered within 48 hours before or 24 hours after verapamil administration.
                                    Flecainide: A study in healthy volunteers showed that the concomitant administration of flecainide and verapamil may have additive effects on myocardial contractility, AV conduction, and repolarization. Concomitant therapy with flecainide and verapamil may result in additive negative inotropic effect and prolongation of atrioventricular conduction.
                                    Quinidine: In a small number of patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (IHSS), concomitant use of verapamil and quinidine resulted in significant hypotension. Until further data are obtained, combined therapy of verapamil and quinidine in patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy should probably be avoided.
The electrophysiological effects of quinidine and verapamil on AV conduction were studied in 8 patients. Verapamil significantly counteracted the effects of quinidine on AV conduction. There has been a report of increased quinidine levels during verapamil therapy.
                                    Nitrates: Verapamil has been given concomitantly with short- and long-acting nitrates without any undesirable drug interactions. The pharmacologic profile of both drugs and the clinical experience suggest beneficial interactions.
                                    Alcohol: Verapamil has been found to significantly inhibit ethanol elimination resulting in elevated blood ethanol concentrations that may prolong the intoxicating effects of alcohol. (See
                                           CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY - Pharmacokinetics and Metabolism.)
                                    
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     