
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
                  Formal drug interaction studies have not been conducted. No data are available on drug interactions between Serostim® and HIV protease inhibitors or the non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors.
               
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           Inhibition of 11β-Hydroxysteroid Dehydrogenase Type 1: May require the initiation of glucocorticoid replacement therapy.  Patients treated with glucocorticoid replacement for previously diagnosed hypoadrenalism may require an increase in their maintenance doses (7.1)
                           Cytochrome P450-Metabolized Drugs: Monitor carefully if used with somatropin (7.2)
                           Oral Estrogen: Larger doses of somatropin may be required in women (7.3)
                           Insulin and/or Oral/Injectable Hypoglycemic Agents: May require adjustment (7.4)
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1	11β-Hydroxysteroid Dehydrogenase Type 1 
                     
                        The microsomal enzyme 11β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 1 (11βHSD-1) is required for conversion of cortisone to its active metabolite, cortisol, in hepatic and adipose tissue. Somatropin inhibit 11βHSD-1. Patients treated with glucocorticoid replacement for previously diagnosed hypoadrenalism may require an increase in their maintenance or stress doses following initiation of somatropin treatment; this may be especially true for patients treated with cortisone acetate and prednisone since conversion of these drugs to their biologically active metabolites is dependent on the activity of 11βHSD-1.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2	Cytochrome P450-metabolized drugs
                     
                        Limited published data indicate that somatropin treatment increases cytochrome P450 (CYP450)-mediated antipyrine clearance in man.  These data suggest that somatropin administration may alter the clearance of compounds metabolized by CYP450 liver enzymes (e.g., corticosteroids, six steroids, anticonvulsants, cyclosporine).  Therefore, careful monitoring is advised when somatropin is administered in combination with drugs metabolized by CYP450 liver enzymes.  However, formal drug interaction studies have not been conducted.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3	Oral Estrogen
                     
                        Because oral estrogens may reduce the serum IGF-1 response to somatropin treatment, girls and women receiving oral estrogen replacement may require greater somatropin dosages [see Dosage and Administration (2)].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4	Insulin and/or Other Oral/Injectable Hypoglycemic Agents
                     
                        Patients with diabetes mellitus who receive concomitant treatment with somatropin may require adjustment of their doses of insulin and/or other hypoglycemic agents [see Warnings and Precautions (5.2)].
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         