
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Endogenous estrogens are largely responsible for the development and maintenance of the female reproductive system and secondary sexual characteristics. Although circulating estrogens exist in a dynamic equilibrium of metabolic interconversions, estradiol is the principal intracellular human estrogen and is substantially more potent than its metabolites, estrone and estriol, at the receptor level.
                        The primary source of estrogen in normally cycling adult women is the ovarian follicle, which secretes 70 to 500 mcg of estradiol daily, depending on the phase of the menstrual cycle. After menopause, most endogenous estrogen is produced by conversion of androstenedione, secreted by the adrenal cortex, to estrone in the peripheral tissues. Thus, estrone and the sulfate-conjugated form, estrone sulfate, are the most abundant circulating estrogens in postmenopausal women.
                        Estrogens act through binding to nuclear receptors in estrogen-responsive tissues. To date, two estrogen receptors have been identified. These vary in proportion from tissue to tissue.
                        Circulating estrogens modulate the pituitary secretion of the gonadotropins, luteinizing hormone (LH) and FSH through a negative feedback mechanism. Estrogens act to reduce the elevated levels of these hormones seen in postmenopausal women.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        Currently, there are no pharmacodynamic data known for ELESTRIN.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        
                           Absorption
                        
                        Steady-state serum concentrations of estradiol are achieved in approximately 3 days following daily application of ELESTRIN to the upper arm.
                        Pharmacokinetic parameters for estradiol on Day 14 following daily application of 0.87 g or 1.7 g of ELESTRIN are summarized in Table 2. Dose dependent PK parameters for ELESTRIN 0.87 g and 1.7 g indicated the dose and serum estradiol (E2) concentrations to be linearly related but not dose-proportional (i.e., doubling in dose led to a 2.5- to 3.0-fold increase in PK parameters). The nominal mean delivery rates of estradiol using the baseline-adjusted average serum concentrations from pharmacokinetic studies using 0.87 g per day and 1.7 g per day are 0.012 mg per day and 0.041 mg per day, respectively. 
                        


                        


Mean concentrations of estradiol over a 24-hour period on Day 14 are shown in Figure 1.
                        
                           Figure 1 - Mean Serum Estradiol Concentrations (Unadjusted) After Multiple Doses. Error bars represent standard deviations.
                        
                        
                           
                        
                        Based on the Cave values at steady state, the E2:E1 ratio was 0.53 for the 0.87 g and 0.98 for the 1.7 g doses. The significance of this finding is that the 1.7 g dose produced an E2:E1 ratio of a premenopausal woman. The 1.7 g dose of ELESTRIN reached the goal of restoring the E2:E1 ratio (~1.0) to that observed in premenopausal women in the early follicular phase of the menstrual cycle.
                        Application of sunscreen 10 minutes before application of ELESTRIN increased the exposure to estradiol by approximately 55 percent. No significant change in estradiol exposure was observed when sunscreen was applied 25 minutes after application of ELESTRIN. In the same study, prolonged (7 days) concomitant application of sunscreen to the site of ELESTRIN application increased exposure to estradiol by about 2-fold, regardless of whether it was applied before or after application of ELESTRIN.
                        
                           Distribution
                        
                        The distribution of exogenous estrogens is similar to that of endogenous estrogens. Estrogens are widely distributed in the body and are generally found in higher concentrations in the sex hormone target organs. Estrogens circulate in blood largely bound to SHBG and albumin.
                        
                           Metabolism
                        
                        Exogenous estrogens are metabolized in the same manner as endogenous estrogens. Circulating estrogens exist in a dynamic equilibrium of metabolic interconversions. These transformations take place mainly in the liver. Estradiol is converted reversibly to estrone, and both can be converted to estriol, which is a major urinary metabolite. Estrogens also undergo enterohepatic recirculation via sulfate and glucuronide conjugation in the liver, biliary secretion of conjugates into the intestine, and hydrolysis in the intestine followed by reabsorption.
                        In postmenopausal women, a significant proportion of the circulating estrogens exist as sulfate conjugates, especially estrone sulfate, which serves as a circulating reservoir for the formation of more active estrogens.
                        
                           Excretion
                        
                        Estradiol, estrone and estriol are excreted in the urine along with glucuronide and sulfate conjugates.
                        
                           Use in Specific Populations
                        
                        No pharmacokinetic studies were conducted in specific populations, including women with renal or hepatic impairment. 
                        
                           Potential for Estradiol Transfer
                        
                        The potential for estradiol transfer between treated postmenopausal female subjects and their untreated male partners was evaluated. Two and 8 hours after women applied 2.6 g ELESTRIN to one arm (12 women per time point), they engaged in direct arm-to-arm contact with a male partner for 5 minutes. No significant changes in estradiol pharmacokinetic parameters were observed in the male partners after contact.
                        Less than 10 percent of the estradiol dose was measured on the skin at 2 and 8 hours after application. After washing the application site with soap and water at 8 hours after application, about 1 percent of the dose of estradiol was measurable.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     Figure 1
                     
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         