
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        Pharmacokinetics when all three of the Lansoprazole Delayed-Release Capsules USP, 30 mg, Amoxicillin Capsules USP, 500 mg, and Clarithromycin Tablets USP, 500 mg components (lansoprazole capsules, amoxicillin capsules, clarithromycin tablets) were coadministered has not been studied. Studies have shown no clinically significant interactions of lansoprazole and amoxicillin or lansoprazole and clarithromycin when administered together. There is no information about the gastric mucosal concentrations of lansoprazole, amoxicillin and clarithromycin after administration of these agents concomitantly. The systemic pharmacokinetic information presented below is based on studies in which each product was administered alone.
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Lansoprazole
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Absorption
                                 
                                    Lansoprazole capsules contain an enteric-coated granule formulation of lansoprazole. Absorption of lansoprazole begins only after the granules leave the stomach.
                                    The absorption of lansoprazole is rapid, with the mean Cmax occurring approximately 1.7 hours after oral dosing, and the absolute bioavailability is over 80%. Both the Cmax and AUC are diminished by about 50 to 70% if lansoprazole is given 30 minutes after food, compared to the fasting condition. There is no significant food effect if lansoprazole is given before meals.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Distribution
                                 
                                    Lansoprazole is 97% bound to plasma proteins. Plasma protein binding is constant over the concentration range of 0.05 to 5.0 mcg/mL.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Metabolism
                                 
                                    Lansoprazole is extensively metabolized in the liver. Two metabolites have been identified in measurable quantities in plasma (the hydroxylated sulfinyl and sulfone derivatives of lansoprazole). These metabolites have very little or no antisecretory activity. Lansoprazole is thought to be transformed into two active species which inhibit acid secretion by blocking the proton pump [(H+, K+)-ATPase enzyme system] at the secretory surface of the gastric parietal cell. The two active species are not present in the systemic circulation. Therefore, the plasma elimination half-life of lansoprazole does not reflect its duration of suppression of gastric acid secretion.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Elimination
                                 
                                    Following single-dose oral administration of lansoprazole, virtually no unchanged lansoprazole was excreted in the urine. In one study, after a single oral dose of 14C-lansoprazole, approximately one-third of the administered radiation was excreted in the urine and two-thirds was recovered in the feces. This implies a significant biliary excretion of the lansoprazole metabolites.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Amoxicillin
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Absorption
                                 
                                    Amoxicillin is stable in the presence of gastric acid and may be given without regard to meals. It is rapidly absorbed after oral administration. Orally administered doses of 500 mg amoxicillin capsules result in average peak blood levels one to two hours after administration in the range of 5.5 mcg/mL to 7.5 mcg/mL.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Distribution
                                 
                                    Amoxicillin diffuses readily into most body tissues and fluids, with the exception of brain and spinal fluid, except when meninges are inflamed. In blood serum, amoxicillin is approximately 20% protein-bound.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Metabolism/Elimination
                                 
                                    The elimination half-life of amoxicillin is 61.3 minutes
                                    Detectable serum levels are observed up to eight hours after an orally administered dose of amoxicillin. Approximately 60% of the orally administered dose of amoxicillin is excreted unchanged in the urine within six to eight hours post-dose; its excretion can be delayed by concurrent administration of probenecid.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Clarithromycin
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Absorption
                                 
                                    Clarithromycin is rapidly absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract after oral administration. The absolute bioavailability of 250 mg clarithromycin tablets was approximately 50%. For a single 500 mg dose of clarithromycin, food slightly delays the onset of clarithromycin absorption, increasing the peak time from approximately two to 2.5 hours. Food also increases the clarithromycin peak plasma concentration by about 24%, but does not affect the extent of clarithromycin bioavailability. Food does not affect the onset of formation of the antimicrobially active metabolite, 14-OH clarithromycin or its peak plasma concentration but does slightly decrease the extent of metabolite formation, indicated by an 11% decrease in area under the plasma concentration-time curve (AUC). Therefore, clarithromycin tablets may be given without regard to food.
                                    In nonfasting healthy human subjects (males and females), peak plasma concentrations were attained within two to three hours after oral dosing. Steady-state peak plasma clarithromycin concentrations were attained within three days and were approximately 3 to 4 mcg/mL with a 500 mg dose administered every eight to 12 hours.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Metabolism/Elimination
                                 
                                    The elimination half-life of clarithromycin was five to seven hours with 500 mg administered every eight to 12 hours. The nonlinearity of clarithromycin pharmacokinetics is slight at the recommended dose of 500 mg administered every eight to 12 hours. With a 500 mg every eight to 12 hours dosing, the peak steady-state concentration of 14-OH clarithromycin is up to 1 mcg/mL, and its elimination half-life is about seven to nine hours. The steady-state concentration of this metabolite is generally attained within three to four days.
                                    After a 500 mg tablet every 12 hours, the urinary excretion of clarithromycin is approximately 30%. The renal clearance of clarithromycin approximates the normal glomerular filtration rate. The major metabolite found in urine is 14-OH clarithromycin, which accounts for an additional 10% to 15% of the dose with a 500 mg tablet administered every 12 hours.
                                    Steady-state concentrations of clarithromycin and 14-OH clarithromycin observed following administration of 500 mg doses of clarithromycin every 12 hours to adult patients with HIV were similar to those observed in healthy volunteers. In adult HIV-infected patients taking 500-mg doses of clarithromycin every 12 hours, steady-state clarithromycin Cmax values ranged from 2 to 4 mcg/mL.
                                    The steady-state concentrations of clarithromycin in subjects with impaired hepatic function did not differ from those in normal subjects; however, the 14-OH clarithromycin concentrations were lower in the hepatically impaired subjects. The decreased formation of 14-OH clarithromycin was at least partially offset by an increase in renal clearance of clarithromycin in the subjects with impaired hepatic function when compared to healthy subjects.
                                    The pharmacokinetics of clarithromycin was also altered in subjects with impaired renal function (see 
                                          PRECAUTIONS
                                        and 
                                          DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION
                                       ).
                                    Clarithromycin and the 14-OH clarithromycin metabolite distribute readily into body tissues and fluids. There are no data available on cerebrospinal fluid penetration. Because of high intercellular concentrations, tissue concentrations are higher than serum concentrations.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Special Populations
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Geriatric Use
                           
                              The clearance of lansoprazole is decreased in the elderly, with elimination half-life increased approximately 50% to 100%. Because the mean half-life in the elderly remains between 1.9 to 2.9 hours, repeated once daily dosing does not result in accumulation of lansoprazole. Peak plasma levels were not increased in the elderly.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Renal Impairment
                           
                              In patients with severe renal impairment, plasma protein binding decreased by 1.0% to 1.5% after administration of 60 mg of lansoprazole. Patients with renal impairment had a shortened elimination half-life and decreased total AUC (free and bound). The AUC for free lansoprazole in plasma, however, was not related to the degree of renal impairment; and the Cmax and Tmax (time to reach the maximum concentration) were not different than the Cmax and Tmax from subjects with normal renal function (see 
                                    DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION
                                 ).
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Hepatic Impairment
                           
                              In patients with various degrees of chronic hepatic impairment, the mean plasma half-life of lansoprazole was prolonged from 1.5 hours to 3.2 to 7.2 hours. An increase in the mean AUC of up to 500% was observed at steady state in hepatically-impaired patients compared to healthy subjects. Consider reduction of lansoprazole delayed-release capsules dosage in patients with severe hepatic impairment.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Gender
                           
                              In a study comparing 12 male and six female human subjects who received lansoprazole, no gender differences were found in pharmacokinetics and intragastric pH results.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Race
                           
                              The pooled pharmacokinetic parameters of lansoprazole from twelve U.S. Phase I studies (N=513) were compared to the mean pharmacokinetic parameters from two Asian studies (N=20). The mean AUCs of lansoprazole in Asian subjects were approximately twice those seen in pooled U.S. data; however, the inter-individual variability was high. The Cmax values were comparable.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Pharmacodynamics
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Microbiology
                           
                              Lansoprazole, clarithromycin and/or amoxicillin have been shown to be active against most strains of Helicobacter pylori in vitro and in clinical infections as described in the 
                                    INDICATIONS AND USAGE
                                  section.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Helicobacter pylori
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Pretreatment Resistance
                                 
                                    Clarithromycin pretreatment resistance rates were 9.5% (91/960) by E-test and 11.3% (12/106) by agar dilution in the dual and triple therapy clinical trials (M93-125, M93-130, M93-131, M95-392, and M95-399). Amoxicillin pretreatment susceptible isolates (≤0.25 mcg/mL) occurred in 97.8% (936/957) and 98.0% (98/100) of the patients in the dual and triple therapy clinical trials by E-test and agar dilution, respectively. Twenty-one of 957 patients (2.2%) by E-test, and two of 100 patients (2.0%) by agar dilution, had amoxicillin pretreatment MICs of greater than 0.25 mcg/mL. One patient on the 14-day triple therapy regimen had an unconfirmed pretreatment amoxicillin minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) of greater than 256 mcg/mL by E-test and the patient was eradicated of H. pylori.
                                    


                                    


Patients not eradicated of H. pylori following triple therapy of lansoprazole delayed-release capsules, amoxicillin capsules, and clarithromycin tablets will likely have clarithromycin resistant H. pylori isolates. Therefore, for those patients who fail therapy, clarithromycin susceptibility testing should be done if possible. Patients with clarithromycin resistant H. pylori should not be treated with triple therapy of lansoprazole delayed-release capsules, amoxicillin capsules, and clarithromycin tablets or other regimens which include clarithromycin as the sole antimicrobial agent.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Amoxicillin Susceptibility Test Results and Clinical/Bacteriological Outcomes
                                 
                                    In the dual and triple therapy clinical trials, 82.6% (195/236) of the patients that had pretreatment amoxicillin susceptible MICs (≤0.25 mcg/mL) were eradicated of H. pylori. Of those with pretreatment amoxicillin MICs of greater than 0.25 mcg/mL, three of six had the H. pylori eradicated. A total of 30% (21/70) of the patients failed lansoprazole 30 mg three times daily per amoxicillin 1 g three times daily dual therapy and a total of 12.8% (22/172) of the patients failed the 10- and 14-day triple therapy regimens. Post-treatment susceptibility results were not obtained on 11 of the patients who failed therapy. Nine of the 11 patients with amoxicillin post-treatment MICs that failed the triple therapy regimen also had clarithromycin resistant H. pylori isolates.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Susceptibility Test for Helicobacter pylori
                                 
                                    The reference methodology for susceptibility testing of H. pylori is agar dilution MICs.1 One to three microliters of an inoculum equivalent to a No. 2 McFarland standard (1 x 107 –1 x 108 CFU/mL for H. pylori) are inoculated directly onto freshly prepared antimicrobial containing Mueller-Hinton agar plates with 5% aged defibrinated sheep blood (greater than 2 weeks old). The agar dilution plates are incubated at 35°C in a microaerobic environment produced by a gas generating system suitable for Campylobacter species. After three days of incubation, the MICs are recorded as the lowest concentration of antimicrobial agent required to inhibit growth of the organism. The clarithromycin and amoxicillin MIC values should be interpreted according to the following criteria:
                                    


                                    


Standardized susceptibility test procedures require the use of laboratory control bacteria to monitor and ensure the accuracy and precision of supplies and reagents in the assay, and the techniques of the individual performing the test. Standard clarithromycin or amoxicillin powder should provide the following MIC ranges:
                                    


                                 



                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Antisecretory Activity
                                 
                                    After oral administration, lansoprazole was shown to significantly decrease the basal acid output and significantly increase the mean gastric pH and percent of time the gastric pH was greater than three and greater than four. Lansoprazole also significantly reduced meal stimulated gastric acid output and secretion volume, as well as pentagastrin-stimulated acid output. In patients with hypersecretion of acid, lansoprazole significantly reduced basal and pentagastrin-stimulated gastric acid secretion. Lansoprazole inhibited the normal increases in secretion volume, acidity and acid output induced by insulin. The intragastric pH results of a five-day, pharmacodynamic, crossover study of 15 mg and 30 mg of once daily lansoprazole are presented in Table 2.
                                    


                                    


After the initial dose in this study, increased gastric pH was seen within one to two hours with 30 mg of lansoprazole and two to three hours with 15 mg of lansoprazole. After multiple daily dosing, increased gastric pH was seen within the first hour post-dosing with 30 mg of lansoprazole and within one to two hours post-dosing with 15 mg of lansoprazole.
                                    Acid suppression may enhance the effect of antimicrobials in eradicating Helicobacter pylori (H. pylori). The percentage of time gastric pH was elevated above five and six was evaluated in a crossover study of lansoprazole given daily, twice daily and three times daily.
                                    


                                    


The inhibition of gastric acid secretion as measured by intragastric pH gradually returned to normal over two to four days after multiple doses. There was no indication of rebound gastric acidity.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         