
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  Chloroquine phosphate has been found to be highly active against the erythrocytic forms of Plasmodium vivax and Plasmodium malariae and most strains of Plasmodium falciparum (but not the gametocytes of P. falciparum).
                  The mechanism of plasmodicidal action of chloroquine is not completely certain. While the drug can inhibit certain enzymes, its effect is believed to result, at least in part, from its interaction with DNA. 
                  Chloroquine is rapidly and almost completely absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract, and only a small proportion of the administered dose is found in the stools. Approximately 55% of the drug in the plasma is bound to nondiffusible plasma constituents. Excretion of chloroquine is quite slow, but is increased by acidification of the urine. Chloroquine is deposited in the tissues in considerable amounts. In animals, from 200 to 700 times the plasma concentration may be found in the liver, spleen, kidney, and lung; leukocytes also concentrate the drug. The brain and spinal cord, in contrast, contain only 10 to 30 times the amount present in plasma.
                  Chloroquine undergoes appreciable degradation in the body. The main metabolite is desethylchloroquine, which accounts for one fourth of the total material appearing in the the urine; bisdesethylchloroquine, a carboxylic acid derivative, and other metabolic products as yet uncharacterized are found in small amounts. Slightly more than half of the urinary drug products can be accounted for as unchanged chloroquine.
               
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Microbiology
                     
                        Chloroquine phosphate has been found to be highly active again the erythrocytic forms of Plasmodium vivax and malariae and most strains of Plasmodium falciparum (but not the gametocytes of P. falciparum). The precise mechanism of action of the drug is not known.
                        In vitro studies with trophozoites of Entamoeba histolytica have demonstrated that chloroquine phosphate also possesses amebicidal activity comparable to that of emetine.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         