
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           Do not exceed doses greater than 20 mg daily of simvastatin. (7.7) 
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     								7.1	In Vitro Data 
                     
                        
                           In vitro data indicate that amlodipine has no effect on the human plasma protein binding of digoxin, phenytoin, warfarin, and indomethacin.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2	Cimetidine
                     
                        Co-administration of amlodipine besylate tablets with cimetidine did not alter the pharmacokinetics of amlodipine.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3	Grapefruit Juice
                     
                        Co-administration of 240 mL of grapefruit juice with a single oral dose of amlodipine 10 mg in 20 healthy volunteers had no significant effect on the pharmacokinetics of amlodipine.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4	Magnesium and Aluminum Hydroxide Antacid
                     
                        Co-administration of a magnesium and aluminum hydroxide antacid with a single dose of amlodipine besylate tablets had no significant effect on the pharmacokinetics of amlodipine.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.5	Sildenafil
                     
                        A single 100 mg dose of sildenafil in subjects with essential hypertension had no effect on the pharmacokinetic parameters of amlodipine. When amlodipine besylate tablets and sildenafil were used in combination, each agent independently exerted its own blood pressure lowering effect.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.6	Atorvastatin
                     
                        Co-administration of multiple 10 mg doses of amlodipine besylate tablets with 80 mg of atorvastatin resulted in no significant change in the steady-state pharmacokinetic parameters of atorvastatin.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.7	Simvastatin
                     
                        Co-administration of multiple doses of 10 mg of amlodipine with 80 mg simvastatin resulted in a 77% increase in exposure to simvastatin compared to simvastatin alone. Limit the dose of simvastatin in patients on amlodipine to 20 mg daily.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.8	Digoxin
                     
                        Co-administration of amlodipine besylate tablets with digoxin did not change serum digoxin levels or digoxin renal clearance in normal volunteers.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.9	Ethanol (Alcohol)
                     
                        Single and multiple 10 mg doses of amlodipine besylate tablets had no significant effect on the pharmacokinetics of ethanol.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.10	Warfarin
                     
                        Co-administration of amlodipine besylate tablets with warfarin did not change the warfarin prothrombin response time.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.11	CYP3A4 Inhibitors
                     
                        Co-administration of a 180 mg daily dose of diltiazem with 5 mg amlodipine in elderly hypertensive patients resulted in a 60% increase in amlodipine systemic exposure. Erythromycin co-administration in healthy volunteers did not significantly change amlodipine systemic exposure. However, strong inhibitors of CYP3A4 (e.g., ketoconazole, itraconazole, ritonavir) may increase the plasma concentrations of amlodipine to a greater extent. Monitor for symptoms of hypotension and edema when amlodipine is co-administered with CYP3A4 inhibitors.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.12	CYP3A4 Inducers
                     
                        No information is available on the quantitative effects of CYP3A4 inducers on amlodipine. Blood pressure should be closely monitored when amlodipine is co-administered with CYP3A4 inducers.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.13	Cyclosporine
                     
                        A prospective study in renal transplant patients (N=11) showed on an average of 40% increase in trough cyclosporine levels when concomitantly treated with amlodipine.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.14	 Drug/Laboratory Test Interactions
                     
                        None known.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         