
                     
                     
                     Drug Interactions
                     
                        
                           Interactions Common for Both Benazepril and Hydrochlorothiazide
                        
                        
                           
                              Potassium Supplements and Potassium-Sparing Diuretics: Concomitant use with benazepril hydrochloride and hydrochlorothiazide may effect potassium levels. Monitor potassium periodically.
                        
                           
                              Lithium: Renal clearance of lithium is reduced by thiazides and increase the risk of lithium toxicity. Increased serum lithium levels and symptoms of lithium toxicity have been reported in patients receiving ACE inhibitors during therapy with lithium. Monitor lithium levels when used concomitantly with benazepril hydrochloride and hydrochlorothiazide.
                        
                           
                              Dual Blockade of the Renin-Angiotensin System (RAS): 
                           Dual Blockade of the RAS with angiotensin receptor blockers, ACE inhibitors, or aliskiren is associated with increased risks of hypertension, hyperkalemia, and changes in renal function (including acute renal failure) compared to monotherapy. Most patients receiving the combination of two RAS inhibitors do not obtain any additional benefit compared to monotherapy. In general, avoid combined use of RAS inhibitors. Closely monitor blood pressure, renal function and electrolytes in patients on benazepril hydrochloride and hydrochlorothiazide and other agents that affect the RAS. 
                        Do not co-administer aliskiren with benazepril hydrochloride and hydrochlorothiazide in patients with diabetes. Avoid use of aliskiren with benazepril hydrochloride and hydrochlorothiazide in patients with renal impairment (GFR <60 mL/min). 
                        
                           
                              NSAIDs and Cox-2 Selective Agents: 
                           In patients who are elderly, volume-depleted (including those on diuretic therapy), or with compromised renal function, co-administration of NSAIDs, including selective COX-2 inhibitors, with ACE inhibitors, including benazepril, may result in deterioration of renal function, including possible acute renal failure. These effects are usually reversible. Monitor renal function periodically in patients receiving benazepril and NSAID therapy. 
                        The antihypertensive effect of benazepril and hydrochlorothiazide may be attenuated by NSAIDs.
                     
                     
                  
               