
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Sodium picosulfate is hydrolyzed by colonic bacteria to form an active metabolite: bis-(p-hydroxy-phenyl)-pyridyl-2-methane, BHPM, which acts directly on the colonic mucosa to stimulate colonic peristalsis.
                        Magnesium oxide and citric acid react to create magnesium citrate in solution, which is an osmotic agent that causes water to be retained within the gastrointestinal tract.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        The stimulant laxative activity of sodium picosulfate together with the osmotic laxative activity of magnesium citrate produces a purgative effect which, when ingested with additional fluids, produces watery diarrhea.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        Sodium picosulfate, which is a prodrug, is converted to its active metabolite, BHPM, by colonic bacteria. After administration of 2 packets of Prepopik® separated by 6 hours, in 16 healthy volunteers, sodium picosulfate reached a mean Cmax of 3.2 ng/mL at approximately 7 hours (Tmax). After the first packet the corresponding values were 2.3 ng/mL at 2 hours. The terminal half-life of sodium picosulfate was 7.4 hours. The fraction of the absorbed sodium picosulfate dose excreted unchanged in urine was 0.19%. Plasma levels of the free BHPM were low, with 13 out of 16 subjects studied having plasma BHPM concentrations below the lower limit of quantification (0.1 ng/mL). Urinary samples show that the majority of excreted BHPM was in the glucuronide-conjugated form. Magnesium oxide and citric acid react in water to create magnesium citrate. Baseline uncorrected magnesium concentration reached a maximum (Cmax) of approximately 1.9 mEq/L, which occurred at 10 hours post initial packet administration (Tmax). This represents an approximately 20% increase from the baseline.
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Drug Interaction Studies
                              
                              In an in vitro study using human liver microsomes, sodium picosulfate did not inhibit the major CYP enzymes (CYP 1A2, 2B6, 2C8, 2C9, 2C19, 2D6 and 3A4/5) evaluated. Based on an in vitro study using freshly isolated hepatocyte culture, sodium picosulfate is not an inducer of CYP1A2, CYP2B6 or CYP3A4/5.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         