
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        The absorption of demeclocycline is slower than that of tetracycline. The time to reach the peak concentration is about 4 hours. After a 150 mg oral dose of demeclocycline tablet, the mean concentrations at 1 hour and 3 hours are 0.46 and 1.22 mcg/mL (n = 6), respectively. The serum half-life ranges between 10 and 16 hours.
                        When demeclocycline hydrochloride is given concomitantly with some dairy products, or antacids containing aluminum, calcium, or magnesium, the extent of absorption is reduced by more than 50%.
                        Demeclocycline hydrochloride penetrates well into various body fluid and tissues. The percent of demeclocycline hydrochloride bound to plasma protein is about 40% using a dialysis equilibrium method and 90% using an ultra-filtration method. Demeclocycline hydrochloride, like other tetracyclines, is concentrated in the liver and excreted into the bile where it is found in much higher concentrations than in the blood. The rate of demeclocycline hydrochloride renal clearance (35 mL/min/1.73 m2) is less than half that of tetracycline. Following a single 150 mg dose of demeclocycline hydrochloride in normal volunteers, 44% (n = 8) was excreted in urine and 13% and 46%, respectively, were excreted in feces in two patients within 96 hours as active drug.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Microbiology
                     
                        The tetracyclines are primarily bacteriostatic and are thought to exert their antimicrobial effect by the inhibition of protein synthesis. The tetracyclines, including demeclocycline, have a similar antimicrobial spectrum of activity against a wide range of gram-negative and gram-positive organisms. Cross-resistance of these organisms to tetracyclines is common.
                        Demeclocycline has been shown to be active against most strains of the following microorganisms, both in vitro and in clinical infections as described in the 
                              INDICATIONS AND USAGE
                            section. 
                        AEROBIC GRAM-POSITIVE MICROORGANISMS:

                           Bacillus anthracis
                           

                           Listeria monocytogenes
                           

                           Staphylococcus aureus
                           

                           Streptococcus pneumoniae
                        
                        AEROBIC GRAM-NEGATIVE MICROORGANISMS:

                           Bartonella bacilliformis
                           

                           Brucella species

                           Calymmatobacterium granulomatis
                           

                           Campylobacter fetus
                           

                           Francisella tularensis
                           

                           Haemophilus ducreyi
                           

                           Haemophilus influenzae
                           

                           Neisseria gonorrhoeae
                           

                           Vibrio cholerae
                           

                           Yersinia pestis
                        
                        Because many strains of the following groups of gram-negative microorganisms have been shown to be resistant to tetracyclines, culture and susceptibility testing are especially recommended:
                        
                           Acinetobacter species

                           Enterobacter aerogenes
                           

                           Escherichia coli
                           

                           Klebsiella species

                           Shigella species
                        OTHER MICROORGANISMS:

                           Actinomyces israelii
                           

                           Borrelia recurrentis
                           

                           Chlamydia psittaci
                           

                           Chlamydia trachomatis
                           

                           Clostridium species

                           Entamoeba species

                           Fusobacterium fusiforme
                           

                           Mycoplasma pneumoniae
                           

                           Propionibacterium acnes
                           

                           Rickettsiae
                           

                           Treponema pallidum subspecies pallidum
                           

                           Treponema pallidum subspecies pertenue
                           

                           Ureaplasma urealyticum
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Susceptibility Tests
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Dilution Techniques
                           
                              Quantitative methods are used to determine antimicrobial minimum inhibitory concentrations (MICs). These MICs provide estimates of the susceptibility of bacteria to antimicrobial compounds. The MICs should be determined using a standardized procedure. Standardized procedures are based on a dilution method (broth or agar) or equivalent with standardized inoculum concentrations and standardized concentrations of demeclocycline hydrochloride or tetracycline powder.1 The MIC values should be interpreted according to the following criteria: 
                              For organisms other than Haemophilus species, Neisseria gonorrhoeae and Streptococcus species:2
                              
                              


                              


For Haemophilus and Streptococcus species:2
                              
                              


                              


For Neisseria gonorrhoeae:2
                              
                              


                              


A report of "Susceptible" indicates that the pathogen is likely to be inhibited by usually achievable concentrations of the antimicrobial compound in blood. A report of "Intermediate" indicates that the result should be considered equivocal, and, if the microorganism is not fully susceptible to alternative, clinically feasible drugs, the test should be repeated. This category implies possible clinical applicability in body sites where the drug is physiologically concentrated or in situations where high dosage of drug can be used. This category also provides a buffer zone which prevents small uncontrolled technical factors from causing major discrepancies in interpretation. A report of "Resistant" indicates that usually achievable concentrations of the antimicrobial compound in the blood are unlikely to be inhibitory and that other therapy should be selected.
                              Standardized susceptibility test procedures require the use of laboratory control microorganisms to control the technical aspects of the laboratory procedures. Standard demeclocycline or tetracycline powder should provide the following MIC values:2
                              
                              


                           



                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Diffusion Techniques
                           
                              Quantitative methods that require measurement of zone diameters also provide reproducible estimates of the susceptibility of bacteria to antimicrobial compounds. One such standardized procedure requires the use of standardized inoculum concentrations.2 This procedure uses paper disks impregnated with 30-mcg tetracycline (as a class disk) or a 30-mcg demeclocycline hydrochloride disk to test the susceptibility of microorganisms to demeclocycline.
                              Reports from the laboratory providing results of the standard single-disk susceptibility test with either a 30-mcg tetracycline-class disk or a 30-mcg demeclocycline disk should be interpreted according to the following criteria:
                              For organisms other than Haemophilus species, Neisseria gonorrhoeae and Streptococcus species:2
                              
                              


                              


For Haemophilus species:2
                              
                              


                              


For N. gonorrhoeae:2
                              
                              


                              


For Streptococcus species:2
                              
                              


                              


Interpretation should be as stated above for results using dilution techniques. Interpretation involves correlation of the diameter obtained in the disk test with the MIC for demeclocycline hydrochloride or tetracycline.
                              As with standardized dilution techniques, diffusion methods require the use of laboratory control microorganisms to control the technical aspects of the laboratory procedures. For the diffusion technique, the 30-mcg demeclocycline hydrochloride disk or the 30-mcg tetracycline-class disk should provide the following zone diameters in these laboratory test quality control strains:2
                              
                              


