
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  
                  Systemic absorption of mupirocin through intact human skin is minimal. The systemic absorption of mupirocin was studied following application of BACTROBAN CREAM 3 times daily for 5 days to various skin lesions (>10 cm in length or 100 cm2 in area) in 16 adults (aged 29 to 60 years) and 10 children (aged 3 to 12 years). Some systemic absorption was observed as evidenced by the detection of the metabolite, monic acid, in urine. Data from this study indicated more frequent occurrence of percutaneous absorption in children (90% of patients) compared to adults (44% of patients); however, the observed urinary concentrations in children (0.07 - 1.3 mcg/mL [1 pediatric patient had no detectable level]) are within the observed range (0.08 - 10.03 mcg/mL [9 adults had no detectable level]) in the adult population. In general, the degree of percutaneous absorption following multiple dosing appears to be minimal in adults and children. Any mupirocin reaching the systemic circulation is rapidly metabolized, predominantly to inactive monic acid, which is eliminated by renal excretion.
                  
 

                  
                  Mupirocin is an antibacterial agent produced by fermentation using the organism Pseudomonas 
                     fluorescens. It is active against a wide range of gram-positive bacteria including methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus 
                     aureus (MRSA). It is also active against certain gram-negative bacteria. Mupirocin inhibits bacterial protein synthesis by reversibly and specifically binding to bacterial isoleucyl transfer-RNA synthetase. Due to this unique mode of action, mupirocin demonstrates no in vitro cross-resistance with other classes of antimicrobial agents.
                   Resistance occurs rarely; however, when mupirocin resistance does occur, it appears to result from the production of a modified isoleucyl-tRNA synthetase. High-level plasmid-mediated resistance (MIC >1024 mcg/mL) has been reported in some strains of Staphylococcus 
                     aureus and coagulase-negative staphylococci.
                   Mupirocin is bactericidal at concentrations achieved by topical application. The minimum bactericidal concentration (MBC) against relevant pathogens is generally 8-fold to 30-fold higher than the minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC). In addition, mupirocin is highly protein bound (>97%), and the effect of wound secretions on the MICs of mupirocin has not been determined.
                   Mupirocin has been shown to be active against most strains of S. 
                     aureus and Streptococcus 
                     pyogenes, both in vitro and in clinical studies. (See INDICATIONS AND USAGE.) The following in vitro data are available, BUT THEIR CLINICAL SIGNIFICANCE IS UNKNOWN. Mupirocin is active against most strains of Staphylococcus 
                     epidermidis and Staphylococcus 
                     saprophyticus.
                  
 

               
               
            
         