
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action-
                     
                        Neostigmine methylsulfate is a competitive cholinesterase inhibitor.  By reducing the breakdown of acetylcholine, neostigmine methylsulfate induces an increase in acetylcholine in the synaptic cleft which competes for the same binding site as nondepolarizing neuromuscular blocking agents, and reverses the neuromuscular blockade.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        Neostigmine is an anticholinesterase agent, and inhibits the hydrolysis of acetylcholine by competing with acetylcholine for binding to acetylcholinesterase at sites of cholinergic transmission.  By reducing the breakdown of acetylcholine, neuromuscular transmission is facilitated.  Neostigmine also has direct postsynaptic cholinomimetic effects which can be managed clinically by the co-administration of atropine or glycopyrrolate. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        
                           Distribution 
                        
                        Protein binding of neostigmine to human serum albumin ranges from 15 to 25%.  The observed volume of distribution is between 0.12 and 1.4 L/kg following intravenous injection.
                        
                           Elimination
                        
                        Neostigmine is metabolized by microsomal enzymes in the liver and the observed elimination half-life reported is between 24 and 113 minutes.  
                        
                           Metabolism
                        
                        Neostigmine is metabolized by microsomal enzymes in the liver.
                        
                           Excretion 
                           
                        
                        The observed elimination half-life reported is between 24 and 113 minutes following intravenous injection. 
                        
                           Specific Populations
                        
                        
                           Pediatric Population: 
                        
                        
                           After intravenous administration as a 2-minute infusion (infants 2 to 10 months old: 100 mcg/kg; children 1 to 6 years old: 70 mcg/kg), the elimination half-life for infants and children were 39 ± 5 min and 48 ± 16 min (mean ± SD), respectively.  Clearance for infants and children were 13.6 ± 2.8 and 11.1 ± 2.7 mL/min/kg (mean ± SD), respectively. 
                        
                           Renal Impairment
                        
                        Elimination half-life was prolonged in anephric patients compared to normal subjects; elimination half-life for normal, transplant and anephric patients were 79.8 ± 48.6, 104.7 ± 64 and 181 ± 54 min (mean ± SD), respectively.   
                        
                           Hepatic Impairment
                        
                        The pharmacokinetics of neostigmine in patients with hepatic impairment has not been studied.  Neostigmine is metabolized by microsomal enzymes in the liver and its concentration may increase in patients with impaired hepatic functions. 
                        
                           Drug Interactions
                        
                        The pharmacokinetic interaction between neostigmine and other drugs has not been studied.  Neostigmine concentration may increase or decrease if concomitantly used drugs inhibit or induce the activity of metabolizing enzymes or transporters, respectively.  
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         