
               
               
               
                  12  CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY

               
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        12.1.  Mechanism of Action

                     
                     
                        Like other topical corticosteroids, fluocinolone acetonide has anti-inflammatory, antipruritic, and vasoconstrictive properties. The mechanism of the anti-inflammatory activity of the topical steroids, in general, is unclear. However, corticosteroids are thought to act by the induction of phospholipase A2 inhibitory proteins, collectively called lipocortins. It is postulated that these proteins control the biosynthesis of potent mediators of inflammation such as prostaglandins and leukotrienes by inhibiting the release of their common precursor arachidonic acid. Arachidonic acid is released from membrane phospholipids by phospholipase A2.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        12.3.  Pharmacokinetics

                     
                     
                        Topical corticosteroids can be absorbed from intact healthy skin. The extent of percutaneous absorption of topical corticosteroids is determined by many factors, including the product formulation and the integrity of the epidermal barrier. Occlusion, inflammation and/or other disease processes in the skin may increase percutaneous absorption. The use of pharmacodynamic endpoints for assessing the systemic exposure of topical corticosteroids may be necessary due to the fact that circulating levels are often below the level of detection. Once absorbed through the skin, topical corticosteroids are metabolized, primarily in the liver, and are then excreted by the kidneys. Some corticosteroids and their metabolites are also excreted in the bile.
                        Fluocinolone acetonide 0.01% topical oil is in the low to medium range of potency as compared with other topical corticosteroids in vasoconstrictor studies.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         