
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
                  No pharmacokinetic drug-drug interaction studies were conducted with AGGRENOX capsules. The following information was obtained from the literature.
               
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           Co-administration with anti-coagulants or NSAIDS can increase risk of bleeding (7.4, 7.10)
                           Decreased renal function can occur with co-administration with NSAIDS (7.10)
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1  Adenosine
                     
                        Dipyridamole has been reported to increase the plasma levels and cardiovascular effects of adenosine. Adjustment of adenosine dosage may be necessary.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2  Angiotensin Converting Enzyme (ACE) Inhibitors
                     
                        Due to the indirect effect of aspirin on the renin-angiotensin conversion pathway, the hyponatremic and hypotensive effects of ACE inhibitors may be diminished by concomitant administration of aspirin.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3  Acetazolamide
                     
                        Concurrent use of aspirin and acetazolamide can lead to high serum concentrations of acetazolamide (and toxicity) due to competition at the renal tubule for secretion.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4  Anticoagulant Therapy (heparin and warfarin)
                     
                        Patients on anticoagulation therapy are at increased risk for bleeding because of drug-drug interactions and effects on platelets. Aspirin can displace warfarin from protein binding sites, leading to prolongation of both the prothrombin time and the bleeding time. Aspirin can increase the anticoagulant activity of heparin, increasing bleeding risk.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.5  Anticonvulsants
                     
                        Salicylic acid can displace protein-bound phenytoin and valproic acid, leading to a decrease in the total concentration of phenytoin and an increase in serum valproic acid levels. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.6  Beta Blockers
                     
                        The hypotensive effects of beta blockers may be diminished by the concomitant administration of aspirin due to inhibition of renal prostaglandins, leading to decreased renal blood flow and salt and fluid retention.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.7  Cholinesterase Inhibitors
                     
                        Dipyridamole may counteract the anticholinesterase effect of cholinesterase inhibitors, thereby potentially aggravating myasthenia gravis. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.8  Diuretics
                     
                        The effectiveness of diuretics in patients with underlying renal or cardiovascular disease may be diminished by the concomitant administration of aspirin due to inhibition of renal prostaglandins, leading to decreased renal blood flow and salt and fluid retention.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.9  Methotrexate
                     
                        Salicylate can inhibit renal clearance of methotrexate, leading to bone marrow toxicity, especially in the elderly or renal impaired.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.10  Nonsteroidal Anti-Inflammatory Drugs (NSAIDs)
                     
                        The concurrent use of aspirin with other NSAIDs may increase bleeding or lead to decreased renal function.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.11  Oral Hypoglycemics 
                     
                        Moderate doses of aspirin may increase the effectiveness of oral hypoglycemic drugs, leading to hypoglycemia.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.12  Uricosuric Agents (probenecid and sulfinpyrazone)
                     
                        Salicylates antagonize the uricosuric action of uricosuric agents.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         