
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              •CYP2B6 inducers: Dose increase may be necessary if coadministered with CYP2B6 inducers (e.g., ritonavir, lopinavir, and efavirenz, carbamazepine, phenobarbital, phenytoin) based on clinical exposure, but should not exceed the maximum dose.  (7.1)
                           
                              •Drugs metabolized by CYP2D6: Bupropion inhibits CYP2D6 and can increase concentrations of: antidepressants (e.g., venlafaxine, nortriptyline, imipramine, desipramine, paroxetine, fluoxetine, sertraline), antipsychotics (e.g., haloperidol, risperidone, thioridazine), beta-blockers (e.g., metoprolol), and Type 1C antiarrhythmics (e.g., propafenone, flecainide). Consider dose reduction when using with bupropion. (7.2)
                           
                              •Drugs that lower seizure threshold: Dose APLENZIN with caution.  (5.3, 7.3)
                           
                              •Dopaminergic Drugs (levodopa and amantadine): CNS toxicity can occur when used concomitantly with APLENZIN. (7.4)
                           
                              •MAOIs: Increased risk of hypertensive reactions can occur when used concomitantly with APLENZIN. (7.6)
                           
                              •Drug laboratory test interactions: APLENZIN can cause false-positive urine test results for amphetamines. (7.7)
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 Potential for Other Drugs to Affect APLENZIN
                     
                        Bupropion is primarily metabolized to hydroxybupropion by CYP2B6. Therefore, the potential exists for drug interactions between APLENZIN and drugs that are inhibitors or inducers of CYP2B6.
                        
                           
                              Inhibitors of CYP2B6
                           
                        
                        
                           Ticlopidine and Clopidogrel: Concomitant treatment with these drugs can increase bupropion exposures but decrease hydroxybupropion exposure. Based on clinical response, dosage adjustment of APLENZIN may be necessary when coadministered with CYP2B6 inhibitors (e.g., ticlopidine or clopidogrel) [see 
                              Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)
                           ].
                        
                           
                              Inducers of CYP2B6
                           
                        
                        
                           Ritonavir, Lopinavir, and Efavirenz: Concomitant treatment with these drugs can decrease bupropion and hydroxybupropion exposure. Dosage increase of APLENZIN may be necessary when coadministered with ritonavir, lopinavir, or efavirenz but should not exceed the maximum recommended dose [see 
                              Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)
                           ].
                        
                           Carbamazepine, Phenobarbital, Phenytoin: While not systemically studied, these drugs may induce metabolism of bupropion and may decrease bupropion exposure [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].  If bupropion is used concomitantly with a CYP inducer, it may be necessary to increase the dose of bupropion, but the maximum recommended dose should not be exceeded.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 Potential for APLENZIN to Affect Other Drugs
                     
                        
                           
                              Drugs Metabolized by CYP2D6
                           
                        
                        Bupropion and its metabolites (erythrohydrobupropion, threohydrobupropion, hydroxybupropion) are CYP2D6 inhibitors. Therefore, coadministration of APLENZIN with drugs that are metabolized by CYP2D6 can increase the exposures of drugs that are substrates of CYP2D6. Such drugs include certain antidepressants (e.g., venlafaxine, nortriptyline, imipramine, desipramine, paroxetine, fluoxetine, and sertraline), antipsychotics (e.g., haloperidol, risperidone, and thioridazine), beta-blockers (e.g., metoprolol), and Type 1C antiarrhythmics (e.g., propafenone, and flecainide). When used concomitantly with APLENZIN, it may be necessary to decrease the dose of these CYP2D6 substrates, particularly for drugs with a narrow therapeutic index.
                        Drugs that require metabolic activation by CYP2D6 to be effective (e.g., tamoxifen), theoretically could have reduced efficacy when administered concomitantly with inhibitors of CYP2D6 such as bupropion. Patients treated concomitantly with APLENZIN and such drugs may require increased doses of the drug [see 
                              Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)
                           ].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3 Drugs that Lower Seizure Threshold
                     
                        Use extreme caution when coadministering APLENZIN with other drugs that lower the seizure threshold (e.g., other bupropion products, antipsychotics, antidepressants, theophylline, or systemic corticosteroids). Use low initial doses of APLENZIN and increase the dose gradually [see 
                              Warnings and Precautions (5.3)
                           ].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4 Dopaminergic Drugs (Levodopa and Amantadine)
                     
                        Bupropion, levodopa, and amantadine have dopamine agonist effects. CNS toxicity has been reported when bupropion was coadministered with levodopa or amantadine. Adverse reactions have included restlessness, agitation, tremor, ataxia, gait disturbance, vertigo, and dizziness. It is presumed that the toxicity results from cumulative dopamine agonist effects. Use caution when administering APLENZIN concomitantly with these drugs.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.5 Use with Alcohol
                     
                        In postmarketing experience, there have been rare reports of adverse neuropsychiatric events or reduced alcohol tolerance in patients who were drinking alcohol during treatment with APLENZIN.  The consumption of alcohol during treatment with APLENZIN should be minimized or avoided.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.6 MAO Inhibitors
                     
                        Bupropion inhibits the reuptake of dopamine and norepinephrine.  Concomitant use of MAOIs and bupropion is contraindicated because there is an increased risk of hypertensive reactions if bupropion is used concomitantly with MAOIs. Studies in animals demonstrate that the acute toxicity of bupropion is enhanced by the MAO inhibitor phenelzine.  At least 14 days should elapse between discontinuation of an MAOI intended to treat depression and initiation of treatment with APLENZIN.  Conversely, at least 14 days should be allowed after stopping APLENZIN before starting an MAOI antidepressant [see Dosage and Administration (2.8, 2.9) and 
                              Contraindications (4)
                           ].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.7 Drug-Laboratory Test Interactions
                     
                        False-positive urine immunoassay screening tests for amphetamines have been reported in patients taking bupropion.  This is due to lack of specificity of some screening tests.  False-positive test results may result even following discontinuation of bupropion therapy.  Confirmatory tests, such as gas chromatography/mass spectrometry, will distinguish bupropion from amphetamines.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         