
               
               
               DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        ACE-inhibitors
                     
                     
                        Reports suggest that NSAIDs may diminish the antihypertensive effect of ACE inhibitors. This interaction should be given consideration in patients taking NSAIDs concomitantly with ACE inhibitors.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        Aspirin
                     
                     
                        When a meloxicam is administered with aspirin (1000 mg TID) to healthy volunteers, it tended to increase the AUC (10%) and Cmax (24%) of meloxicam. The clinical significance of this interaction is not known; however, as with other NSAIDs concomitant administration of meloxicam and aspirin is not generally recommended because of the potential for increased adverse effects.
                        Concomitant administration of low-dose aspirin with meloxicam tablets may result in an increased rate of GI ulceration or other complications, compared to use of meloxicam tablets alone. Meloxicam tablet is not a substitute for aspirin for cardiovascular prophylaxis.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        Cholestyramine
                     
                     
                        Pretreatment for four days with cholestyramine significantly increased the clearance of meloxicam by 50%. This resulted in a decrease in t1/2, from 19.2 hours to 12.5 hours, and a 35% reduction in AUC. This suggests the existence of a recirculation pathway for meloxicam in the gastrointestinal tract. The clinical relevance of this interaction has not been established.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        Cimetidine
                     
                     
                        Concomitant administration of 200 mg cimetidine QID did not alter the single-dose pharmacokinetics of 30 mg meloxicam.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        Digoxin
                     
                     
                        Meloxicam 15 mg once daily for 7 days did not alter the plasma concentration profile of digoxin after β-acetyldigoxin administration for 7 days at clinical doses. In vitro testing found no protein binding drug interaction between digoxin and meloxicam.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        Furosemide
                     
                     
                        Clinical studies, as well as post-marketing observations, have shown that NSAIDs can reduce the natriuretic effect of furosemide and thiazides in some patients. This response has been attributed to inhibition of renal prostaglandin synthesis. Studies with furosemide agents and meloxicam have not demonstrated a reduction in natriuretic effect. Furosemide single and multiple dose pharmacodynamics and pharmacokinetics are not affected by multiple doses of meloxicam. Nevertheless, during concomitant therapy with meloxicam tablets, patients should be observed closely for signs of declining renal failure (see WARNINGS , Renal Effects ), as well as to assure diuretic efficacy.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        Lithium
                     
                     
                        In a study conducted in healthy subjects, mean pre-dose lithium concentration and AUC were increased by 21% in subjects receiving lithium doses ranging from 804 to 1072 mg BID with meloxicam 15 mg QD as compared to subjects receiving lithium alone. These effects have been attributed to inhibition of renal prostaglandin synthesis by meloxicam tablets patients on lithium treatment should be closely monitored for signs of lithium toxicity when meloxicam tablets is introduced, adjusted, or withdrawn.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        Methotrexate
                     
                     
                        NSAIDs have been reported to competitively inhibit methotrexate accumulation in rabbit kidney slices. This may indicate that they could enhance the toxicity of methotrexate. Caution should be used when NSAIDs are administered concomitantly with methotrexate.
                        A study in 13 rheumatoid arthritis (RA) patients evaluated the effects of multiple doses of meloxicam on the pharmacokinetics of methotrexate taken once weekly. Meloxicam did not have a significant effect on the pharmacokinetics of single doses of methotrexate. In vitro, methotrexate did not displace meloxicam from its human serum binding sites.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        Warfarin
                     
                     
                        The effects of warfarin and NSAIDs on GI bleeding are synergistic, such that users of both drugs together have a risk of serious GI bleeding higher than users of either drug alone. 
                        Anticoagulant activity should be monitored, particularly in the first few days after initiating or changing meloxicam tablets therapy in patients receiving warfarin or similar agents, since these patients are at an increased risk of bleeding. The effect of meloxicam on the anticoagulant effect of warfarin was studied in a group of healthy subjects receiving daily doses of warfarin that produced an INR (International Normalized Ratio) between 1.2 and 1.8. In these subjects, meloxicam did not alter warfarin pharmacokinetics and the average anticoagulant effect of warfarin as determined by prothrombin time. However, one subject showed an increase in INR from 1.5 to 2.1. Caution should be used when administering meloxicam tablets with warfarin since patients on warfarin may experience changes in INR and an increased risk of bleeding complications when a new medication is introduced.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Carcinogenesis, Mutagenesis, Impairment of Fertility
                     
                        No carcinogenic effect of meloxicam was observed in rats given oral doses up to 0.8 mg/kg/day (approximately 0.4-fold the human dose at 15 mg/day for a 50 kg adult based on body surface area conversion) for 104 weeks or in mice given oral doses up to 8.0 mg/kg/day (approximately 2.2-fold the human dose, as noted above) for 99 weeks.
                        Meloxicam was not mutagenic in an Ames assay, or clastogenic in a chromosome aberration assay with human lymphocytes and an in vivo micronucleus test in mouse bone marrow.
                        Meloxicam did not impair male and female fertility in rats at oral doses up to 9 and 5 mg/kg/day, respectively (4.9-fold and 2.5-fold the human dose, as noted above). However, an increased incidence of embryolethality at oral doses ≥1 mg/kg/day (0.5-fold the human dose, as noted above) was observed in rats when dams were given meloxicam 2 weeks prior to mating and during early embryonic development.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Pregnancy
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Teratogenic Effects:
                              Pregnancy Category C.
                           
                           
                              Meloxicam caused an increased incidence of septal defect of the heart, a rare event, at an oral dose of 60 mg/kg/day (64.5-fold the human dose at 15 mg/day for a 50 kg adult based on body surface area conversion) and embryolethality at oral doses ≥5 mg/kg/day (5.4-fold the human dose, as noted above) when rabbits were treated throughout organogenesis. Meloxicam was not teratogenic in rats up to an oral dose of 4 mg/kg/day (approximately 2.2-fold the human dose, as noted above) throughout organogenesis. An increased incidence of stillbirths was observed when rats were given oral doses ≥ 1 mg/kg/day throughout organogenesis. Meloxicam crosses the placental barrier. There are no adequate and well-controlled studies in pregnant women. Meloxicam tablets should be used during pregnancy only if the potential benefit justifies the potential risk to the fetus.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        Nonteratogenic Effects
                     
                     
                        Because of the known effects of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs on the fetal cardiovascular system (closure of ductus arteriosus), use during pregnancy (particularly late pregnancy) should be avoided.
                        Meloxicam caused a reduction in birth index, live births, and neonatal survival at oral doses ≥0.125 mg/kg/day (approximately 0.07-fold the human dose at 15 mg/day for a 50 kg adult based on body surface area conversion) when rats were treated during the late gestation and lactation period. No studies have been conducted to evaluate the effect of meloxicam on the closure of the ductus arteriosus in humans; use of meloxicam during the third trimester of pregnancy should be avoided.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Labor and Delivery
                     
                        Studies in rats with meloxicam, as with other drugs known to inhibit prostaglandin synthesis, showed an increased incidence of stillbirths, prolonged delivery, and delayed parturition at oral dosages ≥1 mg/kg/day (approximately 0.5-fold the human dose at 15 mg/day for a 50 kg adult based on body surface area conversion), and decreased pup survival at an oral dose of 4 mg/kg/day (approximately 2.1-fold the human dose, as noted above) throughout organogenesis. Similar findings were observed in rats receiving oral dosages ≥0.125 mg/kg/day (approximately 0.07-fold the human dose, as noted above) during late gestation and the lactation period.
                        The effects of meloxicam tablets on labor and delivery in pregnant women are unknown.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Nursing Mothers
                     
                        It is not known whether this drug is excreted in human milk however, meloxicam was excreted in the milk of lactating rats at concentrations higher than those in plasma.
                        Because many drugs are excreted in human milk and because of the potential for serious adverse reactions in nursing infants from meloxicam tablets, a decision should be made whether to discontinue nursing or to discontinue the drug, taking into account the importance of the drug to the mother.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Pediatric Use
                     
                        Use of this drug product for a pediatric indication is protected by marketing exclusivity.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Geriatric Use
                     
                        As with any NSAID, caution should be exercised in treating the elderly (65 years and older).
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         