
                     
                     
                     
                        Drug InteractionsFew systemic data have been collected on the metabolism of 
bupropion following concomitant administration with other drugs or, 
alternatively, the effect of concomitant administration of bupropion on the 
metabolism of other drugs.
                        Because bupropion is extensively metabolized, the coadministration of other 
drugs may affect its clinical activity. In vitro 
studies indicate that bupropion is primarily metabolized to hydroxybupropion by 
the CYP2B6 isoenzyme. Therefore, the potential exists for a drug interaction 
between bupropion hydrochloride extended-release tablets (XL) and drugs that are 
substrates or inhibitors of the CYP2B6 isoenzyme (e.g., orphenadrine, thiotepa, 
and cyclophosphamide). In addition, in vitro studies 
suggest that paroxetine, sertraline, norfluoxetine, and fluvoxamine as well as 
nelfinavir, ritonavir, and efavirenz inhibit the hydroxylation of bupropion.  No 
clinical studies have been performed to evaluate this finding. The 
threohydrobupropion metabolite of bupropion does not appear to be produced by 
the cytochrome P450 isoenzymes. The effects of concomitant administration of 
cimetidine on the pharmacokinetics of bupropion and its active metabolites were 
studied in 24 healthy young male volunteers. Following oral administration of 
two 150-mg tablets of the sustained-release formulation of bupropion with and 
without 800 mg of cimetidine, the pharmacokinetics of bupropion and 
hydroxybupropion were unaffected.  However, there were 16% and 32% increases in 
the AUC and Cmax, respectively, of the combined moieties of threohydrobupropion 
and erythrohydrobupropion.
                        While not systematically studied, certain drugs may induce the metabolism of 
bupropion (e.g., carbamazepine, phenobarbital, phenytoin).
                        Multiple oral doses of bupropion had no statistically significant effects on 
the single dose pharmacokinetics of lamotrigine in 12 healthy volunteers.
                        Animal data indicated that bupropion may be an inducer of drug-metabolizing 
enzymes in humans. In one study, following chronic administration of bupropion, 
100 mg 3 times daily to 8 healthy male volunteers for 14 days, there was no 
evidence of induction of its own metabolism.  Nevertheless, there may be the 
potential for clinically important alterations of blood levels of coadministered 
drugs.
                        
                           Drugs Metabolized By Cytochrome P450IID6 
(CYP2D6): Many drugs, including most antidepressants (SSRIs, many 
tricyclics), beta-blockers, antiarrhythmics, and antipsychotics are metabolized 
by the CYP2D6 isoenzyme. Although bupropion is not metabolized by this 
isoenzyme, bupropion and hydroxybupropion are inhibitors of CYP2D6 isoenzyme 
in vitro.  In a study of 15 male subjects (ages 19 to 
35 years) who were extensive metabolizers of the CYP2D6 isoenzyme, daily doses 
of bupropion given as 150 mg twice daily followed by a single dose of 50 mg 
desipramine increased the Cmax, AUC, and t1/2 of desipramine by an average of approximately 2-, 5-, and 
2-fold, respectively. The effect was present for at least 7 days after the last 
dose of bupropion. Concomitant use of bupropion with other drugs metabolized by 
CYP2D6 has not been formally studied.
                        Therefore, co-administration of bupropion with drugs that are metabolized by 
CYP2D6 isoenzyme including certain antidepressants (e.g., nortriptyline, 
imipramine, desipramine, paroxetine, fluoxetine, sertraline), antipsychotics 
(e.g., haloperidol, risperidone, thioridazine), beta-blockers (e.g., 
metoprolol), and Type 1C antiarrhythmics (e.g., propafenone, flecainide), should 
be approached with caution and should be initiated at the lower end of the dose 
range of the concomitant medication.  If bupropion is added to the treatment 
regimen of a patient already receiving a drug metabolized by CYP2D6, the need to 
decrease the dose of the original medication should be considered, particularly 
for those concomitant medications with a narrow therapeutic index.
                        
                           MAO Inhibitors: Studies in animals demonstrate 
that the acute toxicity of bupropion is enhanced by the MAO inhibitor phenelzine 
(see CONTRAINDICATIONS).
                        
                           Levodopa and Amantadine: Limited clinical data 
suggest a higher incidence of adverse experiences in patients receiving 
bupropion concurrently with either levodopa or amantadine.  Administration of 
bupropion hydrochloride extended-release tablets (XL) to patients receiving 
either levodopa or amantadine concurrently should be undertaken with caution, 
using small initial doses and gradual dose increases.
                        
                           Drugs That Lower Seizure Threshold: Concurrent 
administration of bupropion hydrochloride extended-release tablets (XL) and 
agents (e.g., antipsychotics, other antidepressants, theophylline, systemic 
steroids, etc.) that lower seizure threshold should be undertaken only with 
extreme caution (see WARNINGS). Low initial dosing and gradual dose increases 
should be employed.
                        
                           Nicotine Transdermal System: (see PRECAUTIONS: 
Cardiovascular Effects).
                        
                           Alcohol: In postmarketing experience, there 
have been rare reports of adverse neuropsychiatric events or reduced alcohol 
tolerance in patients who were drinking alcohol during treatment with bupropion. 
The consumption of alcohol during treatment with bupropion hydrochloride 
extended-release tablets (XL) should be minimized or avoided (also see 
CONTRAINDICATIONS).
                     
                  
               