
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  Indomethacin is a non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID) 
that exhibits antipyretic and analgesic properties. Its mode of action, like 
that of other anti-inflammatory drugs, is not known. However, its therapeutic 
action is not due to pituitary-adrenal stimulation.
                  Indomethacin is a potent inhibitor of prostaglandin synthesis in vitro. Concentrations are reached during therapy which 
have been demonstrated to have an effect in vivo as 
well. Prostaglandins sensitize afferent nerves and potentiate the action of 
bradykinin in inducing pain in animal models. Moreover, prostaglandins are known 
to be among the mediators of inflammation. Since indomethacin is an inhibitor of 
prostaglandin synthesis, its mode of action may be due to a decrease of 
prostaglandins in peripheral tissues. 
                  Indomethacin has been shown to be an effective anti-inflammatory agent, 
appropriate for long-term use in rheumatoid arthritis, ankylosing spondylitis, 
and osteoarthritis.
                  Indomethacin affords relief of symptoms; it does not alter the progressive 
course of the underlying disease.
                  Indomethacin suppresses inflammation in rheumatoid arthritis as demonstrated 
by relief of pain, and reduction of fever, swelling and tenderness. Improvement 
in patients treated with indomethacin for rheumatoid arthritis has been 
demonstrated by a reduction in joint swelling, average number of joints 
involved, and morning stiffness; by increased mobility as demonstrated by a 
decrease in walking time; and by improved functional capability as demonstrated 
by an increase in grip strength. Indomethacin may enable the reduction of 
steroid dosage in patients receiving steroids for the more severe forms of 
rheumatoid arthritis. In such instances the steroid dosage should be reduced 
slowly and the patients followed very closely for any possible adverse 
effects.
                  Indomethacin has been reported to diminish basal and CO2 stimulated cerebral blood flow in healthy volunteers 
following acute oral and intravenous administration. In one study, after one 
week of treatment with orally administered indomethacin, this effect on basal 
cerebral blood flow had disappeared. The clinical significance of this effect 
has not been established. 
                  Indomethacin capsules have been found effective in relieving the pain, 
reducing the fever, swelling, redness, and tenderness of acute gouty arthritis (see indications and usage).
                  
                  Following single oral doses of indomethacin capsules 25 mg or 50 mg, 
indomethacin is readily absorbed, attaining peak plasma concentrations of about 
1 and 2 mcg/mL, respectively, at about 2 hours. Orally administered indomethacin 
capsules are virtually 100% bioavailable, with 90% of the dose absorbed within 4 
hours. A single 50 mg dose of indomethacin oral suspension was found to be 
bioequivalent to a 50 mg indomethacin capsule when each was administered with 
food.
                  Indomethacin is eliminated via renal excretion, metabolism, and biliary 
excretion. Indomethacin undergoes appreciable enterohepatic circulation. The 
mean half-life of indomethacin is estimated to be about 4.5 hours. With a 
typical therapeutic regimen of 25 mg or 50 mg t.i.d., the steady-state plasma 
concentrations of indomethacin are an average 1.4 times those following the 
first dose.
                  Indomethacin exists in the plasma as the parent drug and its desmethyl, 
desbenzoyl, and desmethyl-desbenzoyl metabolites, all in the unconjugated form. 
About 60% of an oral dosage is recovered in urine as drug and metabolites (26% 
as indomethacin and its glucuronide), and 33% is recovered in feces (1.5% as 
indomethacin).
                  About 99% of indomethacin is bound to protein in plasma over the expected 
range of therapeutic plasma concentrations. Indomethacin has been found to cross 
the blood-brain barrier and the placenta.
               
               
            
         