
               
               
               DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
                  

                  

                  Patients receiving other narcotic analgesics, antihistamines, 
antipsychotics, anti-anxiety agents, or other CNS depressants (including 
alcohol) concomitantly with hydrocodone bitartrate and acetaminophen tablets may 
exhibit an additive CNS depression. When combined therapy is contemplated, the 
dose of one or both agents should be reduced.
                  The use of MAO inhibitors or tricyclic antidepressants with hydrocodone 
preparations may increase the effect of either the antidepressant or 
hydrocodone.
                  
                  
                  Drug/Laboratory Test Interactions 

                  Acetaminophen may produce false-positive test results for urinary 
5-hydroxyindoleacetic acid.
                  
                  
                  Carcinogenesis, Mutagenesis, Impairment of 
Fertility 
                  No adequate studies have been conducted in animals to determine 
whether hydrocodone or acetaminophen have a potential for carcinogenesis, 
mutagenesis, or impairment of fertility. Pregnancy
                  
                  
                     Teratogenic Effects:  Pregnancy Category C: 
There are no adequate and well-controlled studies in pregnant women. Hydrocodone 
bitartrate and acetaminophen tablets should be used during pregnancy only if the 
potential benefit justifies the potential risk to the fetus.
                  
                     Nonteratogenic Effects:  Babies born to mothers 
who have been taking opioids regularly prior to delivery will be physically 
dependent. The withdrawal signs include irritability and excessive crying, 
tremors, hyperactive reflexes, increased respiratory rate, increased stools, 
sneezing, yawning, vomiting, and fever. The intensity of the syndrome does not 
always correlate with the duration of maternal opioid use or dose. There is no 
consensus on the best method of managing withdrawal.
                  
                  
                  Labor and Delivery 
                  As with all narcotics, administration of this product to the 
mother shortly before delivery may result in some degree of respiratory 
depression in the newborn, especially if higher doses are used.
                  

               
               
            
         