
               
               
               
                  12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
                  
                  12.1 Mechanism of ActionAlthough the exact mechanism of fluoxetine is unknown, it is 
presumed to be linked to its inhibition of CNS neuronal uptake of 
serotonin.
                  
                  
                  12.2 PharmacodynamicsStudies at clinically relevant doses in man have demonstrated 
that fluoxetine blocks the uptake of serotonin into human platelets. Studies in 
animals also suggest that fluoxetine is a much more potent uptake inhibitor of 
serotonin than of norepinephrine.
                  Antagonism of muscarinic, histaminergic, and α1-adrenergic receptors has been 
hypothesized to be associated with various anticholinergic, sedative, and 
cardiovascular effects of classical tricyclic antidepressant (TCA) drugs. 
Fluoxetine binds to these and other membrane receptors from brain tissue much 
less potently in vitro than do the tricyclic 
drugs.
                  
                  
                  12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     Systemic Bioavailability – In man, 
following a single oral 40 mg dose, peak plasma concentrations of fluoxetine 
from 15 to 55 ng/mL are observed after 6 to 8 hours.
                  The capsule, tablet and oral solution dosage forms of fluoxetine are 
bioequivalent. Food does not appear to affect the systemic bioavailability of 
fluoxetine, although it may delay its absorption by 1 to 2 hours, which is 
probably not clinically significant. Thus, fluoxetine may be administered with 
or without food.
                  
                     Protein Binding – Over the concentration range 
from 200 to 1000 ng/mL, approximately 94.5% of fluoxetine is bound in vitro to human serum proteins, including albumin and 
α1-glycoprotein. The interaction between fluoxetine and other highly 
protein-bound drugs has not been fully evaluated, but may be important.
                  
                     Enantiomers – Fluoxetine is a racemic mixture 
(50/50) of R-fluoxetine and S-fluoxetine enantiomers. In animal models, both 
enantiomers are specific and potent serotonin uptake inhibitors with essentially 
equivalent pharmacologic activity. The S-fluoxetine 
enantiomer is eliminated more slowly and is the predominant enantiomer present 
in plasma at steady state.
                  
                     Metabolism – Fluoxetine is extensively metabolized 
in the liver to norfluoxetine and a number of other unidentified metabolites. 
The only identified active metabolite, norfluoxetine, is formed by demethylation 
of fluoxetine. In animal models, S-norfluoxetine is a 
potent and selective inhibitor of serotonin uptake and has activity essentially 
equivalent to R- or S-fluoxetine. R-norfluoxetine is 
significantly less potent than the parent drug in the inhibition of serotonin 
uptake. The primary route of elimination appears to be hepatic metabolism to 
inactive metabolites excreted by the kidney.
                  
                     Variability in Metabolism – A subset (about 7%) of 
the population has reduced activity of the drug metabolizing enzyme cytochrome 
P450 2D6 (CYP2D6). Such individuals are referred to as “poor metabolizers” of 
drugs such as debrisoquin, dextromethorphan, and the TCAs. In a study involving 
labeled and unlabeled enantiomers administered as a racemate, these individuals 
metabolized S-fluoxetine at a slower rate and thus 
achieved higher concentrations of S-fluoxetine. 
Consequently, concentrations of S-norfluoxetine at 
steady state were lower. The metabolism of R-fluoxetine in these poor metabolizers appears normal. 
When compared with normal metabolizers, the total sum at steady state of the 
plasma concentrations of the 4 active enantiomers was not significantly greater 
among poor metabolizers. Thus, the net pharmacodynamic activities were 
essentially the same. Alternative, nonsaturable pathways (non-2D6) also 
contribute to the metabolism of fluoxetine. This explains how fluoxetine 
achieves a steady-state concentration rather than increasing without limit.
                  Because fluoxetine’s metabolism, like that of a number of other compounds 
including TCAs and other selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs), 
involves the CYP2D6 system, concomitant therapy with drugs also metabolized by 
this enzyme system (such as the TCAs) may lead to drug interactions [see DRUG INTERACTIONS (7.9)].
                  
                     Accumulation and Slow Elimination – The relatively 
slow elimination of fluoxetine (elimination half-life of 1 to 3 days after acute 
administration and 4 to 6 days after chronic administration) and its active 
metabolite, norfluoxetine (elimination half-life of 4 to 16 days after acute and 
chronic administration), leads to significant accumulation of these active 
species in chronic use and delayed attainment of steady state, even when a fixed 
dose is used [see WARNINGS AND PRECAUTIONS (5.12)]. 
After 30 days of dosing at 40 mg/day, plasma concentrations of fluoxetine in the 
range of 91 to 302 ng/mL and norfluoxetine in the range of 72 to 258 ng/mL have 
been observed. Plasma concentrations of fluoxetine were higher than those 
predicted by single-dose studies, because fluoxetine’s metabolism is not 
proportional to dose. Norfluoxetine, however, appears to have linear 
pharmacokinetics. Its mean terminal half-life after a single dose was 8.6 days 
and after multiple dosing was 9.3 days. Steady-state levels after prolonged 
dosing are similar to levels seen at 4 to 5 weeks.
                  The long elimination half-lives of fluoxetine and norfluoxetine assure that, 
even when dosing is stopped, active drug substance will persist in the body for 
weeks (primarily depending on individual patient characteristics, previous 
dosing regimen, and length of previous therapy at discontinuation). This is of 
potential consequence when drug discontinuation is required or when drugs are 
prescribed that might interact with fluoxetine and norfluoxetine following the 
discontinuation of fluoxetine.
                  
                  
                  
                  

               
               
            
         