
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
                  
                     [See Clinical Pharmacology (12.3).]
                  
                  
                     VYTORIN
                  
               
               
               
                  
                     
                        


                        



                           Cyclosporine: Combination increases exposure of ezetimibe and cyclosporine. Cyclosporine concentrations should be monitored. (7.6, 12.3)
                           Coumarin anticoagulants: simvastatin prolongs INR. Achieve stable INR prior to starting VYTORIN. Monitor INR frequently until stable upon initiation or alteration of VYTORIN therapy. (7.9)
                           Cholestyramine: Combination decreases exposure of ezetimibe. (2.7, 7.5)
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 CYP3A4 Interactions
                     
                        The risk of myopathy is increased by reducing the elimination of the simvastatin component of VYTORIN. Hence when VYTORIN is used with an inhibitor of CYP3A4 (e.g., as listed below), elevated plasma levels of HMG-CoA reductase inhibitory activity can increase the risk of myopathy and rhabdomyolysis, particularly with higher doses of VYTORIN. [See Warnings and Precautions (5.1) and Clinical Pharmacology (12.3).]
                        
                        
                           Itraconazole, ketoconazole, and other antifungal azoles
                        
                        
                           Macrolide antibiotics erythromycin, clarithromycin, and the ketolide antibiotic telithromycin
                        
                        
                           HIV protease inhibitors
                        
                        
                           Antidepressant nefazodone
                        
                        
                           Grapefruit juice in large quantities (>1 quart daily)
                        
                        Concomitant use of these drugs and any medication labeled as having a strong inhibitory effect on CYP3A4 should be avoided unless the benefits of combined therapy outweigh the increased risk. If treatment with itraconazole, ketoconazole, erythromycin, clarithromycin or telithromycin is unavoidable, therapy with VYTORIN should be suspended during the course of treatment.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 Lipid-Lowering Drugs That Can Cause Myopathy When Given Alone
                     
                        The risk of myopathy is increased by gemfibrozil and to a lesser extent by other fibrates [see Warnings and Precautions (5.1)].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3 Amiodarone, Verapamil, or Diltiazem
                     
                        The risk of myopathy/rhabdomyolysis is increased by concomitant administration of amiodarone, verapamil, or diltiazem with higher doses of VYTORIN [see Warnings and Precautions (5.1)].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4 Niacin
                     
                        Cases of myopathy/rhabdomyolysis have been observed with simvastatin coadministered with lipid-modifying doses (≥1 g/day niacin) of niacin-containing products. In particular, caution should be used when treating Chinese patients with VYTORIN coadministered with lipid-modifying doses of niacin-containing products. Because the risk for myopathy is dose-related, Chinese patients should not receive VYTORIN 10/80 mg coadministered with lipid-modifying doses of niacin-containing products. [See Warnings and Precautions (5.1).]
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.5 Cholestyramine
                     
                        Concomitant cholestyramine administration decreased the mean AUC of total ezetimibe approximately 55%. The incremental LDL-C reduction due to adding VYTORIN to cholestyramine may be reduced by this interaction.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.6 Cyclosporine or Danazol
                     
                        The risk of myopathy/rhabdomyolysis is increased by concomitant administration of cyclosporine or danazol particularly with higher doses of VYTORIN [see Warnings and Precautions (5.1) and Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                        Caution should be exercised when using VYTORIN and cyclosporine concomitantly due to increased exposure to both ezetimibe and cyclosporine [see Dosage and Administration (2.7)]. Cyclosporine concentrations should be monitored in patients receiving VYTORIN and cyclosporine [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                        The degree of increase in ezetimibe exposure may be greater in patients with severe renal impairment. In patients treated with cyclosporine, the potential effects of the increased exposure to ezetimibe from concomitant use should be carefully weighed against the benefits of alterations in lipid levels provided by ezetimibe. [See Warnings and Precautions (5.1) and Clinical Pharmacology (12.3).]
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.7 Digoxin
                     
                        In one study, concomitant administration of digoxin with simvastatin resulted in a slight elevation in plasma digoxin concentrations. Patients taking digoxin should be monitored appropriately when VYTORIN is initiated.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.8 Fibrates
                     
                        The safety and effectiveness of VYTORIN administered with fibrates have not been established.
                        Fibrates may increase cholesterol excretion into the bile, leading to cholelithiasis. In a preclinical study in dogs, ezetimibe increased cholesterol in the gallbladder bile [see Animal Toxicology and/or Pharmacology (13.2)]. Coadministration of VYTORIN with fibrates is not recommended until use in patients is studied. [See Warnings and Precautions (5.1).]
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.9 Coumarin Anticoagulants
                     
                        Simvastatin 20-40 mg/day modestly potentiated the effect of coumarin anticoagulants: the prothrombin time, reported as International Normalized Ratio (INR), increased from a baseline of 1.7 to 1.8 and from 2.6 to 3.4 in a normal volunteer study and in a hypercholesterolemic patient study, respectively. With other statins, clinically evident bleeding and/or increased prothrombin time has been reported in a few patients taking coumarin anticoagulants concomitantly. In such patients, prothrombin time should be determined before starting VYTORIN and frequently enough during early therapy to ensure that no significant alteration of prothrombin time occurs. Once a stable prothrombin time has been documented, prothrombin times can be monitored at the intervals usually recommended for patients on coumarin anticoagulants. If the dose of VYTORIN is changed or discontinued, the same procedure should be repeated. Simvastatin therapy has not been associated with bleeding or with changes in prothrombin time in patients not taking anticoagulants.
                        Concomitant administration of ezetimibe (10 mg once daily) had no significant effect on bioavailability of warfarin and prothrombin time in a study of twelve healthy adult males. There have been post-marketing reports of increased INR in patients who had ezetimibe added to warfarin. Most of these patients were also on other medications.
                        The effect of VYTORIN on the prothrombin time has not been studied.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         