
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  Dolasetron mesylate and its active metabolite, hydrodolasetron (MDL 74,156), are selective serotonin 5-HT3 receptor antagonists not shown to have activity at other known serotonin receptors and with low affinity for dopamine receptors. The serotonin 5-HT3 receptors are located on the nerve terminals of the vagus in the periphery and centrally in the chemoreceptor trigger zone of the area postrema. 
                  In healthy volunteers (N=64), dolasetron mesylate in single intravenous doses up to 5 mg/kg produced no effect on pupil size or meaningful changes in EEG tracings. Results from neuropsychiatric tests revealed that dolasetron mesylate did not alter mood or concentration. Multiple daily doses of dolasetron have had no effect on colonic transit in humans. Dolasetron mesylate has no effect on plasma prolactin concentrations.
               
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Effects on Electrocardiogram
                     
                        QTcF interval was evaluated in a randomized, placebo and active (moxifloxacin 400 mg once-daily) controlled crossover study in 80 healthy adults, with 14 measurements over 24 hours on Day 4.  The maximum mean (95% upper confidence bound) differences in QTcF from placebo after baseline-correction were 14.1 (16.1) and 36.6 (38.6) ms for 100 mg and supratherapeutic 300 mg ANZEMET administered intravenously, respectively.  ANZEMET 300 mg once daily resulted in approximately 3-fold higher mean Cmax values of dolasetron mesylate and its active metabolite hydrodolasetron on Day 4 compared to those observed with the therapeutic 100 mg ANZEMET dose.
                        Based on exposure-response analyses in healthy volunteers, QTc interval prolongation appears to be associated with concentrations of hydrodolasetron.  Using the established exposure-response relationship, the mean predicted increase (95% upper prediction interval) in QTcF intervals were 22.5 (23.9) and 21.2 (22.6) ms in pediatric and adult cancer patients following a single intravenous dose of 1.8 mg/kg.  
                        In the thorough QT study, exposure dependent prolongation of the PR and QRS interval was also noted in healthy subjects receiving ANZEMET.  The maximum mean (95% upper confidence bound) difference in PR from placebo after baseline-correction was 9.8 (11.6) ms and 33.1 (34.9) ms for 100 mg and supratherapeutic 300 mg ANZEMET, respectively.  The maximum mean (95% upper confidence bound) difference in QRS from placebo after baseline-correction was 3.5 (4.5) ms and 13 (14.5) ms for 100 mg and supratherapeutic 300 mg ANZEMET, respectively. Over one-fourth of the subjects treated with the 300 mg dose had an absolute PR over 200 ms and absolute QRS of over 110 ms post-treatment. A change from baseline ≥ 25% was noted in several of these subjects.  (see CONTRAINDICATIONS and WARNINGS)
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Pharmacokinetics in Humans
                     
                        Intravenous dolasetron mesylate is rapidly eliminated (t1/2<10 min) and completely metabolized to the most clinically relevant species, hydrodolasetron.
                        The reduction of dolasetron to hydrodolasetron is mediated by a ubiquitous enzyme, carbonyl reductase. Cytochrome P-450 (CYP)2D6 is primarily responsible for the subsequent hydroxylation of hydrodolasetron and both CYP3A and flavin monooxygenase are responsible for the N-oxidation of hydrodolasetron.
                        Hydrodolasetron is excreted in the urine unchanged (53.0% of administered intravenous dose). Other urinary metabolites include hydroxylated glucuronides and N-oxide.
                        Hydrodolasetron appeared rapidly in plasma, with a maximum concentration occurring approximately 0.6 hour after the end of intravenous treatment, and was eliminated with a mean half-life of 7.3 hours (%CV=24) and an apparent clearance of 9.4 mL/min/kg (%CV=28) in 24 adults. Hydrodolasetron is eliminated by multiple routes, including renal excretion and, after metabolism, mainly glucuronidation, and hydroxylation. Hydrodolasetron exhibits linear pharmacokinetics over the intravenous dose range of 50 to 200 mg and they are independent of infusion rate. Doses lower than 50 mg have not been studied. Two thirds of the administered dose is recovered in the urine and one third in the feces. Hydrodolasetron is widely distributed in the body with a mean apparent volume of distribution of 5.8 L/kg (%CV=25, N=24) in adults. 
                        Sixty-nine to 77% of hydrodolasetron is bound to plasma protein. In a study with 14C labeled dolasetron, the distribution of radioactivity to blood cells was not extensive. The binding of hydrodolasetron to α1-acid glycoprotein is approximately 50%. The pharmacokinetics of hydrodolasetron are linear and similar in men and women.
                        The pharmacokinetics of hydrodolasetron, in special and targeted patient populations following intravenous administration of ANZEMET Injection, are summarized in Table 1. The pharmacokinetics of hydrodolasetron are similar in adult (young and elderly) healthy volunteers. The apparent clearance of hydrodolasetron in pediatric and adolescent patients is 1.4 times to twofold higher than in adults. Following intravenous administration, the apparent clearance of hydrodolasetron remains unchanged with severe hepatic impairment and decreases 47% with severe renal impairment. No dose adjustment is necessary for elderly patients (see PRECAUTIONS, Geriatric Use) or for patients with hepatic or renal impairment.
                        In a pharmacokinetic study in 18 pediatric patients (2 to 11 years of age) undergoing surgery with general anesthesia and administered a single 1.2 mg/kg intravenous dose of ANZEMET Injection, mean apparent clearance was greater (40%) and terminal half-life shorter (36%) for hydrodolasetron than in healthy adults receiving the same dose.
                        For 12 pediatric patients, ages 2 to 12 years receiving 1.2 mg/kg ANZEMET Injection diluted in apple or apple-grape juice and administered orally, the mean apparent clearance was 34% greater and half-life was 21% shorter than in healthy adults receiving the same dose.
                        


                     



                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Clinical Studies
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Prevention of Postoperative Nausea and Vomiting
                           
                              ANZEMET Injection administered intravenously at a dose of 12.5 mg approximately 15 minutes before the cessation of general balanced anesthesia (short-acting barbiturate, nitrous oxide, narcotic and analgesic, and skeletal muscle relaxant) was significantly more effective than placebo in preventing postoperative nausea and vomiting. No increased efficacy was seen with higher doses.
                              One trial compared single intravenous ANZEMET Injection doses of 12.5, 25, 50, and 100 mg with placebo in 635 women surgical patients undergoing laparoscopic procedures. ANZEMET Injection at a dose of 12.5 mg was statistically superior to placebo for complete response (no vomiting, no rescue medication) (p=.0003). Complete response rates were 50% and 31%, respectively.
                              Another trial compared single intravenous ANZEMET Injection doses of 12.5, 25, 50, and 100 mg with placebo in 1030 (722 women and 308 men) surgical patients. In women, the 12.5 mg dose was statistically superior to placebo for complete response. The complete response rates were 50% and 40%, respectively. However, in men, there was no statistically significant difference in complete response between any ANZEMET dose and placebo.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Treatment of Postoperative Nausea and/or Vomiting
                           
                              Two randomized, double-blinded trials compared single intravenous ANZEMET Injection doses of 12.5, 25, 50, and 100 mg with placebo in 124 male and 833 female patients who had undergone surgery with general balanced anesthesia and presented with early postoperative nausea or vomiting requiring antiemetic treatment. 
                              In both studies, the 12.5 mg intravenous dose of ANZEMET was statistically superior to placebo for complete response (no vomiting, no escape medication). No significant increased efficacy was seen with higher doses.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         