
               
               
               12.      CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY

               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1    Mechanism of Action

                     
                        Amoxicillin is an antibacterial drug. [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.4)]

                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3    Pharmacokinetics

                     
                        Amoxicillin Extended-Release Tablets is an extended-release formulation of amoxicillin intended to provide once-daily dosing.  Following the administration of Amoxicillin Extended-Release Tablets with a low-fat meal in healthy subjects, mean amoxicillin AUC0-∞, Cmax, and Tmax values were 29.8 μg•h/mL, 6.6 μg/mL and 3.1 hours, respectively.  The mean plasma concentration-time curve is shown below in Figure 1.

                        Figure 1. Mean Amoxicillin Plasma Concentrations Following a Single Oral Dose of Amoxicillin Extended-Release Tablets With a Low-Fat Meal in Healthy Subjects (N=20)

                        
                        Administration of Amoxicillin Extended-Release Tablets with food decreases the rate, but not the extent of amoxicillin absorption.  Compared to immediate-release amoxicillin suspension, the rate of amoxicillin absorption following administration of Amoxicillin Extended-Release Tablets was slower, resulting in a lower Cmax and longer Tmax.  Total amoxicillin exposure (AUC) achieved with Amoxicillin Extended-Release Tablets is similar to that observed after oral administration of a comparable dose of immediate-release amoxicillin suspension.

                         Amoxicillin diffuses readily into most body tissues and fluids, with the exception of brain and spinal fluid, except when meninges are inflamed.  Amoxicillin is approximately 20% protein bound in human serum.

                        Amoxicillin is primarily cleared by renal excretion.  Approximately 60% of an oral dose of immediate-release amoxicillin is eliminated unchanged in urine.  The half-life of amoxicillin after oral administration of Amoxicillin Extended-Release Tablets is approximately 1.5 hours, similar to that of immediate-release amoxicillin.  No accumulation of amoxicillin was observed after once-daily dosing of 775 mg of Amoxicillin Extended-Release Tablets for 7 days.

                        
                           Drug Interactions
                        
                         In a study of healthy adult subjects, amoxicillin AUC was similar whereas Cmax  increased approximately 35% following the administration of lansoprazole with Amoxicillin Extended-Release Tablets given with food.

                         Probenecid decreases the renal tubular secretion of amoxicillin.  Concurrent use of Amoxicillin Extended-Release Tablets and probenecid may result in increased and prolonged blood levels of amoxicillin.  The clinical relevance of this finding has not been evaluated.

                     
                     
                     
                        
                           Figure 1

                           
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.4    Microbiology

                     
                     
                        
                           
                              To reduce the development of drug-resistant bacteria and maintain the effectiveness of Amoxicillin Extended-Release Tablets and other antibacterial drugs, Amoxicillin Extended-Release Tablets should be used only to treat or prevent infections that are proven or strongly suspected to be caused by bacteria. (12.4)

                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Mechanism of Action
                              
                              Amoxicillin is similar to penicillin in its bacterial action against susceptible organisms during the stage of active multiplication.  It acts through the inhibition of cell wall biosynthesis that leads to the death of the bacteria.

                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Mechanism of Resistance
                              
                              To date there are no known mechanisms of resistance to penicillin or amoxicillin in Streptococcus pyogenes.
                              
                              
                                 Antimicrobial Activity
                              
                              Amoxicillin has been shown to be active in vitro against isolates of the microorganism S. pyogenes and in clinical infections as described in the INDICATIONS AND USAGE section.

                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Gram-Positive Bacteria:
                              
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Streptococcus pyogenes
                                    
                                    The following in vitro data are available, but their clinical significance is unknown.  At least 90% of the following microorganisms exhibit an in vitro minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) less than or equal to the susceptibility breakpoint of amoxicillin (as determined by susceptibility tests using the class representative agents penicillin or ampicillin).

                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Gram-Positive Bacteria:
                              
                              
                                 Streptococcus spp. (Group B, C, and G; Beta-hemolytic)

                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Susceptibility Test Methods:
                                    
                                    When available, the clinical microbiology laboratory should provide cumulative in vitro susceptibility test results for antimicrobial drugs used in local hospitals and practice areas to the physician as periodic reports that describe the susceptibility profile of nosocomial and community-acquired pathogens.  These reports should aid the physician in selecting the most effective antimicrobial.

                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Dilution Techniques
                              
                              Quantitative methods are used to determine antimicrobial MICs.  These MICs provide estimates of the susceptibility of bacteria to antimicrobial compounds.  The MICs should be determined using a standardized method (broth or agar)1,2.

                              Susceptibility of beta-hemolytic streptococcal isolates to amoxicillin may be inferred by testing penicillin.  An organism that is susceptible to penicillin can be considered susceptible to amoxicillin when used for approved indications2.  If testing is performed, any beta hemolytic streptococcal isolate found to be nonsusceptible should be reidentified, retested, and if confirmed, submitted to a public health laboratory.

                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Quality Control
                              
                              Standardized susceptibility test procedures1,2 require the use of laboratory controls to monitor and ensure the accuracy and precision of the supplies and reagents used in the assay, and the techniques of the individuals performing the test.  Standard amoxicillin powder should provide the following range of MIC values provided in Table 2.2
                              
                              


