
                     
                     
                     Drug Interactions
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 ACE Inhibitors, Angiotensin II Receptor Antagonists, Aldosterone Blockers, Potassium Supplements, Heparin, Low Molecular Weight Heparin, and Other Drugs Known to Cause Hyperkalemia
                              
                           
                           
                              Concomitant administration may lead to severe hyperkalemia.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Alcohol, Barbiturates or Narcotics
                              
                           
                           
                              Potentiation of orthostatic hypotension may occur.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Antidiabetic Drugs
                              
                           
                           
                              (e.g., oral agents, insulin): Dosage adjustment of the antidiabetic drug may be required (see PRECAUTIONS).
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Corticosteroids, ACTH
                              
                           
                           
                              Intensified electrolyte depletion, particularly hypokalemia, may occur.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Pressor Amines (e.g., norepinephrine)
                              
                           
                           
                              Both spironolactone and hydrochlorothiazide reduce the vascular responsiveness to norepinephrine. Therefore, caution should be exercised in the management of patients subjected to regional or general anesthesia while they are being treated with spironolactone and hydrochlorothiazide.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Skeletal Muscle Relaxants, Nondepolarizing (e.g., tubocurarine)
                              
                           
                           
                              Possible increased responsiveness to the muscle relaxant may result.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Lithium
                              
                           
                           
                              Lithium generally should not be given with diuretics. Diuretic agents reduce the renal clearance of lithium and add a high risk of lithium toxicity.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Non-steroidal Anti-Inflammatory Drugs (NSAIDs)
                              
                           
                           
                              In some patients, the administration of an NSAID can reduce the diuretic, natriuretic, and antihypertensive effects of loop, potassium-sparing, and thiazide diuretics. Combination of NSAIDs, e.g., indomethacin, with potassium-sparing diuretics has been associated with severe hyperkalemia. Therefore, when spironolactone and hydrochlorothiazide and NSAIDs are used concomitantly, the patient should be observed closely to determine if the desired effect of the diuretic is obtained.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Digoxin
                              
                           
                           
                              Spironolactone has been shown to increase the half-life of digoxin. This may result in increased serum digoxin levels and subsequent digitalis toxicity. Monitor serum digoxin levels and adjust dose accordingly. Thiazide-induced electrolyte disturbances, i.e. hypokalemia, hypomagnesemia, increase the risk of digoxin toxicity, which may lead to fatal arrhythmic events (see PRECAUTIONS).
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Cholestyramine
                              
                           
                           
                              Hyperkalemic metabolic acidosis has been reported in patients given spironolactone concurrently with cholestyramine.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               