
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     General
                     
                        Tenecteplase is a modified form of human tissue
									plasminogen activator (tPA) that binds to fibrin and converts
									plasminogen to plasmin. In the presence of fibrin, in vitro studies demonstrate
									that Tenecteplase conversion of plasminogen to plasmin is
									increased relative to its conversion in the absence of fibrin.
									This fibrin specificity decreases systemic activation of
									plasminogen and the resulting degradation of circulating
									fibrinogen as compared to a molecule lacking this property.
									Following administration of 30, 40, or 50 mg of TNKase, there
									are decreases in circulating fibrinogen
									(4%–15%) and plasminogen
									(11%–24%). The clinical significance
									of fibrin-specificity on safety (e.g., bleeding) or efficacy has
									not been established. Biological potency is determined by an in vitro clot lysis
									assay and is expressed in Tenecteplase-specific units. The
									specific activity of Tenecteplase has been defined as 200
									units/mg. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        In patients with acute myocardial infarction (AMI),
									TNKase administered as a single bolus exhibits a biphasic
									disposition from the plasma. Tenecteplase was cleared from the
									plasma with an initial half-life of 20 to 24 minutes. The
									terminal phase half-life of Tenecteplase was 90 to 130 minutes.
									In 99 of 104 patients treated with Tenecteplase, mean plasma
									clearance ranged from 99 to 119 mL/min.
                        The initial volume of distribution is weight related and
									approximates plasma volume. Liver metabolism is the major
									clearance mechanism for Tenecteplase.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         