
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Teduglutide is an analog of naturally occurring human glucagon-like peptide-2 (GLP-2), a peptide secreted by L-cells of the distal intestine. GLP-2 is known to increase intestinal and portal blood flow, and inhibit gastric acid secretion. Teduglutide binds to the glucagon-like peptide-2 receptors located in intestinal subpopulations of enteroendocrine cells, subepithelial myofibroblasts and enteric neurons of the submucosal and myenteric plexus.  Activation of these receptors results in the local release of multiple mediators including insulin-like growth factor (IGF)-1, nitric oxide and keratinocyte growth factor (KGF).
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        The ability of GATTEX to improve intestinal absorption was studied in 17 adult subjects with Short Bowel Syndrome using daily doses of 0.03, 0.10, 0.15 mg/kg (N=2-3 per dose group) in a 21-day, open-label, multi-center, dose-ranging study.  All subcutaneous (abdomen) doses studied, except 0.03 mg/kg once daily, resulted in enhanced gastrointestinal fluid (wet weight) absorption of approximately 750-1000 mL/day, and increased villus height and crypt depth of the intestinal mucosa.
                         At a dose 5 times the maximum recommended dose, teduglutide did not prolong the QTc interval to any clinically relevant extent.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Absorption:
                              
                              In healthy subjects, GATTEX administered subcutaneously had an absolute bioavailability of 88% and reached maximum plasma teduglutide concentrations at 3-5 hours after administration. Following a 0.05 mg/kg subcutaneous dose in SBS subjects, the median peak teduglutide concentration (Cmax) was 36 ng/mL and the median area under the curve (AUC0-inf) was 0.15 µg•hr/mL. No accumulation of teduglutide was observed following repeated subcutaneous administrations.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Distribution:
                              
                              In healthy subjects, teduglutide has a volume of distribution (103 mL/kg) similar to blood volume.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Metabolism:
                              
                              The metabolic pathway of teduglutide was not investigated in humans. However, teduglutide is expected to be degraded into small peptides and amino acids via catabolic pathways, similar to the catabolism of endogenous GLP-2.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Elimination:
                              
                              In healthy subjects, teduglutide plasma clearance was approximately 123 mL/hr/kg which is similar to the GFR suggesting that teduglutide is primarily cleared by the kidney. Teduglutide has a mean terminal half-life (t1/2) of approximately 2 hours in healthy subjects and 1.3 hours in SBS subjects.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Dose Linearity:
                              
                              The Cmax and AUC of teduglutide was dose proportional over the dose range of 0.05 to 0.4 mg/kg GATTEX.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Hepatic Impairment:
                              
                              Subjects with moderate hepatic impairment had lower teduglutide Cmax and AUC (10 ~15%) compared to healthy matched control subjects after a single subcutaneous dose of 20 mg GATTEX. Teduglutide PK was not assessed in subjects with severe hepatic impairment.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Renal Impairment:
                              
                              In subjects with moderate to severe renal impairment or end stage renal disease (ESRD), teduglutide Cmax and AUC0-inf increased with the degree of renal impairment following a single subcutaneous administration of 10 mg teduglutide.  Teduglutide exposure increased by a factor of 2.1 (Cmax) and 2.6 (AUC0-inf) in ESRD subjects compared to healthy subjects.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Geriatric Patients:
                              
                              No differences were observed between healthy subjects younger than 65 years and those older than 65 years.  Experience in subjects 75 years and above is limited.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Gender:
                              
                              No clinically relevant gender differences were observed.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         