
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  
                     In vitro studies and in vivo pharmacologic studies have demonstrated that metaproterenol sulfate has a preferential effect on beta2 adrenergic receptors compared with isoproterenol. While it is recognized that beta2 adrenergic receptors are the predominant receptors in bronchial smooth muscle, recent data indicate that there is a population of beta2 receptors in the human heart existing in a concentration between 10 to 50%. The precise function of these, however, is not yet established (see WARNINGS section).
                  The pharmacologic effects of beta adrenergic agonist drugs, including metaproterenol, are at least in part attributable to stimulation through beta adrenergic receptors of intracellular adenyl cyclase, the enzyme which catalyzes the conversion of adenosine triphosphate (ATP) to cyclic-3’, 5’ -adenosine monophosphate (c-AMP). Increased c-AMP levels are associated with relaxation of bronchial smooth muscle and inhibition of release of mediators of immediate hypersensitivity from cells, especially from mast cells.
                  
                     PHARMACOKINETICS: Absorption, biotransformation and excretion studies in humans following oral administration have indicated that an average of less than 10% of the drug is absorbed intact; it is not metabolized by catechol-0-methyltransferase nor converted to glucuronide conjugates but is excreted primarily as the sulfate conjugate formed in the gut.
                  Pulmonary function tests performed after the administration of metaproterenol usually show improvement, e.g., an increase in the one-second forced expiratory volume (FEV1), maximum expiratory flow rate, peak expiratory flow rate, forced vital capacity, and/or a decrease in airway resistance. The resultant decrease in airway obstruction may relieve the dyspnea associated with bronchospasm.
                  Pulmonary function has been monitored in controlled single- and multiple-dose studies. The duration of effect of a single dose of metaproterenol sulfate syrup (that is, the period of time during which there is a 15% or greater increase in mean FEV1) was up to 4 hours. Recent studies in laboratory animals (minipigs, rodents and dogs) recorded the occurrence of cardiac arrhythmias and sudden death (with histologic evidence of myocardial necrosis) when beta agonists and methylxanthines were administered concurrently. The significance of these findings when applied to humans is currently unknown.

                  
               
               
            
         