
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  
               
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        
                           Adapalene 
                        
                        Adapalene binds to specific retinoic acid nuclear receptors but does not bind to cytosolic receptor protein. Biochemical and pharmacological profile studies have demonstrated that adapalene is a modulator of cellular differentiation, keratinization and inflammatory processes. However, the significance of these findings with regard to the mechanism of action of adapalene for the treatment of acne is unknown.
                        
                           Benzoyl peroxide
                        
                        Benzoyl peroxide is an oxidizing agent with bacteriocidal and keratolytic effects.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        Pharmacodynamics of EPIDUO gel is unknown.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        A pharmacokinetic study was conducted in 24 subjects with acne vulgaris who were treated once daily for 30 days with 2 grams/day of EPIDUO gel applied to 1000 cm2 of acne involved skin, (face, chest, and upper back).
                        Two subjects (20%) had quantifiable adapalene plasma concentrations above the limit of quantification (LOQ = 0.1ng/mL). The highest adapalene Cmax and AUC0-24h was 0.21 ng/mL and 1.99 ng•h/mL, respectively. Excretion of adapalene appears to be primarily by the biliary route.
                        Benzoyl peroxide is absorbed by the skin where it is converted to benzoic acid and eliminated in the urine.
                     
                  
               
            
         