
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Aztreonam is an antibacterial drug [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.4)
                           ].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Sputum Concentrations
                              
                              Sputum aztreonam concentrations exhibited considerable variability between patients receiving CAYSTON (75 mg) in clinical trials. The mean sputum concentration 10 minutes following the first dose of CAYSTON (n = 195 patients with CF) was 726 mcg/g. Mean sputum concentrations of aztreonam in patients receiving CAYSTON 3 times a day for 28 days were 984 mcg/g, 793 mcg/g, and 715 mcg/g 10 minutes after dose administration on Days 0, 14, and 28, respectively, indicating no accumulation of aztreonam in sputum.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Plasma Concentrations
                              
                              Plasma aztreonam concentrations exhibited considerable variability between patients receiving CAYSTON (75 mg) in the clinical trials. The mean plasma concentration one hour following the first dose of CAYSTON (at approximately the peak plasma concentration) was 0.59 mcg/mL.  Mean peak plasma concentrations in patients receiving CAYSTON 3 times a day for 28 days were 0.55 mcg/mL, 0.67 mcg/mL, and 0.65 mcg/mL on Days 0, 14, and 28, respectively, indicating no systemic accumulation of aztreonam.  In contrast, the serum concentration of aztreonam following administration of aztreonam for injection (500 mg) is approximately 54 mcg/mL.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Absorption
                              
                              Evaluation of plasma and urine aztreonam concentrations following administration of CAYSTON indicates low systemic absorption of aztreonam. Approximately 10% of the total CAYSTON dose is excreted in the urine as unchanged drug, as compared to 60–65% following intravenous administration of aztreonam for injection.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Distribution
                              
                              The protein binding of aztreonam in serum is approximately 56% and is independent of dose.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Metabolism
                              
                              Following intramuscular administration of aztreonam for injection 500 mg every 8 hours for 7 days, approximately 6% of the dose was excreted as a microbiologically inactive open β-lactam ring hydrolysis product in an 8-hour urine collection on the last day of multiple dosing.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Excretion
                              
                              The elimination half-life of aztreonam from plasma is approximately 2.1 hours following administration of CAYSTON to adult patients with CF, similar to what has been reported for aztreonam for injection. Approximately 10% of the total CAYSTON dose is excreted in the urine as unchanged drug.  Systemically absorbed aztreonam is eliminated about equally by active tubular secretion and glomerular filtration. Following administration of a single intravenous dose of radiolabeled aztreonam for injection, about 12% of the dose was recovered in the feces.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.4 Microbiology
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Mechanism of Action
                              
                              Aztreonam exhibits activity in vitro against Gram-negative aerobic pathogens including P. aeruginosa.  Aztreonam binds to penicillin-binding proteins of susceptible bacteria, which leads to inhibition of bacterial cell wall synthesis and death of the cell. Aztreonam activity is not decreased in the presence of CF lung secretions.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Susceptibility Testing
                              
                              A single sputum sample from a patient with CF may contain multiple morphotypes of P. aeruginosa and each morphotype may have a different level of in vitro susceptibility to aztreonam.  There are no in vitro susceptibility test interpretive criteria for isolates of P. aeruginosa obtained from the sputum of CF patients.1
                              
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Development of Resistance
                              
                              No changes in the susceptibility of P. aeruginosa to aztreonam were observed following a 28-day course of CAYSTON in the placebo-controlled trials.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Cross-Resistance
                              
                              No cross-resistance to other classes of antibiotics, including aminoglycosides, quinolones, and beta-lactams, was observed following a 28-day course of CAYSTON in the Phase 3 placebo-controlled trials or in an open-label follow-on trial of up to nine 28-day courses of 75 mg CAYSTON 3 times a day.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Other
                              
                              No trends in the treatment-emergent isolation of other bacterial respiratory pathogens (Burkholderia cepacia, Stenotrophomonas maltophilia, Achromobacter xylosoxidans, and Staphylococcus aureus) were observed in clinical trials.  There was a slight increase in the isolation of Candida spp. following up to nine 28-day courses of CAYSTON therapy.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         