
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                            Methotrexate: Increases methotrexate plasma levels. (7.4)
                            Aspirin: Use not recommended. (7.5)
                            Angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors, diuretics, beta-blockers: May reduce antihypertensive effects. (7.7)
                            Lithium: Increases lithium plasma levels. (7.9)
                            Warfarin: Higher risk of serious gastrointestinal bleeding. (7.12)
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 Ergot-Containing Drugs
                     
                        Ergot-containing drugs have been reported to cause prolonged vasospastic reactions. Because these effects may be additive, use of ergotamine-containing or ergot-type medications (like dihydroergotamine or methysergide) and TREXIMET within 24 hours of each other is contraindicated.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 Monoamine Oxidase-A Inhibitors
                     
                        MAO-A inhibitors increase systemic exposure of orally administered sumatriptan by 7-fold. Therefore, the use of TREXIMET in patients receiving MAO-A inhibitors is contraindicated.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3 Other 5-HT1 Agonists
                     
                        Because their vasospastic effects may be additive, coadministration of TREXIMET and other 5-HT1 agonists (e.g., triptans) within 24 hours of each other is contraindicated.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4 Methotrexate
                     
                        Naproxen sodium and other NSAIDs have been reported to reduce the tubular secretion of methotrexate in an animal model, possibly increasing the toxicity of methotrexate. Concomitant administration of some NSAIDs with high-dose methotrexate therapy has been reported to elevate and prolong serum methotrexate levels, resulting in deaths from severe hematologic and gastrointestinal toxicity. During concomitant use of TREXIMET and methotrexate, monitor patients for methotrexate toxicity.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.5 Aspirin
                     
                        When naproxen is administered with aspirin (>1 gram/day), its protein binding is reduced, although the clearance of free naproxen is not altered. Concomitant administration of TREXIMET and aspirin is not generally recommended because of the increased risk of bleeding [see Warnings and Precautions (5.2)].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.6 Selective Serotonin Reuptake Inhibitors/Serotonin Norepinephrine Reuptake Inhibitors and Serotonin Syndrome
                     
                        Cases of serotonin syndrome have been reported during coadministration of triptans and SSRIs, SNRIs, TCAs, and MAO inhibitors [see Warnings and Precautions (5.10)].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.7 Angiotensin-Converting Enzyme Inhibitors
                     
                        NSAIDs may diminish the antihypertensive effect of angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors. The use of TREXIMET in patients who are receiving ACE inhibitors may potentiate renal disease states [see Warnings and Precautions (5.11)]. Monitor for signs of worsening renal function during concomitant use of TREXIMET and ACE-inhibitors in patients who are elderly, volume-depleted, or have impaired renal function.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.8 Diuretics
                     
                        Clinical trials, as well as postmarketing observations, have shown that NSAIDs can reduce the natriuretic effect of furosemide and thiazides in some patients. This response has been attributed to inhibition of renal prostaglandin synthesis. During concomitant use of TREXIMET, observe patients for signs of renal failure, in addition to assuring diuretic efficacy [see Warnings and Precautions (5.11)].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.9 Lithium
                     
                        NSAIDs elevated plasma lithium levels and a reduced renal lithium clearance. The mean minimum lithium concentration increased 15%, and the renal clearance was decreased by approximately 20%. These effects have been attributed to NSAID inhibition of renal prostaglandin synthesis. During concomitant use of TREXIMET and lithium, monitor patients for signs of lithium toxicity.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.10 Probenecid
                     
                        Probenecid given concurrently increases naproxen anion plasma levels and extends its plasma half-life significantly.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.11 Propranolol and Other Beta-Blockers
                     
                        Propranolol 80 mg given twice daily had no significant effect on sumatriptan pharmacokinetics. Naproxen and other NSAIDs can reduce the antihypertensive effect of propranolol and other beta-blockers.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.12 Warfarin
                     
                        The effects of warfarin and NSAIDs on gastrointestinal bleeding are synergistic, such that patients taking both drugs have a higher risk of serious gastrointestinal bleeding than patients taking either drug alone.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.13 Drug/Laboratory Test Interactions
                     
                        Naproxen may decrease platelet aggregation and prolong bleeding time. This effect should be kept in mind when bleeding times are determined.
                        The administration of naproxen sodium may result in increased urinary values for 17-ketogenic steroids because of an interaction between the drug and/or its metabolites with m-di-nitrobenzene used in this assay. Although 17-hydroxy-corticosteroid measurements (Porter-Silber test) do not appear to be artificially altered, it is suggested that therapy with naproxen be temporarily discontinued 72 hours before adrenal function tests are performed if the Porter-Silber test is to be used.
                        Naproxen may interfere with some urinary assays of 5-hydroxy indoleacetic acid (5HIAA).
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         