
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        TREXIMET contains sumatriptan and naproxen.
                        Sumatriptan binds with high affinity to cloned 5-HT1B/1D receptors. Sumatriptan presumably exerts its therapeutic effects in the treatment of migraine headache through agonist effects at the 5-HT1B/1D receptors on intracranial blood vessels and sensory nerves of the trigeminal system, which result in cranial vessel constriction and inhibition of neuropeptide release.
                        Naproxen is an NSAID with analgesic and antipyretic properties. The mechanism of action of naproxen, like that of other NSAIDs, is not completely understood but may be related to prostaglandin synthetase inhibition.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Blood Pressure
                              
                              In a randomized, double-blind, parallel group, active control trial, TREXIMET 85/500 mg administered intermittently over 6 months did not increase blood pressure in a normotensive adult population (n = 122). However, significant elevation in blood pressure has been reported with 5-HT1 agonists and NSAIDs in patients with and without a history of hypertension.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Absorption and Bioavailability
                              
                              Sumatriptan, when given as TREXIMET 85/500 mg, has a mean Cmax similar to that of sumatriptan succinate 100 mg tablets alone. The median Tmax of sumatriptan, when given as TREXIMET 85/500 mg, was 1 hour (range: 0.3 to 4.0 hours), which is slightly different compared with sumatriptan succinate 100 mg tablets (median Tmax of 1.5 hours). Naproxen, when given as TREXIMET 85/500 mg, has a Cmax which is approximately 36% lower than naproxen sodium 550 mg tablets and a median Tmax of 5 hours (range: 0.3 to 12 hours), which is approximately 4 hours later than from naproxen sodium tablets 550 mg. AUC values for sumatriptan and for naproxen are similar for TREXIMET 85/500 mg compared with sumatriptan succinate 100 mg tablets or naproxen sodium 550 mg tablets, respectively. In a crossover trial in 16 subjects, the pharmacokinetics of both components administered as TREXIMET 85/500 mg were similar during a migraine attack and during a migraine-free period.
                              Bioavailability of sumatriptan is approximately 15%, primarily due to presystemic (first-pass) metabolism and partly due to incomplete absorption.
                              Naproxen is absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract with an in vivo bioavailability of 95%.
                              Food had no significant effect on the bioavailability of sumatriptan or naproxen administered as TREXIMET, but slightly delayed the Tmax of sumatriptan by about 0.6 hour [see Dosage and Administration (2.3)].
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Distribution
                              
                              Plasma protein binding is 14% to 21%. The effect of sumatriptan on the protein binding of other drugs has not been evaluated. The volume of distribution of sumatriptan is 2.7 L/kg.
                              The volume of distribution of naproxen is 0.16 L/kg. At therapeutic levels naproxen is greater than 99% albumin bound. At doses of naproxen greater than 500 mg/day, there is a less-than-proportional increase in plasma levels due to an increase in clearance caused by saturation of plasma protein binding at higher doses (average trough Css = 36.5, 49.2, and 56.4 mg/L with 500-; 1,000-; and 1,500-mg daily doses of naproxen, respectively). However, the concentration of unbound naproxen continues to increase proportionally to dose.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Metabolism
                              
                              In vitro studies with human microsomes suggest that sumatriptan is metabolized by monoamine oxidase (MAO), predominantly the A isoenzyme. No significant effect was seen with an MAO-B inhibitor.
                              Naproxen is extensively metabolized to 6-0-desmethyl naproxen, and both parent and metabolites do not induce metabolizing enzymes.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Elimination
                              
                              The elimination half-life of sumatriptan is approximately 2 hours. Radiolabeled 14C-sumatriptan administered orally is largely renally excreted (about 60%), with about 40% found in the feces. Most of a radiolabeled dose of sumatriptan excreted in the urine is the major metabolite indole acetic acid (IAA) or the IAA glucuronide, both of which are inactive. Three percent of the dose can be recovered as unchanged sumatriptan.
                              
                              The clearance of naproxen is 0.13 mL/min/kg. Approximately 95% of the naproxen from any dose is excreted in the urine, primarily as naproxen (less than 1%), 6-0-desmethyl naproxen (less than 1%), or their conjugates (66% to 92%). The plasma half-life of the naproxen anion in humans is approximately 19 hours. The corresponding half-lives of both metabolites and conjugates of naproxen are shorter than 12 hours, and their rates of excretion have been found to coincide closely with the rate of naproxen disappearance from the plasma. In patients with renal failure, metabolites may accumulate.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Specific Populations
                              
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Geriatrics
                                    
                                    The pharmacokinetics of TREXIMET in geriatric patients have not been studied. Elderly patients are more likely to have decreased hepatic function and decreased renal function [see Specific Populations (8.5)].
                                    The pharmacokinetics of oral sumatriptan in the elderly (mean age: 72 years, 2 males and 4 females) and in patients with migraine (mean age: 38 years, 25 males and 155 females) were similar to that in healthy male subjects (mean age: 30 years).
                                    Studies indicate that although total plasma concentration of naproxen is unchanged, the unbound plasma fraction, which represents <1% of the total concentration, increased in the elderly (range of unbound trough naproxen from 0.12% to 0.19% in elderly subjects versus 0.05% to 0.075% in younger subjects).
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Pediatrics
                                    
                                    A pharmacokinetic study compared 3 doses of TREXIMET in pediatric patients 12 to 17 years of age (n=24) with adults (n=26). The AUC and Cmax of sumatriptan were 50-60% higher following a single dose of TREXIMET 10/60 mg in pediatric patients 12 to 17 years of age (n=7) compared with adult subjects (n=8), and were 6-26% higher following a single dose of TREXIMET 30/180 mg or 85/500 mg in pediatrics than adults. Naproxen pharmacokinetic parameters were similar between pediatrics and adults.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Renal Impairment
                                    
                                    The effect of renal impairment on the pharmacokinetics of TREXIMET has not been studied. Since naproxen and its metabolites and conjugates are primarily excreted by the kidney, the potential exists for naproxen metabolites to accumulate in the presence of renal insufficiency. Elimination of naproxen is decreased in patients with severe renal impairment. [see Warnings and Precautions (5.11), Use in Specific Populations (8.6)].
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Hepatic Impairment
                                    
                                    The effect of hepatic impairment on the pharmacokinetics of TREXIMET has not been studied. In a study in patients with moderate hepatic impairment (n = 8) matched for sex, age, and weight with healthy subjects (n = 8), patients with hepatic impairment had an approximately 70% increase in AUC and Cmax of sumatriptan and a Tmax 40 minutes earlier compared to healthy subjects. The pharmacokinetics of sumatriptan in patients with severe hepatic impairment has not been studied.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Gender
                                    
                                    In a pooled analysis of 5 pharmacokinetic trials, there was no effect of gender on the systemic exposure of TREXIMET.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Race
                                    
                                    The effect of race on the pharmacokinetics of TREXIMET has not been studied. The systemic clearance and Cmax of sumatriptan were similar in black (n = 34) and white (n = 38) healthy male subjects.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         