
                     
                     
                     Drug Interactions
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Highly Protein Bound Drugs
                           
                              Piroxicam is highly protein bound and, therefore, might be expected to displace other protein bound drugs. Physicians should closely monitor patients for a change in dosage requirements when administering Piroxicam Capsules USP to patients on other highly protein bound drugs.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Aspirin
                           
                              When piroxicam is administered with aspirin, its protein binding is reduced, although the clearance of free piroxicam is not altered. Plasma levels of piroxicam are depressed to approximately 80% of their normal values when piroxicam is administered (20 mg/day) in conjunction with aspirin (3900 mg/day). The clinical significance of this interaction is not known; however, as with other NSAIDs, concomitant administration of piroxicam and aspirin is not generally recommended because of the potential for increased adverse effects. 
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Methotrexate
                           
                              NSAIDs have been reported to competitively inhibit methotrexate accumulation in rabbit kidney slices. This may indicate that they could enhance the toxicity of methotrexate. Caution should be used when NSAIDs are administered concomitantly with methotrexate. 
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           ACE-Inhibitors
                           
                              Reports suggest that NSAIDs may diminish the antihypertensive effect of ACE-inhibitors. This interaction should be given consideration in patients taking NSAIDs concomitantly with ACE-inhibitors. 
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Diuretics
                           
                              Clinical studies, as well as postmarketing observations, have shown that Piroxicam Capsules USP can reduce the natriuretic effect of furosemide and thiazides in some patients. This response has been attributed to inhibition of renal prostaglandin synthesis. During concomitant therapy with NSAIDs, the patient should be observed closely for signs of renal failure (see 
                                    WARNINGS: Renal Effects
                                 ), as well as to assure diuretic efficacy.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Lithium
                           
                               NSAIDs have produced an elevation of plasma lithium levels and a reduction in renal lithium clearance. The mean minimum lithium concentration increased 15% and the renal clearance was decreased by approximately 20%. These effects have been attributed to inhibition of renal prostaglandin synthesis by the NSAID. Thus, when NSAIDs and lithium are administered concurrently, subjects should be observed carefully for signs of lithium toxicity.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Warfarin
                           
                               The effects of warfarin and NSAIDs on GI bleeding are synergistic, such that users of both drugs together have a risk of serious GI bleeding higher than users of either drug alone. 
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               