
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Fexofenadine hydrochloride,
the major active metabolite of terfenadine, is an antihistamine with
selective peripheral H1-receptor antagonist activity. Both
enantiomers of fexofenadine hydrochloride displayed approximately
equipotent antihistaminic effects. Fexofenadine hydrochloride inhibited
antigen-induced bronchospasm in sensitized guinea pigs and histamine
release from peritoneal mast cells in rats. The clinical significance
of these findings is unknown. In laboratory animals, no anticholinergic
or alpha1-adrenergic blocking effects were observed. Moreover,
no sedative or other central nervous system effects were observed.
Radiolabeled tissue distribution studies in rats indicated that fexofenadine
does not cross the blood-brain barrier. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        The pharmacokinetics
of fexofenadine hydrochloride in subjects with seasonal allergic rhinitis
and subjects with chronic urticaria were similar to those in healthy
volunteers.
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Absorption
                           
                              Fexofenadine
hydrochloride was rapidly absorbed following oral administration of
a single dose of two 60 mg capsules to healthy male volunteers with
a mean time to maximum plasma concentration occurring at 2.6 hours
post-dose. After administration of a single 60 mg capsule to healthy
volunteers, the mean maximum plasma concentration was 131 ng/mL. Following
single dose oral administrations of either the 60 and 180 mg tablet
to healthy adult male volunteers, mean maximum plasma concentrations
were 142 and 494 ng/mL, respectively. The tablet formulations are
bioequivalent to the capsule when administered at equal doses. Fexofenadine
hydrochloride pharmacokinetics are linear for oral doses up to a total
daily dose of 240 mg (120 mg twice daily). The administration of the
60 mg capsule contents mixed with applesauce did not have a significant
effect on the pharmacokinetics of fexofenadine in adults.
                              Co-administration
of 180 mg fexofenadine hydrochloride tablet with a high fat meal decreased
the AUC and Cmax of fexofenadine by 21 and 20% respectively.  
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Distribution
                           
                              Fexofenadine
hydrochloride is 60% to 70% bound to plasma proteins, primarily albumin
and α1-acid glycoprotein.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Metabolism
                           
                              Approximately
5% of the total dose of fexofenadine hydrochloride was eliminated
by hepatic metabolism.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Elimination
                           
                              The mean
elimination half-life of fexofenadine was 14.4 hours following administration
of 60mg, twice daily, in healthy volunteers.
                              Human mass balance studies documented a recovery of approximately
80% and 11% of the [14C] fexofenadine hydrochloride dose
in the feces and urine, respectively. Because the absolute bioavailability
of fexofenadine hydrochloride has not been established, it is unknown
if the fecal component represents primarily unabsorbed drug or the
result of biliary excretion.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Special Populations
                           
                              Pharmacokinetics
in special populations (for renal, hepatic impairment, and age), obtained
after a single dose of 80 mg fexofenadine hydrochloride, were compared
to those from healthy volunteers in a separate study of similar design.
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Geriatric Subjects
                                 
                                     In older subjects (≥65 years old), peak plasma levels of
fexofenadine were 99% greater than those observed in younger subjects
(<65 years old). Mean fexofenadine elimination half-lives were
similar to those observed in younger subjects.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Pediatric Subjects
                                 
                                    Cross study comparisons indicated that fexofenadine area under the
curve (AUC) following oral administration of a 60 mg dose of fexofenadine
hydrochloride to 7–12 year old pediatric subjects with allergic
rhinitis was 56% greater compared to healthy adult volunteers
given the same dose. Plasma exposure in pediatric subjects given 30
mg fexofenadine hydrochloride is comparable to adults given 60 mg.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Renally Impaired
                                 
                                    In subjects with mild to moderate (creatinine clearance 41–80
mL/min) and severe (creatinine clearance 11–40 mL/min) renal
impairment, peak plasma levels of fexofenadine were 87% and 111% greater,
respectively, and mean elimination half-lives were 59% and 72% longer,
respectively, than observed in healthy volunteers. Peak plasma levels
in subjects on dialysis (creatinine clearance ≤10 mL/min) were
82% greater and half-life was 31% longer than observed in healthy
volunteers. Based on increases in bioavailability and half-life, a
dose of 60 mg once daily is recommended as the starting dose in patients
with decreased renal function. (See DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION).
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Hepatically Impaired
                                 
                                    The pharmacokinetics of fexofenadine in subjects with hepatic disease
did not differ substantially from that observed in healthy volunteers.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Effect of Gender
                                 
                                    Across several trials, no clinically significant gender-related differences
were observed in the pharmacokinetics of fexofenadine hydrochloride.
                                    
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Pharmacodynamics
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Wheal and Flare
                           
                              Human histamine
skin wheal and flare studies following single and twice daily doses
of 20 and 40 mg fexofenadine hydrochloride demonstrated that the drug
exhibits an antihistamine effect by 1 hour, achieves maximum effect
at 2 to 3 hours, and an effect is still seen at 12 hours. There was
no evidence of tolerance to these effects after 28 days of dosing.
The clinical significance of these observations is unknown. 
                              Histamine skin
wheal and flare studies in 7 to 12 year old subjects showed that following
a single dose of 30 or 60 mg, antihistamine effect was observed at
1 hour and reached a maximum by 3 hours. Greater than 49% inhibition
of wheal area, and 74% inhibition of flare area were maintained for
8 hours following the 30 and 60 mg dose.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Effects on QTc
                           
                           
                              In dogs
(30 mg/kg/orally twice daily for 5 days) and rabbits (10 mg/kg, 
intravenously over 1 hour), fexofenadine hydrochloride did not prolong
QTc. In dogs, the plasma fexofenadine concentration was
approximately 9 times the therapeutic plasma concentrations in adults
receiving the maximum recommended human daily oral dose of 180 mg.
In rabbits, the plasma fexofenadine concentration was approximately
20 times the therapeutic plasma concentration in adults receiving
the maximum recommended human daily oral dose of 180 mg. No effect
was observed on calcium channel current, delayed K+ channel
current, or action potential duration in guinea pig myocytes, Na+ current in rat neonatal myocytes, or on the delayed rectifier
K+ channel cloned from human heart at concentrations up
to 1 × 10-5 M of fexofenadine.
                              No statistically significant increase in mean QTc interval
compared to placebo was observed in 714 subjects with seasonal allergic
rhinitis given fexofenadine hydrochloride capsules in doses of
60 to 240 mg twice daily for 2 weeks. Pediatric subjects from 2 placebo-
controlled trials (n=855) treated with up to 60 mg fexofenadine hydrochloride
twice daily demonstrated no significant treatment- or dose-related
increases in QTc. In addition, no statistically significant
increase in mean QTc interval compared to placebo was observed
in 40 healthy volunteers given fexofenadine hydrochloride as an oral
solution at doses up to 400 mg twice daily for 6 days, or in 230 healthy
volunteers given fexofenadine hydrochloride 240 mg once daily for
1 year. In subjects with chronic idiopathic urticaria, there were
no clinically relevant differences for any ECG intervals, including
QTc, between those treated with fexofenadine hydrochloride
180 mg once daily (n = 163) and those treated with placebo (n = 91)
for 4 weeks.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         