
                     
                     
                     
                        Drug Interactions

                     
                     
                        The inotropic and toxic effects of cardiac glycosides and calcium are synergistic and arrhythmias may occur if these drugs are given together (particularly when calcium is given intravenously). Intravenous administration of calcium should be avoided in patients receiving cardiac glycosides; if necessary, calcium should be given slowly in small amounts.
                        Calcium complexes tetracycline antibiotics rendering them inactive. The two drugs should not be given at the same time orally nor should they be mixed for parenteral administration.
                        Calcium Gluconate Injection has been reported to be incompatible with intravenous solutions containing various drugs. Published data are too varied and/or limited to permit generalizations, and specialized references should be consulted for specific information.
                        
                           Interaction with Ceftriaxone Sodium Injection:  
                           Do not use diluents containing calcium to reconstitute ceftriaxone vials or to further dilute a reconstituted vial for IV administration because a precipitate can form.  Precipitation of ceftriaxone-calcium can also occur when calcium-containing solutions are mixed with ceftriaxone in the same IV administration line. Calcium-containing IV solutions, including continuous calcium-containing infusions such as parenteral nutrition must not be administered simultaneously with ceftriaxone via a Y-site.  However, in patients other than neonates, calcium-containing solutions and ceftriaxone may be administered sequentially of one another if the infusion lines are thoroughly flushed between infusions with a compatible fluid.  
                           In vitro
                            studies using adult and neonatal plasma from umbilical cord blood demonstrated that neonates have an increased risk of precipitation of ceftriaxone-calcium.
                        
                        There have been no reports of an interaction between oral calcium-containing products and ceftriaxone or interaction between calcium-containing products (IV or oral) and intramuscular ceftriaxone.
                     
                     
                  
               