
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Crofelemer is an inhibitor of both the cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP)-stimulated cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) chloride ion (Cl-) channel, and the calcium-activated Cl- channels (CaCC) at the luminal membrane of enterocytes.  The CFTR Cl- channel and CaCC regulate Cl- and fluid secretion by intestinal epithelial cells.  Crofelemer acts by blocking Cl- secretion and accompanying high volume water loss in diarrhea, normalizing the flow of Cl- and water in the GI tract. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        Consistent with the mechanism of action of crofelemer (i.e., inhibition of CFTR and CaCC in the GI lumen), data suggest stool chloride concentrations decreased in patients treated with FULYZAQ (500 mg four times daily) (n=25) for four days relative to placebo (n=24); stool chloride concentrations decreased in both African American patients treated with FULYZAQ (n=3) relative to placebo (n=5) and non-African American patients treated with FULYZAQ (n=22) relative to placebo (n=19).
                        At a dose 10 times the maximum recommended dose, crofelemer does not prolong the QTc interval to any clinically relevant extent.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        
                           Absorption
                        
                        The absorption of crofelemer is minimal following oral dosing in healthy adults and HIV‑positive patients and concentrations of crofelemer in plasma are below the level of quantitation (50 ng/mL). Therefore, standard pharmacokinetic parameters such as area under the curve, maximum concentration, and half-life cannot be estimated. 
                        
                           Distribution
                        
                        The distribution of crofelemer has not been determined.
                        
                           Metabolism
                        
                        No metabolites of crofelemer have been identified in healthy subjects or patients in clinical trials.
                        
                           Elimination
                        
                        The elimination route has not been identified in humans. 
                        
                           Food Effect
                        
                        Administration of crofelemer with a high-fat meal was not associated with an increase in systemic exposure of crofelemer in healthy volunteers. In the clinical trial, a single 500 mg dose of crofelemer was administered one-half hour before the morning and evening meals.  Therefore, crofelemer may be administered with or without a meal.
                        
                           Drug‑Drug Interactions
                        
                        Results of a crossover study in healthy volunteers showed crofelemer 500 mg administered four times daily for five days had no effect on the exposure of zidovudine and nelfinavir when administered as a single dose.  A 20% decrease in lamivudine exposure was also observed in the same study but was not considered to be clinically important.     
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         