
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              Cationic drugs: May reduce metformin elimination (7.1)
                           
                              UGT inducers (e.g., rifampin): Canagliflozin exposure is reduced. Consider increasing canagliflozin dose from 50 mg to 150 mg twice daily (2.3, 7.2)
                           
                              Digoxin: Monitor digoxin levels (7.2)
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1	Drug Interactions with Metformin
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Cationic Drugs
                              
                              Cationic drugs (e.g., amiloride, digoxin, morphine, procainamide, quinidine, quinine, ranitidine, triamterene, trimethoprim, or vancomycin) that are eliminated by renal tubular secretion theoretically have the potential for interaction with metformin by competing for common renal tubular transport systems. Although such interactions remain theoretical (except for cimetidine), careful patient monitoring and dose adjustment of INVOKAMET and/or the interfering drug is recommended in patients who are taking cationic medications that are excreted via the proximal renal tubular secretory system.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Carbonic Anhydrase Inhibitors
                              
                              Topiramate or other carbonic anhydrase inhibitors (e.g., zonisamide, acetazolamide or dichlorphenamide) frequently decrease serum bicarbonate and induce non-anion gap, hyperchloremic metabolic acidosis. Concomitant use of these drugs may induce metabolic acidosis and may increase the risk of lactic acidosis. Monitor for signs and symptoms of acidosis when these drugs are used concomitantly with INVOKAMET [see Warnings and Precautions (5.1)].
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Drugs Affecting Glycemic Control
                              
                              Certain drugs tend to produce hyperglycemia and may lead to loss of glycemic control. These drugs include the thiazides and other diuretics, corticosteroids, phenothiazines, thyroid products, estrogens, oral contraceptives, phenytoin, nicotinic acid, sympathomimetics, calcium channel blockers, and isoniazid. When such drugs are administered to a patient receiving INVOKAMET, monitor for loss of blood glucose control. When such drugs are withdrawn from a patient receiving INVOKAMET, monitor for hypoglycemia.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2	Drug Interactions with Canagliflozin
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 UGT Enzyme Inducers
                              
                              Rifampin: Rifampin lowered canagliflozin exposure which may reduce the efficacy of INVOKAMET. If an inducer of UGTs (e.g., rifampin, phenytoin, phenobarbital, ritonavir) must be co-administered with INVOKAMET, consider increasing the dose to canagliflozin 150 mg twice daily if patients are currently tolerating INVOKAMET with 50 mg canagliflozin twice daily, have an eGFR greater than 60 mL/min/1.73 m2, and require additional glycemic control. Consider other antihyperglycemic therapy in patients with an eGFR of 45 to less than 60 mL/min/1.73 m2 receiving concurrent therapy with a UGT inducer and require additional glycemic control [see Dosage and Administration (2.3) and Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Digoxin
                              
                              Canagliflozin increased digoxin exposure. Digoxin, as a cationic drug, also has the potential to compete with metformin for common renal tubular transport systems [see Drug Interactions (7.1)]. Monitor patients taking INVOKAMET with concomitant digoxin for a need to adjust dose of either drug.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Drug/Laboratory Test Interference
                              
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Positive Urine Glucose Test
                                    
                                    Monitoring glycemic control with urine glucose tests is not recommended in patients taking SGLT2 inhibitors as SGLT2 inhibitors increase urinary glucose excretion and will lead to positive urine glucose tests. Use alternative methods to monitor glycemic control.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Interference with 1,5-anhydroglucitol (1,5-AG) Assay
                                    
                                    Monitoring glycemic control with 1,5-AG assay is not recommended as measurements of 1,5-AG are unreliable in assessing glycemic control in patients taking SGLT2 inhibitors. Use alternative methods to monitor glycemic control.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         