
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  Microbiology Mechanism of Action: The mechanism of action of ciclopirox has been investigated using various in vitro and in vivo infection models. One in vitro study suggested that ciclopirox acts by chelation of polyvalent cations (Fe+3 or Al+3) resulting in the inhibition of the metal-dependent enzymes that are responsible for the degradation of peroxides within the fungal cell. The clinical significance of this observation is not known.

                  

                  Activity in vitro and ex vivo:  In vitro methodologies employing various broth or solid media with and without additional nutrients have been utilized to determine ciclopirox minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) values for the dermatophytic molds.(1-2) As a consequence, a broad range of MIC values, 1-20 mcg/mL were obtained for Trichophyton rubrum and Trichophyton mentagrophytes species. Correlation between in vitro MIC results and clinical outcome has yet to be established for ciclopirox.

                  
One ex vivo study was conducted evaluating 8% ciclopirox against new and established Trichophyton rubrum and Trichophyton mentagrophytes infections in ovine hoof material.(3) After 10 days of treatment the growth of T. rubrum and T. mentagrophytes in the established infection model was very minimally affected. Elimination of the molds from hoof material was not achieved in either the new or established for infection models.

                  

                  Susceptibility testing for Trichophyton rubrum species: In vitro susceptibility testing methods for determining ciclopirox MIC values against the dermatophytic molds, including Trichophyton rubrum species, have not been standardized or validated. Ciclopirox MIC values will vary depending on the susceptibility testing method employed, composition and pH of media and the utilization of nutritional supplements. Breakpoints to determine whether clinical isolates of Trichophyton rubrum are susceptible or resistant to ciclopirox have not been established.

                  

                  Resistance Studies: have not been conducted to evaluate drug resistance development in T. rubrum species exposed to 8% ciclopirox topical solution. Studies assessing crossresistance to ciclopirox and other known antifungal agents have not been performed. 

                  

                  Antifungal Drug Interaction: No studies have been conducted to determine whether ciclopirox might reduce the effectiveness of systemic antifungal agents for onychomycosis. Therefore, the concomitant use of 8% ciclopirox topical solution and systemic antifungal agents for onychomycosis is not recommended

               
               
            
         