


7 	DRUG INTERACTIONS



Mefloquine: Additive effect on gastrointestinal tract and atrial rate. (7.1)7.1)Anticholinesterase drugs for glaucoma treatment: Additive effects. (7.2)7.2)Narcotics: Exacerbation of bradycardia possible. (7.3)7.3)Depolarizing neuromuscular blocking agents: Increased effect. (7.4)7.4)Non-depolarizing neuromuscular blocking agents: Dose may need to be increased. (7.4)7.4)Aminoglycoside antibiotics, local and some general anesthetics, antiarrhythmic agents, and other drugs that interfere with neuromuscular transmission should be used cautiously, if at all. (7.4)7.4)Drugs converted to pantothenic acid (e.g., dexpanthenol): Additive effect. (7.5)7.5)Mefloquine: Additive effect on gastrointestinal tract and atrial rate. (7.1)7.1)






7.1	Mefloquine
A potential interaction between the antimalarial drug mefloquine and pyridostigmine bromide exists through a possible additive effect on the gastrointestinal tract. The most common complaint about both drugs is loose bowels. It has been reported that simple additive effects on the atrial rate occur when mefloquine and pyridostigmine bromide are combined.







7.2	Other Anticholinesterase Drugs
Because anticholinesterase drugs are often used in the treatment of glaucoma, the use of pyridostigmine bromide in such situations may have an additive effect that may cause or exacerbate problems with night vision.







7.3	Narcotics
The bradycardia associated with the use of narcotics may exacerbate pyridostigmine-induced bradycardia.







7.4	Drugs that Interfere with Neuromuscular Transmission
Particular caution should be observed in the administration of depolarizing neuromuscular blocking agents (e.g., succinylcholine) during surgery since the degree of neuromuscular blockade that ensues may be enhanced by previously administered pyridostigmine bromide. Doses of non-depolarizing neuromuscular blocking agents (e.g., pancuronium bromide) may need to be increased in patients previously administered pyridostigmine. Atropine antagonizes the muscarinic effects of pyridostigmine, and this interaction is utilized to counteract the muscarinic symptoms of pyridostigmine toxicity. Anticholinesterase agents are sometimes effective in reversing neuromuscular block induced by aminoglycoside antibiotics. However, aminoglycoside antibiotics, local and some general anesthetics, antiarrhythmic agents, and other drugs that interfere with neuromuscular transmission should be used cautiously, if at all. 







7.5	Drugs Converted to Pantothenic Acid (e.g., Dexpanthenol)
Theoretically, drugs such as dexpanthenol, which are converted to pantothenic acid in vivo, may have additive effects with pyridostigmine by increasing production of acetylcholine.in vivo, may have additive effects with pyridostigmine by increasing production of acetylcholine.




