


12 	CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY





12.1 Mechanism of Action
        Pyridostigmine is a reversible cholinesterase inhibitor.







12.2 Pharmacodynamics
The mechanism of Soman induced death is reasonably well-understood; death is believed to result primarily from respiratory failure due to irreversible inhibition of the enzyme acetylcholinesterase and the consequent increase in the level of the neurotransmitter acetylcholine 1) at nicotinic receptors at the neuromuscular junction, resulting in pathological stimulation and ultimate failure of the muscles of respiration, 2) at muscarinic receptors in secretory glands and smooth muscle, resulting in excessive respiratory secretions and bronchoconstriction, and 3) at cholinergic receptors in the brain, resulting in central respiratory depression. The effect of pyridostigmine is presumed to result from its reversible inhibition of a critical number of acetylcholinesterase active sites in the peripheral nervous system, protecting them from irreversible inhibition by Soman. (Pyridostigmine is not thought to enter the brain in significant amounts.) When the pyridostigmine-induced inhibition of the enzyme is subsequently reversed, there is a small residual amount of enzyme activity that is adequate to sustain life (provided atropine and 2-PAM are subsequently administered). An implication of this presumed mechanism is that it is not helpful to give pyridostigmine either just before or during exposure to Soman.







12.3 	Pharmacokinetics
Pyridostigmine bromide is poorly absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract with an absolute bioavailability of 10-20%. Following a single oral dose of 30 mg pyridostigmine bromide in the fasting state, the TMAX was 2.2 ± 1.0 hours. The pharmacokinetics of pyridostigmine bromide is linear over the dose range of 30-60 mg. Following multiple doses of pyridostigmine (30 mg every 8 hours for 21 days), the average steady-state trough concentration of pyridostigmine was about ¼ of the peak concentration after a single dose.MAX was 2.2 ± 1.0 hours. The pharmacokinetics of pyridostigmine bromide is linear over the dose range of 30-60 mg. Following multiple doses of pyridostigmine (30 mg every 8 hours for 21 days), the average steady-state trough concentration of pyridostigmine was about ¼ of the peak concentration after a single dose.The volume of distribution was about 19 ± 12 liters, indicating that pyridostigmine distributes into tissues. No information on protein binding of pyridostigmine is available.Pyridostigmine undergoes hydrolysis by cholinesterases and is metabolized in the liver. It is excreted in the urine both as unchanged drug and its metabolites. The systemic clearance of pyridostigmine bromide is 830 mL/min and the elimination half-life of pyridostigmine bromide is approximately 3 hours.





Renal ImpairmentIn anephric patients (n=4), the elimination half-life increased 3 fold and the systemic clearance decreased by 75% [see Use in Specific Populations (8.6)].Use in Specific Populations (8.6)].







Hepatic ImpairmentNo information is available on the pharmacokinetics of pyridostigmine in hepatic impaired patients.







GenderThe clearance of pyridostigmine bromide is not influenced by gender.







ElderlyIn a pyridostigmine study in the elderly (71-85 years), the elimination half-life of pyridostigmine was similar to the half-life in the young (21-51 years). However, the systemic plasma clearance was 30% lower in the elderly.






