
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              •CNS depressants, including alcohol: Possible adverse additive CNS-depressant effects (5.1, 7.1)
                           
                           
                              •Imipramine: Decreased alertness observed (7.1)
                           
                           
                              •Chlorpromazine: Impaired alertness and psychomotor performance observed (7.1)
                           
                           
                              •Rifampin: Combination use may decrease effect (7.2)
                           
                           
                              •Ketoconazole: Combination use may increase effect (7.2)
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 CNS-active Drugs
                     
                        Co-administration of zolpidem with other CNS depressants increases the risk of CNS depression [see Warnings and Precautions (5.1)]. Zolpidem tartrate was evaluated in healthy volunteers in single-dose interaction studies for several CNS drugs.

                           

                           Imipramine, Chlorpromazine
                           

                           
Imipramine in combination with zolpidem produced no pharmacokinetic interaction other than a 20% decrease in peak levels of imipramine, but there was an additive effect of decreased alertness. Similarly, chlorpromazine in combination with zolpidem produced no pharmacokinetic interaction, but there was an additive effect of decreased alertness and psychomotor performance [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].

                           

                           Haloperidol
                           

                           
A study involving haloperidol and zolpidem revealed no effect of haloperidol on the pharmacokinetics or pharmacodynamics of zolpidem. The lack of a drug interaction following single-dose administration does not predict the absence of an effect following chronic administration [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].

                           

                           Alcohol
                           

                           
An additive adverse effect on psychomotor performance between alcohol and oral zolpidem was demonstrated [see Warnings and Precautions (5.1)].

                           

                           Sertraline
                           

                           
Concomitant administration of zolpidem and sertraline increases exposure to zolpidem [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)]. 

                           

                           Fluoxetine
                           

                           
After multiple doses of zolpidem tartrate and fluoxetine an increase in the zolpidem half-life (17%) was observed. There was no evidence of an additive effect in psychomotor performance [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 Drugs that Affect Drug Metabolism via Cytochrome P450
                     
                        Some compounds known to inhibit CYP3A may increase exposure to zolpidem. The effect of drugs on other P450 enzymes on the exposure to zolpidem is not known.

                           

                           Rifampin
                           

                           
Rifampin, a CYP3A4 inducer, significantly reduced the exposure to and the pharmacodynamic effects of zolpidem. Use of Rifampin in combination with zolpidem may decrease the efficacy of zolpidem.

                           

                           Ketoconazole
                           

                           
Ketoconazole, a potent CYP3A4 inhibitor, increased the pharmacodynamic effects of zolpidem. Consideration should be given to using a lower dose of zolpidem when ketoconazole and zolpidem are given together.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         