


CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY





Human Pharmacology
Keflex is acid stable and may be given without regard to meals. It is rapidly absorbed after oral administration. Following doses of 250 mg, 500 mg, and 1 g, average peak serum levels of approximately 9, 18, and 32 μg/mL respectively were obtained at 1 hour. Measurable levels were present 6 hours after administration. Cephalexin is excreted in the urine by glomerular filtration and tubular secretion. Studies showed that over 90% of the drug was excreted unchanged in the urine within 8 hours. During this period, peak urine concentrations following the 250-mg, 500-mg, and 1-g doses were approximately 1000, 2200, and 5000 μg/mL respectively.







Microbiology
In vitro tests demonstrate that the cephalosporins are bactericidal because of their inhibition of cell-wall synthesis. Cephalexin has been shown to be active against most strains of the following microorganisms both in vitro and in clinical infections as described in the INDICATIONS AND USAGE section.In vitro tests demonstrate that the cephalosporins are bactericidal because of their inhibition of cell-wall synthesis. Cephalexin has been shown to be active against most strains of the following microorganisms both Aerobes, Gram-positive:Aerobes, Gram-positive: Staphylococcus aureus (including penicillinase-producing strains) Staphylococcus aureus (including penicillinase-producing strains) Streptococcus pneumoniae (penicillin-susceptible strains) Streptococcus pneumoniae (penicillin-susceptible strains) Streptococcus pyogenes Streptococcus pyogenes Staphylococcus aureus (including penicillinase-producing strains) Staphylococcus aureus (including penicillinase-producing strains)Aerobes, Gram-negative:Aerobes, Gram-negative: Escherichia coli Escherichia coli Haemophilus influenzae Haemophilus influenzae Klebsiella pneumoniae Klebsiella pneumoniae Moraxella (Branhamella) catarrhalis Moraxella (Branhamella) catarrhalis Proteus mirabilis Proteus mirabilis Escherichia coli Escherichia coli Haemophilus influenzae Haemophilus influenzae Klebsiella pneumoniae Klebsiella pneumoniae Moraxella (Branhamella) catarrhalis Moraxella (Branhamella) catarrhalis Proteus mirabilis Proteus mirabilisNote— Methicillin-resistant staphylococci and most strains of enterococci (Enterococcus faecalis [formerly Streptococcus faecalis]) are resistant to cephalosporins, including cephalexin. It is not active against most strains of Enterobacter spp., Morganella morganii, and Proteus vulgaris. It has no activity against Pseudomonas spp. or Acinetobacter calcoaceticus.  Penicillin-resistant Streptococcus pneumoniae is usually cross-resistant to beta-lactam antibiotics.Note— Methicillin-resistant staphylococci and most strains of enterococci (




