
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY

               
                  Corticosteroids suppress the inflammatory response to a variety of agents and they probably delay or slow healing.  Since corticosteroids may inhibit the body's defense mechanism against infection, a concomitant antibacterial drug may be used when this inhibition is considered to be clinically significant in a particular case.

                  When a decision to administer both a corticosteroid and an antibacterial is made, the administration of such drugs in combination has the advantage of greater patient compliance and convenience, with the added assurance that the appropriate dosage of both drugs is administered. When both types of drugs are in the same formulation, compatibility of ingredients is assured and the correct volume of drug is delivered and retained.  The relative potency of corticosteroids depends on the molecular structure, concentration and release from the vehicle.

               
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           Microbiology:  Sulfacetamide sodium exerts a bacteriostatic effect against susceptible bacteria by restricting the synthesis of folic acid required for growth through competition with p-aminobenzoic acid.

                        Some strains of these bacteria may be resistant to sulfacetamide or resistant strains may emerge in vivo.

                        The anti-infective component in these products is included to provide action against specific organisms susceptible to it.  Sulfacetamide sodium is active in vitro against susceptible strains of the following microorganisms:  Escherichia coli, Staphylococcus aureus, Streptococcus pneumoniae, Streptococcus (viridans group), Haemophilus influenzae, Klebsiella species, and Enterobacter species.  This product does not provide adequate coverage against: Neisseria species, Pseudomonas species, and Serratia marcescens (see 
                              INDICATIONS AND USAGE
                           ).

                     
                     
                  
               
            
         