
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        

                        Methadone hydrochloride is amu-agonist; a synthetic opioid analgesic with multiple actions qualitativelysimilar to those of morphine, the most prominent of which involves the centralnervous system and organs composed of smooth muscle. The principal therapeuticuses for methadone are for analgesia and for detoxification or maintenance inopioid addiction. The methadone withdrawal syndrome, although qualitativelysimilar to that of morphine, differs in that the onset is slower, the course ismore prolonged, and the symptoms are less severe. 
                        

                        Some data also indicate thatmethadone acts as an antagonist at the N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptor.The contribution of NMDA receptor antagonism to methadone's efficacy isunknown. Other NMDA receptor antagonists have been shown to produce neurotoxiceffects in animals. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        

                        
                           Absorption: Following oral administration the bioavailability ofmethadone ranges between 36 to 100% and peak plasma concentrations are achievedbetween 1 to 7.5 hours. Dose proportionality of methadone pharmacokinetics isnot known. However, after administration of daily oral doses ranging from 10 to225 mg, the steady-state plasma concentrations ranged between 65 to 630 ng/mLand the peak concentrations ranged between 124 to 1255 ng/mL. Effect of food onthe bioavailability of methadone has not been evaluated. 
                        

                        
                           Distribution: Methadone is a lipophilic drug and the steady-statevolume of distribution ranges between 1.0 to 8.0 L/kg. In plasma, methadone ispredominantly bound to α1-acid glycoprotein (85% to 90%). Methadone is secretedin saliva, breast milk, amniotic fluid and umbilical cord plasma. 
                        

                        
                           Metabolism: Methadone is primarily metabolized by N-demethylationto an inactive metabolite, 2-ethylidene-1,5­dimethyl-3,3-diphenylpyrrolidene(EDDP). Cytochrome P450 enzymes, primarily CYP3A4, CYP2B6, and CYP2C19 and to alesser extent CYP2C9 and CYP2D6, are responsible for conversion of methadone toEDDP and other inactive metabolites, which are excreted mainly in the urine.Methadone appears to be a substrate for P-glycoprotein but its pharmacokineticsdo not appear to be significantly altered in case of P-glycoproteinpolymorphism or inhibition. 
                        

                        
                           Excretion: The elimination of methadone is mediated by extensivebiotransformation, followed by renal and fecal excretion. Published reportsindicate that after multiple dose administration the apparent plasma clearanceof methadone ranged between 1.4 and 
                        126 L/h, and the terminalhalf-life (T 1/2) was highly variable and ranged between 8 to 59 hours indifferent studies. Methadone is a basic (pKa=9.2) compound and the pH of the urinarytract can alter its disposition in plasma. Also, since methadone is lipophilic,it has been known to persist in the liver and other tissues. The slow releasefrom the liver and other tissues may prolong the duration of methadone actiondespite low plasma concentrations. 
                        

                        
                           Drug Interactions: Cytochrome P450 Interactions: Methadoneundergoes hepatic 
                        N-demethylation by cytochromeP450 (CYP) isoforms, principally CYP3A4, CYP2B6, CYP2C19, and to a lesserextent by CYP2C9 and CYP2D6. Coadministration of methadone with CYP inducersmay result in more rapid metabolism and potential for decreased effects ofmethadone, whereas administration with CYP inhibitors may reduce metabolism andpotentiate methadone's effects. Although antiretroviral drugs such as efavirenz,nelfinavir, nevirapine, ritonavir, lopinavir+ritonavir combination are known toinhibit some CYPs, they are shown to reduce the plasma levels of methadone,possibly due to CYP induction activity 
                              [seeDrug Interactions (7.2)].
                            Therefore, drugs administered concomitantlywith methadone should be evaluated for interaction potential; clinicians areadvised to evaluate individual response to drug therapy. 
                        

                        
                           Cytochrome P450 Inducers:The following drug interactions were reported following coadministration ofmethadone with known inducers of cytochrome P450 enzymes: 
                        

                        
                           Rifampin: In patients well-stabilized on methadone, concomitantadministration of rifampin resulted in a marked reduction in serum methadonelevels and a concurrent appearance of withdrawal symptoms. 
                        

                        
                           Phenytoin: In a pharmacokinetic study with patients on methadonemaintenance therapy, phenytoin administration (250 mg twice daily initially for1 day followed by 300 mg daily for 3 to 4 days) resulted in an approximately50% reduction in methadone exposure and withdrawal symptoms occurredconcurrently. Upon discontinuation of phenytoin, the incidence of withdrawalsymptoms decreased and methadone exposure increased to a level comparable tothat prior to phenytoin administration. 
                        

                        St. John's Wort, Phenobarbital,Carbamazepine: Administration of methadone with other CYP3A4 inducers mayresult in withdrawal symptoms. 
                        

                        
                           Cytochrome P450 Inhibitors:Since the metabolism of methadone is mediated primarily by CYP3A4 isozyme,coadministration of drugs that inhibit CYP3A4 activity may cause decreasedclearance of methadone.  
                        

                        
                           Voriconazole: Repeat dose administration of oral voriconazole (400mg every 12 hours for 
                        1 day, then 200 mg every 12 hoursfor 4 days) increased the peak plasma concentration 
                        (C max) and AUC of (R)-methadoneby 31% and 47%, respectively, in subjects receiving a methadone maintenancedose (30 to 100 mg daily. The C max and AUC of (S) ­methadone increased by 65%and 103%, respectively. Increased plasma concentrations of methadone have beenassociated with toxicity including QT prolongation. Frequent monitoring foradverse events and toxicity related to methadone is recommended duringcoadministration. Dose reduction of methadone may be needed 
                              [see Drug Interactions (7.2)]. 
                           
                        
                        

                        
                           
                              Antiretroviral drugs
                           : Although antiretroviral drugs such asefavirenz, nelfinavir, nevirapine, ritonavir, telaprevir, lopinavir+ritonavircombination are known to inhibit some CYPs, they are shown to reduce the plasmalevels of methadone, possibly due to CYP induction activity. 
                        Abacavir, amprenavir,darunavir+ritonavir, efavirenz, nelfinavir, nevirapine, ritonavir, telaprevir,lopinavir+ritonavir, saquinavir+ritonavir, tipranvir+ritonavir combination:Coadministration of these anti-retroviral agents resulted in increasedclearance or decreased plasma levels of methadone 
                              [see Drug Interactions (7.2)].
                           
                        
                        

                        
                           Didanosine and Stavudine: Methadone decreased the AUC and peaklevels for didanosine and stavudine, with a more significant decrease fordidanosine. Methadone disposition was not substantially altered 
                              [see Drug Interactions (7.2)].
                           
                        
                        

                        
                           Zidovudine: Methadone increased the AUC of zidovudine which couldresult in toxic effects 
                              [see DrugInteractions (7.2)].
                           
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         