
                     
                     
                     Drug Interactions
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                    Aspirin:
                                  When Diclofenac Sodium Extended-release Tablets are administered with aspirin, its protein binding is reduced. The clinical significance of this interaction is not known; however, as with other NSAIDs, concomitant administration of diclofenac and aspirin is not generally recommended because of the potential of increased adverse effects.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                    Methotrexate:
                                  NSAIDs have been reported to competitively inhibit methotrexate accumulation in rabbit kidney slices. This may indicate that they could enhance the toxicity of methotrexate. Caution should be used when NSAIDs are administered concomitantly with methotrexate.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                    Cyclosporine:
                                  Diclofenac Sodium Extended-release Tablets, like other NSAIDs, may affect renal prostaglandins and increase the toxicity of certain drugs. Therefore, concomitant therapy with Diclofenac Sodium Extended-release Tablets may increase cyclosporine's nephrotoxicity. Caution should be used when Diclofenac Sodium Extended-release Tablets are administered concomitantly with cyclosporine.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                    ACE-inhibitors:
                                  Reports suggest that NSAIDs may diminish the antihypertensive effect of ACE-inhibitors. This interaction should be given consideration in patients taking NSAIDs concomitantly with ACE-inhibitors.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                    Furosemide:
                                  Clinical studies, as well as postmarketing observations, have shown that Diclofenac Sodium Extended-release Tablets can reduce the natriuretic effect of furosemide and thiazides in some patients. This response has been attributed to inhibition or renal prostaglandin synthesis. During concomitant therapy with NSAIDs, the patient should be observed closely for signs of renal failure (see 
                                    WARNINGS, Renal Effects
                                 ), as well as to assure diuretic efficacy.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                    Lithium:
                                  NSAIDs have produced an elevation of plasma lithium levels and a reduction in renal lithium clearance. The mean minimum lithium concentration increased 15% and the renal clearance was decreased by approximately 20%. These effects have been attributed to inhibition of renal prostaglandin synthesis by the NSAID. Thus, when NSAIDs and lithium are administered concurrently, subjects should be observed carefully for signs of lithium toxicity.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                    Warfarin:
                                  The effects of warfarin and NSAIDs on GI bleeding are synergistic, such that users of both drugs together have a risk of serious GI bleeding higher than users of either drug alone.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                    CYP2C9 Inhibitors or Inducers:
                                  Diclofenac is metabolized by cytochrome P450 enzymes, predominantly by CYP2C9.  Coadministration of diclofenac with CYP2C9 inhibitors (e.g. voriconazole) may enhance the exposure and toxicity of diclofenac whereas coadministration with CYP2C9 inducers (e.g. rifampin) may lead to compromised efficacy of diclofenac.  Use caution when dosing diclofenac with CYP2C9 inhibitors or inducers, a dosage adjustment may be warranted (see 
                                    
                                       CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY, Pharmacokinetics, Drug Interactions).
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               