
               
               
               
                  12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY 
               
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        12.1 Mechanism of Action 
                     
                     
                        Sumatriptan is the active component of Sumavel DosePro. Sumatriptan binds with high affinity to human cloned 5-HT1B/1D receptors. Sumatriptan presumably exerts its therapeutic effects in the treatment of migraine headache by binding to 5-HT1B/1D receptors located on intracranial blood vessels and sensory nerves of the trigeminal system. 
                        Current theories proposed to explain the etiology of migraine headache suggest that symptoms are due to local cranial vasodilatation and/or to the release of sensory neuropeptides (including substance P and calcitonin gene-related peptide) through nerve endings in the trigeminal system. The therapeutic activity of sumatriptan for the treatment of migraine and cluster headaches is thought to be due to the agonist effects at the 5-HT1B/1D receptors on intracranial blood vessels (including the arterio-venous anastomoses) and sensory nerves of the trigeminal system, which result in cranial vessel constriction and inhibition of pro-inflammatory neuropeptide release. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        12.2 Pharmacodynamics 
                     
                     
                        
                           Blood Pressure: Significant elevation in blood pressure, including hypertensive crisis, has been reported in patients with and without a history of hypertension [see Warnings and Precautions (
                           
                              5.8
                           
                           )]. 
                        
                           Peripheral (Small) Arteries: In healthy volunteers (N = 18), a trial evaluating the effects of sumatriptan on peripheral (small vessel) arterial reactivity failed to detect a clinically significant increase in peripheral resistance. 
                        
                           Heart Rate: Transient increases in blood pressure observed in some subjects in clinical trials carried out during sumatriptan’s development as a treatment for migraine were not accompanied by any clinically significant changes in heart rate. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                     
                        
                           Absorption and Bioavailability: Sumavel DosePro is bioequivalent to sumatriptan needle-based injection via autoinjector at the thigh and abdomen administration sites. A sub-optimal dose may be delivered when administered to the arm and therefore, the arm is not recommended as a site of administration. 
                        Pharmacokinetic parameters following a 6 mg subcutaneous dose of Sumavel DosePro into the thigh were determined in 32 subjects (males and females). The maximum serum concentration (Cmax) (mean ± standard deviation) was 71.9 ± 14.4 ng/mL; the time to peak concentration (Tmax) was 12 minutes after dosing (range, 4 to 20 minutes); and the terminal half-life was 103 ± 22 minutes.
                        Pharmacokinetic parameters following a 6 mg subcutaneous dose of Sumavel DosePro into the abdomen were determined in 35 subjects (males and females). The maximum serum concentration (Cmax) (mean ± standard deviation) was 78.6 ± 17.3 ng/mL; the time to peak concentration (Tmax) was 12 minutes after dosing (range, 6 to 20 minutes); and the terminal half-life was 102 ± 12 minutes. 
                        
                           Distribution: The bioavailability of sumatriptan via subcutaneous site injection to 18 healthy male subjects was 97% ± 16% of that obtained following intravenous injection. Protein binding, determined by equilibrium dialysis over the concentration range of 10 to 1,000 ng/mL, is low, approximately 14% to 21%. The effect of sumatriptan on the protein binding of other drugs has not been evaluated. 
                        
                           Metabolism: In vitro studies with human microsomes suggest that sumatriptan is metabolized by MAO, predominantly the A isoenzyme. Most of a radiolabeled dose of sumatriptan excreted in the urine is the major metabolite indole acetic acid (IAA) or the IAA glucuronide, both of which are inactive. 
                        
                           Elimination: After a single 6 mg subcutaneous dose, 22% ± 4% was excreted in the urine as unchanged sumatriptan and 38% ± 7% as the IAA metabolite. 
                        
                           Special Populations: Age: The pharmacokinetics of sumatriptan in the elderly (mean age: 72 years, 2 males and 4 females) and in subjects with migraine (mean age: 38 years, 25 males and 155 females) were similar to that in healthy male subjects (mean age: 30 years). 
                        
                           Renal Impairment: The effect of renal impairment on the pharmacokinetics of sumatriptan has not been examined. 
                        
                           Hepatic Impairment: The effect of mild to moderate hepatic disease on the pharmacokinetics of subcutaneously administered sumatriptan has been evaluated. There were no significant differences in the pharmacokinetics of subcutaneously administered sumatriptan in moderately hepatically impaired subjects compared with healthy controls. The pharmacokinetics of subcutaneously administered sumatriptan in patients with severe hepatic impairment has not been studied. The use of Sumavel DosePro in this population is not recommended [see 
                           Use in Specific Populations (
                           
                              8.6
                           
                           )
                           ]. 
                        
                           Race: The systemic clearance and Cmax of sumatriptan were similar in Black (n = 34) and Caucasian (n = 38) healthy male subjects. 
                        
                           Drug Interaction Studies: Monoamine Oxidase-A Inhibitors: In a trial of 14 healthy females, pretreatment with an MAO-A inhibitor decreased the clearance of sumatriptan, resulting in a 2-fold increase in the area under the sumatriptan plasma concentration-time curve (AUC), corresponding to a 40% increase in elimination half-life. 
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         