
               
               
               7	DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                            Patients who are on anticoagulant therapy may require downward adjustment of their anticoagulant dosage. (7.1)
                            The concurrent use of tetracycline and methoxyflurane has been reported to result in fatal renal toxicity. (7.3)
                            To avoid contraceptive failure, female patients are advised to use a second form of contraceptive during treatment with minocycline. (7.5)
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1	Anticoagulants
                     
                        Because tetracyclines have been shown to depress plasma prothrombin activity, patients who are on anticoagulant therapy may require downward adjustment of their anticoagulant dosage. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2   Penicillin
                     
                        Since bacteriostatic drugs may interfere with the bactericidal action of penicillin, it is advisable to avoid giving tetracycline-class drugs in conjunction with penicillin. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3	Methoxyflurane
                     
                        The concurrent use of tetracycline and methoxyflurane has been reported to result in fatal renal toxicity.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4	Antacids and Iron Preparations
                     
                        Absorption of tetracyclines is impaired by antacids containing aluminum, calcium or magnesium and iron-containing preparations.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.5	Low Dose Oral Contraceptives
                     
                        In a multi-center study to evaluate the effect of SOLODYN on low dose oral contraceptives, hormone levels over one menstrual cycle with and without SOLODYN 1 mg/kg once-daily were measured. Based on the results of this trial, minocycline-related changes in estradiol, progestinic hormone, FSH and LH plasma levels, of breakthrough bleeding, or of contraceptive failure, can not be ruled out. To avoid contraceptive failure, female patients are advised to use a second form of contraceptive during treatment with minocycline.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.6	Drug/Laboratory Test Interactions
                     
                        False elevations of urinary catecholamine levels may occur due to interference with the fluorescence test.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         