
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  
                     Mechanism Of Action
                  
                  Tizanidine is an agonist at α2-adrenergic receptor sites and presumably reduces spasticity by increasing presynaptic inhibition of motor neurons. In animal models, tizanidine has no direct effect on skeletal muscle fibers or the neuromuscular junction, and no major effect on monosynaptic spinal reflexes. The effects of tizanidine are greatest on polysynaptic pathways. The overall effect of these actions is thought to reduce facilitation of spinal motor neurons.
                  The imidazoline chemical structure of tizanidine is related to that of the antihypertensive drug clonidine and other α2-adrenergic agonists. Pharmacological studies in animals show similarities between the two compounds, but tizanidine was found to have one-tenth to one-fiftieth (1/50) of the potency of clonidine in lowering blood pressure.
               
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     PHARMACOKINETICS
                     
                        Following oral administration, tizanidine is essentially completely absorbed and has a half-life of approximately 2.5 hours (coefficient of variation [CV] = 33%). Following administration of tizanidine, peak plasma concentrations occurred at 1.5 hours (CV = 40%) after dosing. Food increases Cmax by approximately one-third and shortens time to peak concentration by approximately 40 minutes, but the extent of tizanidine absorption is not affected. Tizanidine has linear pharmacokinetics over a dose of 1 to 20 mg. The absolute oral bioavailability of tizanidine is approximately 40% (CV = 24%), due to extensive first-pass metabolism in the liver; approximately 95% of an administered dose is metabolized. Tizanidine metabolites are not known to be active; their half-lives range from 20 to 40 hours. Tizanidine is widely distributed throughout the body; mean steady state volume of distribution is 2.4 L/kg (CV = 21 %) following intravenous administration in healthy adult volunteers.
                        Following single and multiple oral dosing of 14C-tizanidine, an average of 60% and 20% of total radioactivity was recovered in the urine and feces, respectively.
                        Tizanidine is approximately 30% bound to plasma proteins, independent of concentration over the therapeutic range.
                        
                           SPECIAL POPULATIONS
                        
                        
                           Age Effects: No specific pharmacokinetic study was conducted to investigate age effects.  Cross study comparison of pharmacokinetic data following single dose administration of 6 mg tizanidine showed that younger subjects cleared the drug four times faster than the elderly subjects. Tizanidine has not been evaluated in children (see PRECAUTIONS).
                        
                           Hepatic Impairment: Pharmacokinetic differences due to hepatic impairment have not been studied (see WARNINGS).
                        
                           Renal Impairment: Tizanidine clearance is reduced by more than 50% in elderly patients with renal insufficiency (creatinine clearance < 25 mL/min) compared to healthy elderly subjects; this would be expected to lead to a longer duration of clinical effect. Tizanidine should be used with caution in renally impaired patients (see PRECAUTIONS).
                        
                           Gender Effects: No specific pharmacokinetic study was conducted to investigate gender effects. Retrospective analysis of pharmacokinetic data, however, following single and multiple dose administration of 4 mg tizanidine showed that gender had no effect on the pharmacokinetics of tizanidine.
                        
                           Race Effects: Pharmacokinetic differences due to race have not been studied.
                        
                           Drug Interactions - Oral Contraceptives: No specific pharmacokinetic study was conducted to investigate interaction between oral contraceptives and tizanidine. Retrospective analysis of population pharmacokinetic data following single and multiple dose administration of 4 mg tizanidine, however, showed that women concurrently taking oral contraceptives had 50% lower clearance of tizanidine compared to women not on oral contraceptives (see PRECAUTIONS).
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         