
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
                  No specific interaction studies have been conducted with ZUTRIPRO速 Oral Solution.
               
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           Opioids, antihistamines, antipsychotics, anti-anxiety agents, or other CNS depressants: Avoid using with ZUTRIPRO速; May cause additive CNS depression. (7.1)
                           MAOIs or tricyclic antidepressants: Do not use. May increase the effect of either the antidepressant or hydrocodone; may cause increase in blood pressure or hypertensive crisis may occur. (7.2)
                           Anticholinergic drugs: Use with caution. Additive adverse effects resulting from cholinergic blockade (e.g., xerostomia, blurred vision, or constipation) may occur. (7.3)
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 Opioids, Antihistamines, Antipsychotics, Anti-anxiety Agents, or Other CNS Depressants (Including Alcohol)
                     
                        The use of  opioids, antihistamines, antipsychotics, anti-anxiety agents, or other CNS depressants concomitantly with ZUTRIPRO速 Oral Solution may cause an additive CNS depressant effect and should be avoided.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 MAOIs and Tricyclic Antidepressants
                     
                        Do not prescribe ZUTRIPRO速 Oral Solution if the patient is taking a prescription MAOI (i.e., certain drugs used for depression, psychiatric or emotional conditions, or Parkinson's disease), or for 2 weeks after stopping a MAOI drug. The use of MAOIs or tricyclic antidepressants with hydrocodone preparations may increase the effect of either the antidepressant or hydrocodone. An increase in blood pressure or hypertensive crisis may also occur when pseudoephedrine containing preparations are used with MAOIs [see Warnings and Precautions (5.7)].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3 Anticholinergic Drugs
                     
                        Hydrocodone and chlorpheniramine should be administered cautiously to persons receiving other anticholinergic drugs in order to avoid paralytic ileus and excessive anticholinergic effects.
                        Additive adverse effects resulting from cholinergic blockade (e.g., xerostomia, blurred vision, or constipation) may occur when anticholinergic drugs are administered with chlorpheniramine [see Warnings and Precautions (5.6)].
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         