
                     
                     
                     Drug Interactions
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Acidifying Agents
                           
                              Gastrointestinal acidifying agents (guanethidine, reserpine, glutamic acid HCl, ascorbic acid, fruit juices, etc.) lower absorption of amphetamines. Urinary acidifying agents (ammonium chloride, sodium acid phosphate, etc.) increase the concentration of the ionized species of the amphetamine molecule, thereby increasing urinary excretion. Both groups of agents lower blood levels and efficacy of amphetamine.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Adrenergic Blockers
                           
                              Adrenergic blockers are inhibited by amphetamines.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Alkalinizing Agents
                           
                              Gastrointestinal alkalinizing agents (sodium bicarbonate, etc.) increase absorption of amphetamines. Urinary alkalinizing agents (acetazolamide, some thiazides) increase the concentration of the non-ionized species of the amphetamine molecule, thereby decreasing urinary excretion. Both groups of agents increase blood levels and therefore potentiate the actions of amphetamines.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Antidepressants, Tricyclic
                           
                              Amphetamines may enhance the activity of tricyclic or sympathomimetic agents; d-amphetamine with desipramine or protriptyline and possibly other tricyclics cause striking and sustained increases in the concentration of d-amphetamine in the brain; cardiovascular effects can be potentiated.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           MAO Inhibitors
                           
                              MAOI antidepressants, as well as a metabolite of furazolidone, slow amphetamine metabolism. This slowing potentiates amphetamines, increasing their effect on the release of norepinephrine and other monoamines from adrenergic nerve endings; this can cause headaches and other signs of hypertensive crisis. A variety of neurological toxic effects and malignant hyperpyrexia can occur, sometimes with fatal results.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Antihistamines
                           
                              Amphetamines may counteract the sedative effect of antihistamines.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Antihypertensives
                           
                              Amphetamines may antagonize the hypotensive effects of antihypertensives.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Chlorpromazine
                           
                              Chlorpromazine blocks dopamine and norepinephrine reuptake, thus inhibiting the central stimulant effects of amphetamines, and can be used to treat amphetamine poisoning.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Ethosuximide
                           
                              Amphetamines may delay intestinal absorption of ethosuximide.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Haloperidol
                           
                              Haloperidol blocks dopamine and norepinephrine reuptake, thus inhibiting the central stimulant effect of amphetamines.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Lithium Carbonate
                           
                              The stimulatory effects of amphetamines may be inhibited by lithium carbonate.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Meperidine
                           
                              Amphetamines potentiate the analgesic effect of meperidine.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Methenamine Therapy
                           
                              Urinary excretion of amphetamines is increased, and efficacy is reduced, by acidifying agents used in methenamine therapy.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Norepinephrine
                           
                              Amphetamines enhance the adrenergic effect of norepinephrine.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Phenobarbital
                           
                              Amphetamines may delay intestinal absorption of phenobarbital; co-administration of phenobarbital may produce a synergistic anticonvulsant action.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Phenytoin
                           
                              Amphetamines may delay intestinal absorption of phenytoin; co-administration of phenytoin may produce a synergistic anticonvulsant action.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Propoxyphene
                           
                              In cases of propoxyphene overdosage, amphetamine CNS stimulation is potentiated and fatal convulsions can occur.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Veratrum Alkaloids
                           
                              Amphetamines inhibit the hypotensive effect of veratrum alkaloids.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               