
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Pathological changes in Dementia of the Alzheimer's type and Dementia associated with Parkinson’s disease involve cholinergic neuronal pathways that project from the basal forebrain to the cerebral cortex and hippocampus. These pathways are thought to be intricately involved in memory, attention, learning, and other cognitive processes. While the precise mechanism of rivastigmine’s action is unknown, it is postulated to exert its therapeutic effect by enhancing cholinergic function. This is accomplished by increasing the concentration of acetylcholine through reversible inhibition of its hydrolysis by cholinesterase. If this proposed mechanism is correct, Rivastigmine Tartrate Capsules’ effect may lessen as the disease process advances and fewer cholinergic neurons remain functionally intact. There is no evidence that rivastigmine alters the course of the underlying dementing process. After a 6 mg dose of rivastigmine, anticholinesterase activity is present in CSF for about 10 hours, with a maximum inhibition of about 60% 5 hours after dosing.   and studies demonstrate that the inhibition of cholinesterase by rivastigmine is not affected by the concomitant administration of memantine, an N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor antagonist.
                        

                        

                        

                        In vitro
                        in vivo
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Clinical Trial Data
                     
                        The effectiveness of Rivastigmine Tartrate Capsules as a treatment for Alzheimer’s Disease is demonstrated by the results of 2 randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled clinical investigations in patients with Alzheimer’s Disease [diagnosed by NINCDS-ADRDA and DSM-IV criteria, Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) ≥10 and ≤26, and the Global Deterioration Scale (GDS)]. The mean age of patients participating in Rivastigmine Tartrate Capsules trials was 73 years with a range of 41 to 95. Approximately 59% of patients were women and 41% were men. The racial distribution was Caucasian 87%, Black 4% and Other races 9%.   In each study, the effectiveness of Rivastigmine Tartrate Capsules was evaluated using a dual outcome assessment strategy.   The ability of Rivastigmine Tartrate Capsules to improve cognitive performance was assessed with the cognitive subscale of the Alzheimer’s Disease Assessment Scale (ADAS-cog), a multi item instrument that has been extensively validated in longitudinal cohorts of Alzheimer’s Disease patients. The ADAS-cog examines selected aspects of cognitive performance including elements of memory, orientation, attention, reasoning, language and praxis. The ADAS-cog scoring range is from 0 to 70, with higher scores indicating greater cognitive impairment. Elderly normal adults may score as low as 0 or 1, but it is not unusual for non-demented adults to score slightly higher.   The patients recruited as participants in each study had mean scores on ADAS-cog of approximately 23 units, with a range from 1 to 61. Experience gained in longitudinal studies of ambulatory patients with mild to moderate Alzheimer’s Disease suggests that they gain 6 to 12 units a year on the ADAS-cog. Lesser degrees of change, however, are seen in patients with very mild or very advanced disease because the ADAS-cog is not uniformly sensitive to change over the course of the disease. The annualized rate of decline in the placebo patients participating in Rivastigmine Tartrate Capsule trials was approximately 3 to 8 units per year.   The ability of Rivastigmine Tartrate Capsules to produce an overall clinical effect was assessed using a Clinician’s Interview Based Impression of Change (CIBIC) that required the use of caregiver information, the CIBIC-Plus. The CIBIC-Plus is not a single instrument and is not a standardized instrument like the ADAS-cog. Clinical trials for investigational drugs have used a variety of CIBIC formats, each different in terms of depth and structure. As such, results from a CIBIC-Plus reflect clinical experience from the trial or trials in which it was used and can not be compared directly with the results of CIBIC-Plus evaluations from other clinical trials. The CIBIC-Plus used in the Rivastigmine Tartrate Capsules trials was a structured instrument based on a comprehensive  evaluation at baseline and subsequent time-points of three domains: patient cognition, behavior and functioning, including assessment of activities of daily living. It represents the assessment of a skilled clinician using validated scales based on his/her observation at interviews conducted separately with the patient and the caregiver familiar with the behavior of the patient over the interval rated. The CIBIC-Plus is scored as a 7 point categorical rating, ranging from a score of 1, indicating “markedly improved,” to a score of 4, indicating “no change” to a score of 7, indicating “marked worsening.” The CIBIC-Plus has not been systematically compared directly to assessments not using information from caregivers or other global methods.
                        

                        
                           Dementia of the Alzheimer’s type
                        
                        

                        

                        

                        

                        
                           Study Outcome Measures:
                        
                        

                        

                        

                        

                        

                        

                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     U.S. 26-Week Study
                     
                        In a study of 26 weeks duration, 699 patients were randomized to either a dose range of 1 to 4 mg or 6 to 12 mg of Rivastigmine Tartrate Capsules per day or to placebo, each given in divided doses. The 26-week study was divided into a 12-week forced dose titration phase and a 14-week maintenance phase. The patients in the active treatment arms of the study were maintained at their highest tolerated dose within the respective range. Figure 1 illustrates the time course for the change from baseline in ADAS-cog scores for all three dose groups over the 26 weeks of the study. At 26 weeks of treatment, the mean differences in the ADAS-cog change scores for the Rivastigmine Tartrate Capsules -treated patients compared to the patients on placebo were 1.9 and 4.9 units for the 1 to 4 mg and 6 to 12 mg treatments, respectively. Both treatments were statistically significantly superior to placebo and the 6 to 12 mg/day range was significantly superior to the 1 to 4 mg/day range. Figure 2 illustrates the cumulative percentages of patients from each of the three treatment groups who had attained at least the measure of improvement in ADAS-cog score shown on the X axis. Three change scores, (7-point and 4-point reductions from baseline or no change in score) have been identified for illustrative purposes, and the percent of patients in each group achieving that result is shown in the inset table.   The curves demonstrate that both patients assigned to Rivastigmine Tartrate Capsules and placebo have a wide range of responses, but that the Rivastigmine Tartrate Capsules groups are more likely to show the greater improvements. A curve for an effective treatment would be shifted to the left of the curve for placebo, while an ineffective or deleterious treatment would be superimposed upon, or shifted to the right of the curve for placebo, respectively. Figure 3 is a histogram of the frequency distribution of CIBIC-Plus scores attained by patients assigned to each of the three treatment groups who completed 26 weeks of treatment. The mean Rivastigmine Tartrate Capsules -placebo differences for these groups of patients in the mean rating of change from baseline were 0.32 units and 0.35 units for 1 to 4 mg and 6 to 12 mg of Rivastigmine Tartrate Capsules, respectively. The mean ratings for the 6 to 12 mg/day and 1 to 4 mg/day groups were statistically significantly superior to placebo. The differences between the 6 to 12 mg/day and the 1 to 4 mg/day groups were statistically significant.
                        

                        

                        
                           Effects on the ADAS-cog:
                                        

                           
                        
                        

                        
                        

                        

                        
                           Effects on the CIBIC-Plus:
                                        
                              

                           
                        
                        

                        

                        
                        

                        
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           rivastigmine-figure01
                           
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           rivastigmine-figure02
                           
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           rivastigmine-figure03
                           
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Global 26-Week Study
                     
                        In a second study of 26 weeks duration, 725 patients were randomized to either a dose range of 1 to 4 mg or 6 to 12 mg of Rivastigmine Tartrate Capsules per day or to placebo, each given in divided doses. The 26-week study was divided into a 12-week forced dose titration phase and a 14-week maintenance phase. The patients in the active treatment arms of the study were maintained at their highest tolerated dose within the respective range.   Figure 4 illustrates the time course for the change from baseline in ADAS-cog scores for all three dose groups over the 26 weeks of the study. At 26 weeks of treatment, the mean differences in the ADAS-cog change scores for the Rivastigmine Tartrate Capsules -treated patients compared to the patients on placebo were 0.2 and 2.6 units for the 1 to 4 mg and 6 to 12 mg treatments, respectively. The 6 to 12 mg/day group was statistically significantly superior to placebo, as well as to the 1 to 4 mg/day group. The difference between the 1 to 4 mg/day group and placebo was not statistically significant. Figure 5 illustrates the cumulative percentages of patients from each of the three treatment groups who had attained at least the measure of improvement in ADAS-cog score shown on the X axis. Similar to the U.S. 26-week study, the curves demonstrate that both patients assigned to Rivastigmine Tartrate Capsules and placebo have a wide range of responses, but that the 6 to 12 mg/day Rivastigmine Tartrate Capsules group is more likely to show the greater improvements.   Figure 6 is a histogram of the frequency distribution of CIBIC-Plus scores attained by patients assigned to each of the three treatment groups who completed 26 weeks of treatment. The mean Rivastigmine Tartrate Capsules -placebo differences for these groups of patients for the mean rating of change from baseline were 0.14 units and 0.41 units for 1 to 4 mg and 6 to 12 mg of Rivastigmine Tartrate Capsules, respectively. The mean ratings for the 6 to 12 mg/day group was statistically significantly superior to placebo. The comparison of the mean ratings for the 1 to 4 mg/day group and placebo group was not statistically significant.
                        

                        

                        

                        
                           Effects on the ADAS-cog:
                        
                        
                        

                        
                           
                           

                           Effects on the CIBIC-Plus:
                        
                        

                        

                        

                        
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           rivastigmine-figure04
                           
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           rivastigmine-figure05
                           
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           rivastigmine-figure06
                           
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     U.S. Fixed Dose Study
                     
                        In a study of 26 weeks duration, 702 patients were randomized to doses of 3, 6, or 9 mg/day of Rivastigmine Tartrate Capsules or to placebo, each given in divided doses. The fixed-dose study design, which included a 12-week forced titration phase and a 14-week maintenance phase, led to a high dropout rate in the 9 mg/day group because of poor tolerability. At 26 weeks of treatment, significant differences were observed for the ADAS-cog mean change from baseline for the 9 mg/day and 6 mg/day groups, compared to placebo. No significant differences were observed between any of the Rivastigmine Tartrate Capsules dose groups and placebo for the analysis of the CIBIC-Plus mean rating of change. Although no significant differences were observed between Rivastigmine Tartrate Capsules treatment groups, there was a trend toward numerical superiority with higher doses.   The effectiveness of Rivastigmine Tartrate Capsules as a treatment for dementia associated with Parkinson’s disease is demonstrated by the results of one randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled clinical investigation in patients with mild to moderate dementia, with onset at least 2 years after the initial diagnosis of idiopathic Parkinson’s disease. The diagnosis of idiopathic Parkinson’s Disease was based on the United Kingdom Parkinson’s Disease Society Brain Bank clinical criteria. The diagnosis of dementia was based on the criteria stipulated under the DSM-IV category “Dementia Due To Other General Medical Condition” (code 294.1x), but patients were not required to have a distinctive pattern of cognitive deficits as part of the dementia. Alternate causes of dementia were excluded by clinical history, physical and neurological examination, brain imaging, and relevant blood tests. Patients enrolled in the study had a MMSE score ≥ 10 and ≤ 24 at entry.  The mean age of patients participating in this trial was 72.7 years with a range of 50 – 91. Approximately, 35.1% of patients were women and 64.9% of patients were men.  The racial distribution was 99.6% Caucasian and Other races 0.4%.   This study used a dual outcome assessment strategy to evaluate the effectiveness of Rivastigmine Tartrate Capsules. The ability of Rivastigmine Tartrate Capsules to improve cognitive performance was assessed with the ADAS-cog. The ability of Rivastigmine Tartrate Capsules to produce an overall clinical effect was assessed using the Alzheimer’s Disease Cooperative Study – Clinician’s Global Impression of Change (ADCS-CGIC). The ADCS-CGIC is a more standardized form of CIBIC-Plus and is also scored as a seven point categorical rating, ranging from a score of 1, indicating "markedly improved," to a score of 4, indicating "no change" to a score of 7, indicating "marked worsening."   In this study, 541 patients were randomized to a dose range of 3 – 12 mg of Rivastigmine Tartrate Capsules per day or to placebo in a ratio of 2:1, given in divided doses.  The 24-week study was divided into a 16-week titration phase and an 8-week maintenance phase.  The patients in the active treatment arm of the study were maintained at their highest tolerated dose within the specified dose range.     Figure 7 illustrates the time course for the change from baseline in ADAS-cog scores for both treatment groups over the 24 week study. At 24 weeks of treatment, the mean difference in the ADAS-cog change scores for the Rivastigmine Tartrate Capsules-treated patients compared to the patients on placebo was 3.8 points.  This treatment difference was statistically significant in favor of Rivastigmine Tartrate Capsules when compared to placebo. Figure 8 is a histogram of the distribution of patients’ scores on the ADCS-CGIC (Alzheimer’s Disease Cooperative Study—Clinicians Global Impression of Change) at 24 weeks. The mean difference in change scores between the Rivastigmine Tartrate Capsules and placebo groups from baseline was 0.5 points.  This difference was statistically significant in favor of Rivastigmine Tartrate Capsules treatment. Patients' age, gender, or race did not predict clinical outcome of Rivastigmine Tartrate Capsules treatment.
                        

                        

                        

                        
                           Dementia Associated with Parkinson’s disease (PDD)
                        
                        
                           International Twenty-Four-Week Study
                                        

                              

                           
                        
                        

                        

                        

                        

                        
                           Study Outcome Measures:
                        
                        

                        

                        
                           Study Results:
                        
                        

                        

                        
                           Effects on the ADAS-cog:
                        
                        
                           Effects on the ADCS-CGIC:
                                        
                              

                           
                        
                        

                        
                        Age, Gender and Race:
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           rivastigmine-figure07
                           
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           rivastigmine-figure08
                           
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        Rivastigmine is well absorbed with absolute bioavailability of about 40% (3 mg dose). It shows linear pharmacokinetics up to 3 mg BID but is non-linear at higher doses. Doubling the dose from 3 to 6 mg BID results in a 3-fold increase in AUC. The elimination half-life is about 1.5 hours, with most elimination as metabolites via the urine. Rivastigmine is rapidly and completely absorbed. Peak plasma concentrations are reached in approximately 1 hour. Absolute bioavailability after a 3 mg dose is about 36%. Administration of Rivastigmine Tartrate Capsules with food delays absorption (t ) by 90 minutes, lowers C by approximately 30% and increases AUC by approximately 30%.   Rivastigmine is widely distributed throughout the body with a volume of distribution in the range of 1.8 to 2.7 L/kg. Rivastigmine penetrates the blood brain barrier, reaching CSF peak concentrations in 1.4 to 2.6 hours. Mean AUC ratio of CSF/plasma averaged 40 ± 0.5% following 1 to 6 mg BID doses.   Rivastigmine is about 40% bound to plasma proteins at concentrations of 1 to 400 ng/mL, which cover the therapeutic concentration range. Rivastigmine distributes equally between blood and plasma with a blood-to-plasma partition ratio of 0.9 at concentrations ranging from 1 to 400 ng/mL.   Rivastigmine is rapidly and extensively metabolized, primarily via cholinesterase-mediated hydrolysis to the decarbamylated metabolite. Based on evidence from and animal studies, the major cytochrome P450 isozymes are minimally involved in rivastigmine metabolism. Consistent with these observations is the finding that no drug interactions related to cytochrome P450 have been observed in humans [see ]. The major pathway of elimination is via the kidneys. Following administration of C-rivastigmine to 6 healthy volunteers total recovery of radioactivity over 120 hours was 97% in urine and 0.4% in feces. No parent drug was detected in urine. The sulfate conjugate of the decarbamylated metabolite is the major component excreted in urine and represents 40% of the dose. Mean oral clearance of rivastigmine is 1.8 ± 0.6 L/min after 6 mg BID.
                        

                        

                        
                            
                        
                        

                        
                           Absorption:
                        
                        max
                        max
                        

                        

                        
                           Distribution:
                        
                        1-12hr
                        

                        

                        

                        

                        
                           Metabolism:
                        
                        in vitro
                        Drug-Drug Interactions
                        

                        
                            
                                        

                           
                        
                        
                           Elimination:
                        
                        14
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Special Populations
                     
                        Following a single 3 mg dose, mean oral clearance of rivastigmine was 60% lower in hepatically impaired patients (n=10, biopsy proven) than in healthy subjects (n=10). After multiple 6 mg BID oral dosing, the mean clearance of rivastigmine was 65% lower in mild (n=7, Child-Pugh score 5 to 6) and moderate (n=3, Child-Pugh score 7 to 9) hepatically impaired patients (biopsy proven, liver cirrhosis) than in healthy subjects (n=10). Dosage adjustment is not necessary in hepatically impaired patients as the dose of drug is individually titrated to tolerability.   Following a single 3 mg dose, mean oral clearance of rivastigmine is 64% lower in moderately impaired renal patients (n=8, GFR=10 to 50 mL/min) than in healthy subjects (n=10, GFR≥60 mL/min); Cl/F=1.7 L/min (cv=45%) and 4.8 L/min (cv=80%), respectively. In severely impaired renal patients (n=8, GFR<10mL/min), mean oral clearance of rivastigmine is 43% higher than in healthy subjects (n=10, GFR≥60 mL/min); Cl/F = 6.9 L/min and 4.8 L/min, respectively. For unexplained reasons, the severely impaired renal patients had a higher clearance of rivastigmine than moderately impaired patients. However, dosage adjustment may not be necessary in renally impaired patients as the dose of the drug is individually titrated to tolerability.   Following a single 2.5 mg oral dose to elderly volunteers (>60 years of age, n=24) and younger volunteers (n=24), mean oral clearance of rivastigmine was 30% lower in elderly (7 L/min) than in younger subjects (10 L/min).   No specific pharmacokinetic study was conducted to investigate the effect of gender and race on the disposition of Rivastigmine Tartrate Capsules, but a population pharmacokinetic analysis indicates that gender (n=277 males and 348 females) and race (n=575 White, 34 Black, 4 Asian, and 12 Other) did not affect the clearance of Rivastigmine Tartrate capsules   Population PK analysis showed that nicotine use increases the oral clearance of rivastigmine by 23% (n=75 Smokers and 549 Nonsmokers).
                        

                        
                           Hepatic Disease:
                        
                        

                        

                        
                           Renal Disease:
                        
                        

                        

                        
                           Age:
                        
                        

                        

                        
                           Gender and Race:
                        
                        

                        

                        
                           Nicotine Use:
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Drug-Drug Interactions
                     
                        Rivastigmine is primarily metabolized through hydrolysis by esterases. Minimal metabolism occurs via the major cytochrome P450 isoenzymes. Based on studies, no pharmacokinetic drug interactions with drugs metabolized by the following isoenzyme systems are expected: CYP1A2, CYP2D6, CYP3A4/5, CYP2E1, CYP2C9, CYP2C8, or CYP2C19.   No pharmacokinetic interaction was observed between rivastigmine and digoxin, warfarin, diazepam, or fluoxetine in studies in healthy volunteers. The elevation of prothrombin time induced by warfarin is not affected by administration of Rivastigmine Tartrate Capsules.   Drugs that induce or inhibit CYP450 metabolism are not expected to alter the metabolism of rivastigmine. Single dose pharmacokinetic studies demonstrated that the metabolism of rivastigmine is not significantly affected by concurrent administration of digoxin, warfarin, diazepam, or fluoxetine.   Population PK analysis with a database of 625 patients showed that the pharmacokinetics of rivastigmine were not influenced by commonly prescribed medications such as antacids (n=77), antihypertensives (n=72), β-blockers (n=42), calcium channel blockers (n=75), antidiabetics (n=21), nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (n=79), estrogens (n=70), salicylate analgesics (n=177), antianginals (n=35), and antihistamines (n=15). In addition, in clinical trials, no increased risk of clinically relevant untoward effects was observed in patients treated concomitantly with Rivastigmine Tartrate Capsules and these agents.
                        

                        
                           Effect of
                        
                        
                           Rivastigmine Tartrate Capsules on the Metabolism of Other Drugs:
                        
                        in vitro
                        

                        

                        

                        

                        
                           Effect of Other Drugs on the Metabolism of
                        
                        
                           Rivastigmine Tartrate Capsules:
                        
                        

                        

                     
                     
                  
               
            
         