
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           Concurrent use of other CNS depressants may cause respiratory depression, hypotension, and profound sedation or coma. (7.1)
                           XARTEMIS XR may enhance the neuromuscular blocking action of skeletal muscle relaxants and produce an increased degree of respiratory depression. (7.2)
                           Monoamine oxidase inhibitors may intensify the effects of opioids causing anxiety, confusion and significant depression of respiration or coma. (7.3)
                           The CYP3A4 isoenzyme plays a major role in the metabolism of XARTEMIS XR; drugs that inhibit CYP3A4 activity may cause decreased clearance of oxycodone which could lead to an increase in oxycodone plasma concentrations. (7.4)
                           Mixed agonist/antagonist analgesics may reduce the analgesic effect of oxycodone and may precipitate withdrawal symptoms in these patients. (7.5)
                           Anticholinergics may increase risk for urinary retention and severe constipation. (7.6)
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1   CNS Depressants
                     
                        The concomitant use of XARTEMIS XR with other CNS depressants including sedatives, hypnotics, tranquilizers, general anesthetics, phenothiazines, other opioids, and alcohol can increase the risk of respiratory depression, profound sedation, coma and death. Monitor patients receiving CNS depressants and XARTEMIS XR for signs of respiratory depression, sedation and hypotension.
                        When combined therapy with any of the above medications is considered, the dose of one or both agents should be reduced [see Dosage and Administration (2.2) and Warnings and Precautions (5.4)].
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2    Neuromuscular Blocking Agents
                     
                        Oxycodone, as well as other opioid analgesics, may enhance the neuromuscular blocking action of skeletal muscle relaxants and produce an increased degree of respiratory depression.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3       Monoamine Oxidase Inhibitors
                     
                        Monoamine Oxidase Inhibitors (MAOIs) have been reported to intensify the effects of at least one opioid drug causing anxiety, confusion, and significant depression of respiration or coma. The use of XARTEMIS XR is not recommended for patients taking MAOIs or within 14 days of stopping such treatment.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4       Agents Affecting Cytochrome P450 Enzymes
                     
                        
                           
                              CYP3A4 Inhibitors

                              
                           Because the CYP3A4 isoenzyme plays a major role in the metabolism of oxycodone, drugs that inhibit CYP3A4 activity may cause decreased clearance of oxycodone which could lead to an increase in oxycodone plasma concentrations and result in increased or prolonged opioid effects. These effects could be more pronounced with concomitant use of CYP2D6 and 3A4 inhibitors. If co-administration with XARTEMIS XR is necessary, monitor patients for respiratory depression and sedation at frequent intervals and consider dose adjustments until stable drug effects are achieved [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                        
                        
                           
                              CYP3A4 Inducers

                              
                           CYP450 3A4 inducers may induce the metabolism of oxycodone and, therefore, may cause increased clearance of the drug which could lead to a decrease in oxycodone plasma concentrations, lack of efficacy or, possibly, development of a withdrawal syndrome in a patient who had developed physical dependence to oxycodone. If co-administration with XARTEMIS XR is necessary, monitor for signs of opioid withdrawal and consider dose adjustments until stable drug effects are achieved [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                        
                        
                           
                              CYP2D6 Inhibitors

                              
                           Oxycodone is metabolized in part to oxymorphone via the Cytochrome P450 isoenzyme CYP2D6. While this pathway may be blocked by a variety of drugs (e.g., certain cardiovascular drugs, including amiodarone and quinidine, and antidepressants), such blockade has not yet been shown to be of clinical significance with this agent. However, clinicians should be aware of this possible interaction [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.5       Mixed Agonist/Antagonist Opioid Analgesics
                     
                        Agonist/antagonist analgesics (i.e., pentazocine, nalbuphine, butorphanol, and buprenorphine) should be administered with caution to patients who have received or are receiving a course of therapy with an opioid agonist analgesic such as XARTEMIS XR. In this situation, mixed agonist/antagonist analgesics may reduce the analgesic effect of XARTEMIS XR and/or may precipitate withdrawal symptoms in these patients.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.6       Anticholinergics
                     
                        Anticholinergics or other medications with anticholinergic activity when used concurrently with opioid analgesics may result in increased risk of urinary retention and/or severe constipation, which may lead to paralytic ileus.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         