
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1. Mechanism of Action
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Carbidopa
                              
                              When levodopa is administered orally, it is rapidly decarboxylated to dopamine in extracerebral tissues so that only a small portion of a given dose is transported unchanged to the central nervous system. Carbidopa inhibits the decarboxylation of peripheral levodopa, making more levodopa available for delivery to the brain.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Levodopa
                              
                              Levodopa is the metabolic precursor of dopamine, does cross the blood-brain barrier, and presumably is converted to dopamine in the brain. This is thought to be the mechanism whereby levodopa relieves symptoms of Parkinson's disease.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2. Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        Because its decarboxylase inhibiting activity is limited to extracerebral tissues, administration of carbidopa with levodopa makes more levodopa available to the brain. The addition of carbidopa to levodopa reduces the peripheral effects (nausea, vomiting) due to decarboxylation of levodopa; however, carbidopa does not decrease the adverse reactions due to the central effects of levodopa.
                        Patients treated with levodopa therapy for Parkinson's disease may develop motor fluctuations characterized by end-of-dose failure, peak dose dyskinesia, 'on-off' phenomenon, and akinesia.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3. Pharmacokinetics
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Absorption
                              
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Carbidopa
                                    
                                    Following oral dosing of RYTARY the maximum concentration occurred at approximately 3 hours. The bioavailability of carbidopa from RYTARY relative to immediate-release carbidopa-levodopa tablets was approximately 50%.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Levodopa
                                    
                                    The pharmacokinetics of RYTARY were evaluated following single doses in healthy subjects and following single and multiple doses in patients with Parkinson's disease. The bioavailability of levodopa from RYTARY in patients was approximately 70% relative to immediate-release carbidopa-levodopa. Following an initial peak at about one hour, plasma concentrations are maintained for about 4 to 5 hours before declining.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Distribution
                              
                              Carbidopa is approximately 36% bound to plasma proteins. Approximately 10-30% of levodopa is bound to plasma protein.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Metabolism and Elimination
                              
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Carbidopa
                                    
                                    The terminal phase elimination half-life of carbidopa is approximately 2 hours.
                                    Carbidopa is metabolized to two main metabolites: α-methyl-3-methoxy-4-hydroxyphenylpropionic acid and α-methyl-3,4-dihydroxy-phenylpropionic acid. These two metabolites are primarily eliminated in the urine unchanged or as a glucuronide. Unchanged carbidopa accounts for 30% of the total urinary excretion.
                                    Peripheral dopa-decarboxylase may be saturated by carbidopa in other carbidopa-levodopa products at 70 to 100 mg per day, which produces equivalent exposure to 140 to 200 mg of carbidopa provided by RYTARY.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Levodopa
                                    
                                    The terminal phase elimination half-life of levodopa, the active moiety of antiparkinsonian activity, is approximately 2 hours in the presence of carbidopa.
                                    Levodopa is extensively metabolized to various metabolites. The two major metabolic pathways are decarboxylation by dopa decarboxylase (DDC) and O-methylation by catechol-O-methyltransferase (COMT).
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Dose Proportionality
                              
                              RYTARY shows approximately dose proportional pharmacokinetics for both carbidopa and levodopa over the levodopa dosage strength range of 95 mg to 245 mg.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Effect of Food
                              
                              In healthy adults, oral administration of RYTARY after a high-fat, high-calorie meal reduced Cmax approximately 21% and increased AUCinf approximately 13% for levodopa compared to administration in the fasted state. There may be a delay by 2 hours in the absorption of levodopa when RYTARY is taken with a high-fat, high-calorie meal. In addition, absorption of levodopa may be decreased by a high protein meal.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Specific Populations
                              
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Elderly
                                    
                                    In pharmacokinetics studies following a single dose of RYTARY, the peak concentrations of carbidopa and levodopa are generally similar between younger (45-60 years) and older (60-75 years) subjects.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Gender
                                    
                                    In pharmacokinetics studies following a single dose of RYTARY:
                                    
                                       Carbidopa
At comparable doses females are reported to have higher carbidopa peak concentrations and systemic exposure (approximately 33%) compared to males. Median time to peak concentration and terminal half-life are comparable between males and females.
                                        Levodopa
At comparable doses females are reported to have higher levodopa peak concentrations (approximately 23% to 33%) and systemic exposure (approximately 33% to 37%) compared to males. Median time to peak concentration and terminal half-life are comparable between males and females.
                                    
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         