
                     
                     
                     Drug Interactions
                     
                        studies were conducted to investigate the potential of gabapentin to inhibit the major cytochrome P450 enzymes (CYP1A2, CYP2A6, CYP2C9, CYP2C19, CYP2D6, CYP2E1, and CYP3A4) that mediate drug and xenobiotic metabolism using isoform selective marker substrates and human liver microsomal preparations. Only at the highest concentration tested (171 mcg/mL; 1 mM) was a slight degree of inhibition (14% to 30%) of isoform CYP2A6 observed. No inhibition of any of the other isoforms tested was observed at gabapentin concentrations up to 171 mcg/mL (approximately 15 times the C at 3600 mg/day).
                                    In vitro
                           max
                        
                        Gabapentin is not appreciably metabolized nor does it interfere with the metabolism of commonly coadministered antiepileptic drugs.
                        The drug interaction data described in this section were obtained from studies involving healthy adults and adult patients with epilepsy.
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Phenytoin
                           
                           
                              In a single (400 mg) and multiple dose (400 mg TID) study of gabapentin in epileptic patients (N = 8) maintained on phenytoin monotherapy for at least 2 months, gabapentin had no effect on the steady-state trough plasma concentrations of phenytoin and phenytoin had no effect on gabapentin pharmacokinetics.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Carbamazepine
                           
                           
                              Steady-state trough plasma carbamazepine and carbamazepine 10, 11 epoxide concentrations were not affected by concomitant gabapentin (400 mg TID; N = 12) administration. Likewise, gabapentin pharmacokinetics were unaltered by carbamazepine administration.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Valproic Acid
                           
                           
                              The mean steady-state trough serum valproic acid concentrations prior to and during concomitant gabapentin administration (400 mg TID; N = 17) were not different and neither were gabapentin pharmacokinetic parameters affected by valproic acid.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Phenobarbital
                           
                           
                              Estimates of steady-state pharmacokinetic parameters for phenobarbital or gabapentin (300 mg TID; N = 12) are identical whether the drugs are administered alone or together.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Naproxen
                           
                           
                              Coadministration (N = 18) of naproxen sodium capsules (250 mg) with gabapentin (125 mg) appears to increase the amount of gabapentin absorbed by 12% to 15%. Gabapentin had no effect on naproxen pharmacokinetic parameters. These doses are lower than the therapeutic doses for both drugs. The magnitude of interaction within the recommended dose ranges of either drug is not known.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Hydrocodone
                           
                           
                              Coadministration of gabapentin (125 to 500 mg; N = 48) decreases hydrocodone (10 mg; N = 50) C and AUC values in a dose-dependent manner relative to administration of hydrocodone alone; C and AUC values are 3% to 4% lower, respectively, after administration of 125 mg gabapentin and 21% to 22% lower, respectively, after administration of 500 mg gabapentin. The mechanism for this interaction is unknown. Hydrocodone increases gabapentin AUC values by 14%. The magnitude of interaction at other doses is not known.
                                            max
                                 max
                              
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Morphine
                           
                           
                              A literature article reported that when a 60 mg controlled-release morphine capsule was administered 2 hours prior to a 600 mg gabapentin capsule (N = 12), mean gabapentin AUC increased by 44% compared to gabapentin administered without morphine (see ). Morphine pharmacokinetic parameter values were not affected by administration of gabapentin 2 hours after morphine. The magnitude of interaction at other doses is not known.
                                            PRECAUTIONS
                              
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Cimetidine
                           
                           
                              In the presence of cimetidine at 300 mg QID (N = 12), the mean apparent oral clearance of gabapentin fell by 14% and creatinine clearance fell by 10%. Thus, cimetidine appeared to alter the renal excretion of both gabapentin and creatinine, an endogenous marker of renal function. This small decrease in excretion of gabapentin by cimetidine is not expected to be of clinical importance. The effect of gabapentin on cimetidine was not evaluated.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Oral Contraceptive
                           
                           
                              Based on AUC and half-life, multiple-dose pharmacokinetic profiles of norethindrone and ethinyl estradiol following administration of tablets containing 2.5 mg of norethindrone acetate and 50 mcg of ethinyl estradiol were similar with and without coadministration of gabapentin (400 mg TID; N = 13). The C of norethindrone was 13% higher when it was coadministered with gabapentin; this interaction is not expected to be of clinical importance.
                                            max
                              
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Antacid (Aluminum Hydroxide and Magnesium Hydroxide)
                           
                           
                              Aluminum hydroxide and magnesium hydroxide reduced the bioavailability of gabapentin (N = 16) by about 20%. This decrease in bioavailability was about 5% when gabapentin was administered 2 hours after aluminum hydroxide and magnesium hydroxide. It is recommended that gabapentin be taken at least 2 hours following aluminum hydroxide and magnesium hydroxide administration.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Effect of Probenecid
                           
                           
                              Probenecid is a blocker of renal tubular secretion. Gabapentin pharmacokinetic parameters without and with probenecid were comparable. This indicates that gabapentin does not undergo renal tubular secretion by the pathway that is blocked by probenecid.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               