
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Endogenous estrogens are largely responsible for the development and maintenance of the female reproductive system and secondary sexual characteristics. Although circulating estrogens exist in a dynamic equilibrium of metabolic interconversions, estradiol is the principal intracellular human estrogen and is substantially more potent than its metabolites, estrone and estriol, at the receptor level.
                        The primary source of estrogen in normally cycling adult women is the ovarian follicle, which secretes 70 to 500 mcg of estradiol daily, depending on the phase of the menstrual cycle. After menopause, most endogenous estrogen is produced by conversion of androstenedione, secreted by the adrenal cortex, to estrone in the peripheral tissues. Thus, estrone and the sulfate conjugated form, estrone sulfate, are the most abundant circulating estrogens in postmenopausal women.
                        Estrogens act through binding to nuclear receptors in estrogen responsive tissues. To date, two estrogen receptors have been identified. These vary in proportion from tissue to tissue.
                        Circulating estrogens modulate the pituitary secretion of the gonadotropins, luteinizing hormone (LH) and follicle stimulating hormone (FSH) through a negative feedback mechanism. Estrogens act to reduce the elevated concentrations of these hormones seen in postmenopausal women.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        There are no pharmacodynamic data for MINIVELLE.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        
                           Absorption
                        
                        In a single-dose, two way-crossover clinical study conducted in 96 healthy, non-smoking postmenopausal women under fed condition, MINIVELLE (0.1 mg per day) was bioequivalent to Vivelle (0.1 mg per day) based on estradiol exposure (AUC0-84) and estradiol peak concentration (Cmax) following a single-dose on the lower abdomen for 84 hours.
                        Estradiol pharmacokinetics were characterized in a separate open-label, single-center, randomized, single-dose, three-way crossover study conducted in 36 healthy, non-smoking postmenopausal women (aged 40 to 65 years).  MINIVELLE transdermal systems delivering nominal estradiol of approximately 0.025 mg, 0.05 mg, and 0.1 mg per day were applied to the lower abdomen under fed state in a crossover fashion for 84 hours.  The mean estradiol pharmacokinetics parameters are summarized in Table 2.  AUC and Cmax are dose proportional from 0.025 mg to 0.1 mg per day. 
                        


                        


Figure 1 illustrates the mean baseline-uncorrected estradiol serum concentrations of MINIVELLE at three different strengths. 
                        
                           Figure 1: Mean Baseline-Uncorrected Estradiol Serum Concentration-Time Profiles Following a Single Dose of MINIVELLE 0.1 mg per day (Treatment A), 0.05 mg per day (Treatment B), and 0.025 mg per day (Treatment C) (N=36)
                        
                        
                           
                        
                        
                           Distribution
                        
                        No specific investigation of the tissue distribution of estradiol absorbed from Minivelle in humans has been conducted. The distribution of exogenous estrogens is similar to that of endogenous estrogens. Estrogens are widely distributed in the body and are generally found in higher concentrations in the sex hormone target organs. Estrogens circulate in the blood largely bound to sex hormone-binding globulin (SHBG) and albumin.
                        
                           Metabolism
                        
                        Exogenous estrogens are metabolized in the same manner as endogenous estrogens. Circulating estrogens exist in a dynamic equilibrium of metabolic interconversions. These transformations take place mainly in the liver. Estradiol is converted reversibly to estrone, and both can be converted to estriol, which is a major urinary metabolite. Estrogens also undergo enterohepatic recirculation via sulfate and glucuronide conjugation in the liver, biliary secretion of conjugates into the intestine, and hydrolysis in the intestine followed by reabsorption. In postmenopausal women a significant portion of the circulating estrogens exist as sulfate conjugates, especially estrone sulfate, which serves as a circulating reservoir for the formation of more active estrogens. 
                        
                           Excretion
                        
                        Estradiol, estrone and estriol are excreted in the urine along with glucuronide and sulfate conjugates. The mean half-life values of estradiol calculated from treatment groups in the bioequivalence study and dose-proportionality study after dosing with the MINIVELLE ranged from 6.2 to 7.9 hours. After removal of the transdermal systems, serum concentrations of estradiol and estrone returned to baseline concentrations within 24 hours.
                        
                           Adhesion and Adhesive Residue
                        
                        Based on combined data from bioequivalence and dose proportionality studies consisting of 208 MINIVELLE observations, approximately 98 percent of the observations had an adhesion score of 0 (i.e., the skin adhesion rate was greater than or equal to 90 percent) over the 84-hour wear period. One subject had a complete detachment during the wear period. Approximately 65 percent of the transdermal systems evaluated in these studies were with MINIVELLE 0.1 mg per day (6.6 cm2 active surface area).
                        After removal of MINIVELLE, subjects had either no adhesive residue (score of 0) or light adhesive residue (score of 1). There were no subjects who had medium adhesive residue. Of the 208 MINIVELLE observations, 54 percent had light adhesive residue and 46 percent had no adhesive residue.
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           Figure 1:	Mean Baseline-Uncorrected Estradiol Serum Concentration-Time Profiles Following a Single Dose of MINIVELLE 0.1 mg per day (Treatment A), 0.05 mg per day (Treatment B), and 0.025 mg per day (Treatment C) (N=36)
                           
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         