
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 Monoamine Oxidase Inhibitors (MAOIs)
                     
                        Adverse reactions, some of which were serious, have been reported in patients who have recently been discontinued from a monoamine oxidase inhibitor (MAOI) and started on antidepressants with pharmacological properties similar to desvenlafaxine (SNRIs or SSRIs), or who have recently had SNRI or SSRI therapy discontinued prior to initiation of an MAOI.  [see 
                           Dosage and Administration (2.6   ), Contraindications (4  ) and Warnings and Precautions (5.2  )]
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 Serotonergic Drugs
                     
                        Based on the mechanism of action of Desvenlafaxine Extended-Release Tablets and the potential for serotonin syndrome, caution is advised when Desvenlafaxine Extended-Release Tablets is co-administered with other drugs that may affect the serotonergic neurotransmitter systems. [see 
                           Dosage and Administration (2.6 ) , Contraindications (4)  and Warnings and Precautions (5.2  )] 
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3 Drugs that Interfere with Hemostasis (e.g., NSAIDs, Aspirin, and Warfarin)
                     
                        Serotonin release by platelets plays an important role in hemostasis. Epidemiological studies of case-control and cohort design that have demonstrated an association between use of psychotropic drugs that interfere with serotonin reuptake and the occurrence of upper gastrointestinal bleeding. These studies have also shown that concurrent use of an NSAID or aspirin may potentiate this risk of bleeding. Altered anticoagulant effects, including increased bleeding, have been reported when SSRIs and SNRIs are co-administered with warfarin. Patients receiving warfarin therapy should be carefully monitored when Desvenlafaxine Extended-Release Tablets is initiated or discontinued [see Warnings and Precautions (5.4 )]. 
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4 Potential for Desvenlafaxine to Affect Other Drugs
                     
                        Clinical studies have shown that desvenlafaxine does not have a clinically relevant effect on CYP2D6 metabolism at the dose of 100 mg daily. Substrates primarily metabolized by CYP2D6 (e.g., desipramine, atomoxetine, dextromethorphan, metoprolol, nebivolol, perphenazine, tolterodine) should be dosed at the original level when co-administered with Desvenlafaxine Extended-Release Tablets 100 mg or lower. Reduce the dose of these substrates by one-half if co-administered with 400 mg of Desvenlafaxine Extended-Release Tablets. The substrate dose should be increased to the original level when 400 mg of Desvenlafaxine Extended-Release Tablets is discontinued.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.5  Other Drugs Containing Desvenlafaxine or Venlafaxine
                     
                         Avoid use of Desvenlafaxine Extended-Release Tablets with other desvenlafaxine-containing products or venlafaxine products. The concomitant use of Desvenlafaxine Extended-Release Tablets with other desvenlafaxine-containing products or venlafaxine will increase desvenlafaxine blood levels and increase dose-related adverse reactions [see Adverse Reactions (6  )].    
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.6 Ethanol
                     
                        A clinical study has shown that desvenlafaxine does not increase the impairment of mental and motor skills caused by ethanol. However, as with all CNS-active drugs, patients should be advised to avoid alcohol consumption while taking Desvenlafaxine Extended-Release Tablets. 
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         