
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        

                        Rizatriptan binds with high affinity to human cloned 5-HT1B/1D receptors. Rizatriptan presumably exerts its therapeutic effects in the treatment of migraine headache by binding to 5-HT1B/1D receptors located on intracranial blood vessels and sensory nerves of the trigeminal system.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        

                        Absorption
Rizatriptan is completely absorbed following oral administration. The mean oral absolute bioavailability of the rizatriptan benzoate tablet is about 45%, and mean peak plasma concentrations (Cmax) are reached in approximately 1 to 1.5 hours (Tmax). The presence of a migraine headache did not appear to affect the absorption or pharmacokinetics of rizatriptan. Food has no significant effect on the bioavailability of rizatriptan but delays the time to reach peak concentration by an hour. In clinical trials, rizatriptan benzoate was administered without regard to food.

                           
The bioavailability and Cmax of rizatriptan were similar following administration of rizatriptan benzoate tablets and rizatriptan benzoate orally disintegrating tablets, but the rate of absorption is somewhat slower with rizatriptan benzoate orally disintegrating tablets, with Tmax delayed by up to 0.7 hour. AUC of rizatriptan is approximately 30% higher in females than in males. No accumulation occurred on multiple dosing.

                           
Distribution
The mean volume of distribution is approximately 140 liters in male subjects and 110 liters in female subjects. Rizatriptan is minimally bound (14%) to plasma proteins.

                           
Metabolism
The primary route of rizatriptan metabolism is via oxidative deamination by monoamine oxidase-A (MAO-A) to the indole acetic acid metabolite, which is not active at the 5-HT1B/1D receptor. N-monodesmethyl-rizatriptan, a metabolite with activity similar to that of parent compound at the 5-HT1B/1D receptor, is formed to a minor degree. Plasma concentrations of N-monodesmethyl-rizatriptan are approximately 14% of those of parent compound, and it is eliminated at a similar rate. Other minor metabolites, the N-oxide, the 6-hydroxy compound, and the sulfate conjugate of the 6-hydroxy metabolite are not active at the 5-HT1B/1D receptor.

                           
Elimination
The total radioactivity of the administered dose recovered over 120 hours in urine and feces was 82% and 12%, respectively, following a single 10 mg oral administration of 14C-rizatriptan. Following oral administration of 14C-rizatriptan, rizatriptan accounted for about 17% of circulating plasma radioactivity.
Approximately 14% of an oral dose is excreted in urine as unchanged rizatriptan while 51% is excreted as indole acetic acid metabolite, indicating substantial first pass metabolism.
The plasma half-life of rizatriptan in males and females averages 2 to 3 hours.
                              
                                 

                                 
Cytochrome P450 Isoforms

                              
                           Rizatriptan is not an inhibitor of the activities of human liver cytochrome P450 isoforms 3A4/5, 1A2, 2C9, 2C19, or 2E1; rizatriptan is a competitive inhibitor (Ki=1400 nM) of cytochrome P450 2D6, but only at high, clinically irrelevant concentrations.
                              
                                 

                                 
Special Populations

                              
                           
                           Geriatric: Rizatriptan pharmacokinetics in healthy elderly non-migraineur volunteers (age 65 to 77 years) were similar to those in younger non-migraineur volunteers (age 18 to 45 years).

                           Pediatric:
                           

                           Information related to the pharmacokinetics of rizatriptan in pediatric migraineurs 6 to 17 years of age is approved for Merck & Co., Inc.’s Rizatriptan Benzoate Tablets. However, due to Merck & Co., Inc.’s marketing exclusivity rights, this drug product is not labeled with that information.

                           
                           Gender: The mean AUC0-∞ and Cmax of rizatriptan (10 mg orally) were about 30% and 11% higher in females as compared to males, respectively, while Tmax occurred at approximately the same time.

                           Hepatic impairment: Following oral administration in patients with hepatic impairment caused by mild to moderate alcoholic cirrhosis of the liver, plasma concentrations of rizatriptan were similar in patients with mild hepatic insufficiency compared to a control group of subjects with normal hepatic function; plasma concentrations of rizatriptan were approximately 30% greater in patients with moderate hepatic insufficiency.

                           Renal impairment: In patients with renal impairment (creatinine clearance 10 to 60 mL/min/1.73 m2), the AUC0-∞ of rizatriptan was not significantly different from that in subjects with normal renal function. In hemodialysis patients, (creatinine clearance <2 mL/min/1.73 m2), however, the AUC for rizatriptan was approximately 44% greater than that in patients with normal renal function.

                           Race: Pharmacokinetic data revealed no significant differences between African American and Caucasian subjects.
                              
                                 

                                 
Drug Interactions

                              
                           
                           [See also Drug Interactions (7).]
                           
                              
                                 

                                 
Monoamine oxidase inhibitors
                           
                           :

                           Rizatriptan is principally metabolized via monoamine oxidase, ‘A’ subtype (MAO-A). Plasma concentrations of rizatriptan may be increased by drugs that are selective MAO-A inhibitors (e.g., moclobemide) or nonselective MAO inhibitors [type A and B] (e.g., isocarboxazid, phenelzine, tranylcypromine, and pargyline). In a drug interaction study, when rizatriptan 10 mg was administered to subjects (n=12) receiving concomitant therapy with the selective, reversible MAO-A inhibitor, moclobemide 150 mg t.i.d., there were mean increases in rizatriptan AUC and Cmax of 119% and 41% respectively; and the AUC of the active N-monodesmethyl metabolite of rizatriptan was increased more than 400%. The interaction would be expected to be greater with irreversible MAO inhibitors. No pharmacokinetic interaction is anticipated in patients receiving selective MAO-B inhibitors [see Contraindications (4) and Drug Interactions (7.5)].
                              
                                 

                                 
Propranolol
                           
                           : 

                           In a study of concurrent administration of propranolol 240 mg/day and a single dose of rizatriptan 10 mg in healthy adult subjects (n=11), mean plasma AUC for rizatriptan was increased by 70% during propranolol administration, and a four-fold increase was observed in one subject. The AUC of the active N-monodesmethyl metabolite of rizatriptan was not affected by propranolol [see Dosage and Administration (2.4) and Drug Interactions (7.1)].
                              
                                 

                                 
Nadolol/Metoprolol
                           
                           :

                              

                           In a drug interactions study, effects of multiple doses of nadolol 80 mg or metoprolol 100 mg every 12 hours on the pharmacokinetics of a single dose of 10 mg rizatriptan were evaluated in healthy subjects (n=12). No pharmacokinetic interactions were observed.

                           
                              
                                 
Paroxetine
                           
                           :
                           

                           
In a study of the interaction between the selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor (SSRI) paroxetine 20 mg/day for two weeks and a single dose of rizatriptan 10 mg in healthy subjects (n=12), neither the plasma concentrations of rizatriptan nor its safety profile were affected by paroxetine [see Warnings and Precautions (5.7), Drug Interactions (7.4), and Patient Counseling Information (17)].
                        
                           
                        
                        

                        

                        Oral contraceptives:
In a study of concurrent administration of an oral contraceptive during 6 days of administration of rizatriptan benzoate tablet (10 to 30 mg/day) in healthy female volunteers (n=18), rizatriptan did not affect plasma concentrations of ethinyl estradiol or norethindrone.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         