
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
                  Pharmacokinetic/pharmacodynamic interaction studies have been conducted with treprostinil administered subcutaneously (Remodulin) and orally (treprostinil diethanolamine).
                  
                     Pharmacodynamics
                  
               
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                            Blood pressure lowering drugs (e.g., diuretics, antihypertensive agents, or vasodilators): Risk of increased reduction in blood pressure (7.1)
                            Remodulin inhibits platelet aggregation. Potential for increased risk of bleeding, particularly among patients on anticoagulants. (7.2)
                            Remodulin dosage adjustment may be necessary if inhibitors or inducers of CYP2C8 are added or withdrawn. (7.6)
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 Antihypertensive Agents or Other Vasodilators
                     
                        Concomitant administration of Remodulin with diuretics, antihypertensive agents or other vasodilators may increase the risk of symptomatic hypotension.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 Anticoagulants
                     
                        Since treprostinil inhibits platelet aggregation, there may be an increased risk of bleeding, particularly among patients receiving anticoagulants.
                        
                           Pharmacokinetics
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3 Bosentan
                     
                        In a human pharmacokinetic study conducted with bosentan (250 mg/day) and an oral formulation of treprostinil (treprostinil diethanolamine), no pharmacokinetic interactions between treprostinil and bosentan were observed.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4 Sildenafil
                     
                        In a human pharmacokinetic study conducted with sildenafil (60 mg/day) and an oral formulation of treprostinil (treprostinil diethanolamine), no pharmacokinetic interactions between treprostinil and sildenafil were observed.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.5 Effect of Treprostinil on Cytochrome P450 Enzymes
                     
                        
                           In vitro studies of human hepatic microsomes showed that treprostinil does not inhibit cytochrome P450 (CYP) isoenzymes CYP1A2, CYP2A6, CYP2C8, CYP2C9, CYP2C19, CYP2D6, CYP2E1 and CYP3A. Additionally, treprostinil does not induce cytochrome P450 isoenzymes CYP1A2, CYP2B6, CYP2C9, CYP2C19, and CYP3A. Thus Remodulin is not expected to alter the pharmacokinetics of compounds metabolized by CYP enzymes.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.6 Effect of Cytochrome P450 Inhibitors and Inducers on Treprostinil
                     
                        Human pharmacokinetic studies with an oral formulation of treprostinil (treprostinil diethanolamine) indicated that co-administration of the cytochrome P450 (CYP) 2C8 enzyme inhibitor gemfibrozil increases exposure (both Cmax and AUC) to treprostinil. Co-administration of the CYP2C8 enzyme inducer rifampin decreases exposure to treprostinil. It has not been determined if the safety and efficacy of treprostinil by the parenteral (subcutaneously or intravenously) route are altered by inhibitors or inducers of CYP2C8 [see Warnings and Precautions (5.4)].
                        Remodulin has not been studied in conjunction with Flolan or Tracleer® (bosentan).
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.7 Effect of Other Drugs on Treprostinil
                     
                        Drug interaction studies have been carried out with treprostinil (oral or subcutaneous) co-administered with acetaminophen (4 g/day), warfarin (25 mg/day), and fluconazole (200 mg/day), respectively in healthy volunteers. These studies did not show a clinically significant effect on the pharmacokinetics of treprostinil. Treprostinil does not affect the pharmacokinetics or pharmacodynamics of warfarin. The pharmacokinetics of R- and S- warfarin and the INR in healthy subjects given a single 25 mg dose of warfarin were unaffected by continuous subcutaneous infusion of treprostinil at an infusion rate of 10 ng/kg/min.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         