
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        The major pharmacologic actions of treprostinil are direct vasodilation of pulmonary and systemic arterial vascular beds, and inhibition of platelet aggregation.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        In animals, the vasodilatory effects reduce right and left ventricular afterload and increase cardiac output and stroke volume. Other studies have shown that treprostinil causes a dose-related negative inotropic and lusitropic effect. No major effects on cardiac conduction have been observed.
                        Treprostinil produces vasodilation and tachycardia. Single doses of treprostinil up to 84 mcg by inhalation produce modest and short-lasting effects on QTc, but this is apt to be an artifact of the rapidly changing heart rate. Treprostinil administered by the subcutaneous or intravenous routes has the potential to generate concentrations many-fold greater than those generated via the inhaled route; the effect on the QTc interval when treprostinil is administered parenterally has not been established.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        The pharmacokinetics of continuous subcutaneous Remodulin are linear over the dose range of 1.25 to 125 ng/kg/min (corresponding to plasma concentrations of about 15 pg/mL to 18,250 pg/mL) and can be described by a two-compartment model. Dose proportionality at infusion rates greater than 125 ng/kg/min has not been studied.
                        Subcutaneous and intravenous administration of Remodulin demonstrated bioequivalence at steady state at a dose of 10 ng/kg/min.
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Absorption
                              
                              Remodulin is relatively rapidly and completely absorbed after subcutaneous infusion, with an absolute bioavailability approximating 100%. Steady-state concentrations occurred in approximately 10 hours. Concentrations in patients treated with an average dose of 9.3 ng/kg/min were approximately 2,000 pg/mL.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Distribution
                              
                              The volume of distribution of the drug in the central compartment is approximately 14L/70 kg ideal body weight. Remodulin at in vitro concentrations ranging from 330-10,000 mcg/L was 91% bound to human plasma protein.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Metabolism and Excretion
                              
                              Treprostinil is substantially metabolized by the liver, primarily by CYP2C8. In a study conducted in healthy volunteers using [14C] treprostinil, 78.6% and 13.4% of the subcutaneous dose was recovered in the urine and feces, respectively, over 10 days. Only 4% was excreted as unchanged treprostinil in the urine. Five metabolites were detected in the urine, ranging from 10.2% to 15.5% and representing 64.4% of the dose administered. Four of the metabolites are products of oxidation of the 3-hydroxyloctyl side chain and one is a glucuroconjugated derivative (treprostinil glucuronide). The identified metabolites do not appear to have activity.
                              The elimination of treprostinil (following subcutaneous administration) is biphasic, with a terminal elimination half-life of approximately 4 hours using a two compartment model. Systemic clearance is approximately 30 L/hr for a 70 kg person.
                              Based on in vitro studies treprostinil does not inhibit or induce major CYP enzymes [see Drug Interactions (7.5)].
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Special Populations
                              
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Hepatic Insufficiency
                                    
                                    In patients with portopulmonary hypertension and mild (n=4) or moderate (n=5) hepatic insufficiency, Remodulin at a subcutaneous dose of 10 ng/kg/min for 150 minutes had a Cmax that was 2-fold and 4-fold, respectively, and an AUC 0-
                                       ∞ that was 3-fold and 5-fold, respectively, values observed in healthy subjects. Clearance in patients with hepatic insufficiency was reduced by up to 80% compared to healthy adults.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Renal Insufficiency
                                    
                                    No studies have been performed in patients with renal insufficiency, so no specific advice about dosing in such patients can be given. Although only 4% of the administered dose is excreted unchanged in the urine, the five identified metabolites are all excreted in the urine.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         