
               
               
               
                  12  CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY

               
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           12.1 	Mechanism of Action 

                        
                     
                     
                        Temozolomide is not directly active but undergoes rapid nonenzymatic conversion at physiologic pH to the reactive compound 5-(3-methyltriazen1-yl)-imidazole-4-carboxamide (MTIC). The cytotoxicity of MTIC is thought to be primarily due to alkylation of DNA. Alkylation (methylation) occurs mainly at the O6 and N7 positions of guanine.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           12.3 	Pharmacokinetics 

                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                              Absorption:
                            Temozolomide is rapidly and completely absorbed after oral administration with a peak plasma concentration (Cmax) achieved in a median Tmax of 1 hour. Food reduces the rate and extent of temozolomide absorption. Mean peak plasma concentration and AUC decreased by 32% and 9%, respectively, and median Tmax increased by 2-fold (from 1 to 2.25 hours) when temozolomide was administered after a modified high-fat breakfast. 
                        Following a single oral dose of 150 mg/m2, the geometric mean Cmax values for temozolomide and MTIC were 7.5 mcg/mL and 282 ng/mL, respectively. Following a single oral dose of 150 mg/m2, the geometric mean AUC values for temozolomide and MTIC were 23.4 mcg·hr/mL and 864 ng·hr/mL, respectively. 
                        
                           
                              Distribution:
                            Temozolomide has a mean apparent volume of distribution of 0.4 L/kg (%CV=13%). It is weakly bound to human plasma proteins; the mean percent bound of drug-related total radioactivity is 15%.
                        
                           
                              Metabolism and Elimination:
                            Temozolomide is spontaneously hydrolyzed at physiologic pH to the active species, MTIC and to temozolomide acid metabolite. MTIC is further hydrolyzed to 5-amino-imidazole-4-carboxamide (AIC), which is known to be an intermediate in purine and nucleic acid biosynthesis, and to methylhydrazine, which is believed to be the active alkylating species. Cytochrome P450 enzymes play only a minor role in the metabolism of temozolomide and MTIC. Relative to the AUC of temozolomide, the exposure to MTIC and AIC is 2.4% and 23%, respectively.
                        
                           
                              Excretion:
                            About 38% of the administered temozolomide total radioactive dose is recovered over 7 days: 37.7% in urine and 0.8% in feces. The majority of the recovery of radioactivity in urine is unchanged temozolomide (5.6%), AIC (12%), temozolomide acid metabolite (2.3%), and unidentified polar metabolite(s) (17%). Overall clearance of temozolomide is about 5.5 L/hr/m2. Temozolomide is rapidly eliminated, with a mean elimination half-life of 1.8 hours, and exhibits linear kinetics over the therapeutic dosing range of 75 to 250 mg/m2/day.
                        
                           
                              Effect of Age:
                            A population pharmacokinetic analysis indicated that age (range: 19 to 78 years) has no influence on the pharmacokinetics of temozolomide.
                        
                           
                              Effect of Gender:
                            A population pharmacokinetic analysis indicated that women have an approximately 5% lower clearance (adjusted for body surface area) for temozolomide than men.
                        
                           
                              Effect of Race:
                            The effect of race on the pharmacokinetics of temozolomide has not been studied.
                        
                           
                              Tobacco Use:
                            A population pharmacokinetic analysis indicated that the oral clearance of temozolomide is similar in smokers and nonsmokers.
                        
                           
                              Effect of Renal Impairment:
                            A population pharmacokinetic analysis indicated that creatinine clearance over the range of 36 to 130 mL/min/m2 has no effect on the clearance of temozolomide after oral administration. The pharmacokinetics of temozolomide have not been studied in patients with severely impaired renal function (CLcr <36 mL/min/m2). Caution should be exercised when temozolomide is administered to patients with severe renal impairment [see 
                           
                              Use in Special Populations (8.6)
                           
                           ]. Temozolomide has not been studied in patients on dialysis.
                        
                           
                              Effect of Hepatic Impairment:
                            A study showed that the pharmacokinetics of temozolomide in patients with mild-to-moderate hepatic impairment (Child-Pugh Class I - II) were similar to those observed in patients with normal hepatic function. Caution should be exercised when temozolomide is administered to patients with severe hepatic impairment [see 
                           
                              Use in Specific Populations (8.7)
                           
                           ].
                        
                           
                              Effect of Other Drugs on Temozolomide Pharmacokinetics:
                            In a multiple-dose study, administration of temozolomide capsules with ranitidine did not change the Cmax or AUC values for temozolomide or MTIC.
                        A population analysis indicated that administration of valproic acid decreases the clearance of temozolomide by about 5% [see Drug Interactions (7.1)
                           
                           ].
                        A population analysis did not demonstrate any influence of coadministered dexamethasone, prochlorperazine, phenytoin, carbamazepine, ondansetron, H2-receptor antagonists, or phenobarbital on the clearance of orally administered temozolomide.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         