
               
               
               
                  7  DRUG INTERACTIONS 

               
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              Monitor patients starting or ending CYP3A4 inhibitors or inducers for potential over or under dosing. (7.1) 
                           
                           
                              Use caution in prescribing buprenorphine and naloxone sublingual tablet for patients receiving benzodiazepines or other CNS depressants and warn patients against concomitant self-administration/misuse. (7.3) 
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        7.1 Cytochrome P-450 3A4 (CYP3A4) Inhibitors and Inducers 

                     
                     
                        Buprenorphine is metabolized to norbuprenorphine primarily by cytochrome CYP3A4; therefore, potential interactions may occur when buprenorphine and naloxone sublingual tablet is given concurrently with agents that affect CYP3A4 activity. The concomitant use of buprenorphine and naloxone sublingual tablet with CYP3A4 inhibitors (e.g., azole antifungals such as ketoconazole, macrolide antibiotics such as erythromycin, and HIV protease inhibitors) should be monitored and may require dose-reduction of one or both agents. 
                        The interaction of buprenorphine with CYP3A4 inducers has not been studied; therefore, it is recommended that patients receiving buprenorphine and naloxone sublingual tablets be monitored for signs and symptoms of opioid withdrawal if inducers of CYP3A4 (e.g., efavirenz, phenobarbital, carbamazepine, phenytoin, rifampicin) are co-administered [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)]. 
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        7.2 Antiretrovirals 

                     
                     
                        Three classes of antiretroviral agents have been evaluated for CYP3A4 interactions with buprenorphine. Nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors (NRTIs) do not appear to induce or inhibit the P450 enzyme pathway, thus no interactions with buprenorphine are expected. Non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors (NNRTIs) are metabolized principally by CYP3A4. Efavirenz, nevirapine and etravirine are known CYP3A inducers whereas delaviridine is a CYP3A inhibitor. Significant pharmacokinetic interactions between NNRTIs (e.g., efavirenz and delavirdine) and buprenorphine have been shown in clinical studies, but these pharmacokinetic interactions did not result in any significant pharmacodynamic effects. It is recommended that patients who are on chronic buprenorphine treatment have their dose monitored if NNRTIs are added to their treatment regimen. Studies have shown some antiretroviral protease inhibitors (PIs) with CYP3A4 inhibitory activity (nelfinavir, lopinavir/ritonavir, ritonavir) have little effect on buprenorphine pharmacokinetic and no significant pharmacodynamic effects. Other PIs with CYP3A4 inhibitory activity (atazanavir and atazanavir/ritonavir) resulted in elevated levels of buprenorphine and norbuprenorphine and patients in one study reported increased sedation. Symptoms of opioid excess have been found in post-marketing reports of patients receiving buprenorphine and atazanavir with and without ritonavir concomitantly. Monitoring of patients taking buprenorphine and atazanavir with and without ritonavir is recommended, and dose reduction of buprenorphine may be warranted. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        7.3 Benzodiazepines 

                     
                     
                        There have been a number of post-marketing reports regarding coma and death associated with the concomitant use of buprenorphine and benzodiazepines. In many, but not all of these cases, buprenorphine was misused by self-injection. Preclinical studies have shown that the combination of benzodiazepines and buprenorphine altered the usual ceiling effect on buprenorphine-induced respiratory depression, making the respiratory effects of buprenorphine appear similar to those of full opioid agonists. Buprenorphine and naloxone sublingual tablets should be prescribed with caution to patients taking benzodiazepines or other drugs that act on the CNS, regardless of whether these drugs are taken on the advice of a physician or are being abused/misused. Patients should be warned that it is extremely dangerous to self-administer non-prescribed benzodiazepines while taking buprenorphine and naloxone sublingual tablets, and should also be cautioned to use benzodiazepines concurrently with buprenorphine and naloxone sublingual tablets only as directed by their physician. 
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         