
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           Drug Interactions Affecting Co-administered Drugs:
                        
                           
                              •
                              Antibiotics: Thiamine, riboflavin, pyridoxine, niacinamide, and ascorbic acid decrease activities of erythromycin, kanamycin, streptomycin, doxycycline, and lincomycin (7.1)
                           
                              •
                              Bleomycin
                              : Ascorbic acid and riboflavin may reduce the activity of bleomycin (7.1)
                           
                              •
                              Levodopa: Pyridoxine may decrease blood levels of levodopa and levodopa efficacy may decrease (7.1)
                           
                              •
                              Phenytoin: Folic acid may decrease phenytoin blood levels and increase risk of seizure activity (7.1)
                           
                              •
                              Methotrexate: Folic acid may decrease response to methotrexate (7.1)
                        
                        
                           Drug Interactions Affecting Vitamin Levels:
                        
                        
                           
                              •
                              Hydralazine, Isoniazid: Concomitant administration of hydralazine or isoniazid may increase pyridoxine requirements (7.2).
                           
                              •
                              Phenytoin: May decrease folic acid concentrations (7.2)
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 Drug Interactions Affecting Co-administered Drugs
                     
                        A number of interactions between vitamins and drugs have been reported. The following are examples of these types of interactions:
                        
                           
                               
                              Warfarin: Vitamin K, a component of INFUVITE PEDIATRIC, antagonizes the anticoagulant action of warfarin. In patients who are co-administered warfarin and INFUVITE PEDIATRIC, blood levels of prothrombin/INR should be periodically monitored to determine if dose of warfarin needs to be adjusted.
                           
                               
                              Antibiotics: Thiamine, riboflavin, pyridoxine, niacinamide, and ascorbic acid decrease antibiotic activities of erythromycin, kanamycin, streptomycin, doxycycline, and lincomycin.
                           
                               
                              Bleomycin: Ascorbic acid and riboflavin inactivate bleomycin in vitro, thus the activity of bleomycin may be reduced.
                           
                               
                              Levodopa: Pyridoxine may increase the metabolism of levodopa (decrease blood levels of levodopa) and decrease its efficacy.
                           
                               
                              Phenytoin: Folic acid may increase phenytoin metabolism and lower the serum concentration of phenytoin resulting in increased seizure activity.
                           
                               
                              Methotrexate: Folic acid may decrease a patient’s response to methotrexate therapy.
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 Drug Interactions Affecting Vitamin Levels
                     
                        
                           
                               Hydralazine, Isoniazid:
                           
                               Concomitant administration of hydralazine or isoniazid may increase pyridoxine requirements.
                           
                               Phenytoin:
                           
                               Phenytoin may decrease serum folic acid concentrations.
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         