
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        Ketorolac tromethamine is a nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID) that exhibits analgesic activity in animal models. The mechanism of action of ketorolac, like that of other NSAIDs, is not completely understood but may be related to prostaglandin synthetase inhibition. The biological activity of ketorolac tromethamine is associated with the S-form. Ketorolac tromethamine possesses no sedative or anxiolytic properties.
                        Pain relief was statistically different after ketorolac tromethamine dosing from that of placebo at 1/2 hour (the first time point at which it was measured) following the largest recommended doses of ketorolac tromethamine and by 1 hour following the smallest recommended doses. The peak analgesic effect of ketorolac tromethamine occurred within 2 to 3 hours and was not statistically significantly different over the recommended dosage range of ketorolac tromethamine. The greatest difference between large and small doses of ketorolac tromethamine by either route was in the duration of analgesia.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        Ketorolac tromethamine is a racemic mixture of [-]S and [+]R-enantiomeric forms, with the S-form having analgesic activity.
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Comparison of IV, IM and Oral Pharmacokinetics
                           
                              The pharmacokinetics of ketorolac tromethamine, following IV, IM and oral doses of ketorolac tromethamine are compared in Table 1. In adults the extent of bioavailability following administration of the ORAL and IM forms of ketorolac tromethamine was equal to that following an IV bolus.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Linear Kinetics
                           
                              In adults, following administration of single ORAL, IM or IV doses of ketorolac tromethamine in the recommended dosage ranges, the clearance of the racemate does not change. This implies that the pharmacokinetics of ketorolac tromethamine in adults, following single or multiple IM, IV or recommended oral doses of ketorolac tromethamine, are linear. At the higher recommended doses, there is a proportional increase in the concentrations of free and bound racemate.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Binding and Distribution
                           
                              The mean apparent volume (Vβ) of ketorolac tromethamine following complete distribution was approximately 13 liters. This parameter was determined from single-dose data. The ketorolac tromethamine racemate has been shown to be highly protein-bound (99%). Nevertheless, even plasma concentrations as high as 10 mcg/mL will only occupy approximately 5% of the albumin binding sites. Thus, the unbound fraction for each enantiomer will be constant over the therapeutic range. A decrease in serum albumin, however, will result in increased free drug concentrations.
                              Ketorolac tromethamine is excreted in human milk (see
                                     PRECAUTIONS: Nursing Mothers
                                 ).
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Metabolism
                           
                              Ketorolac tromethamine is largely metabolized in the liver. The metabolic products are hydroxylated and conjugated forms of the parent drug. The products of metabolism, and some unchanged drug, are excreted in the urine.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Excretion
                           
                              The principal route of elimination of ketorolac and its metabolites is renal. About 92% of a given dose is found in the urine, approximately 40% as metabolites and 60% as unchanged ketorolac. Approximately 6% of a dose is excreted in the feces. A single-dose study with 10 mg ketorolac tromethamine (n=9) demonstrated that the S-enantiomer is cleared approximately two times faster than the R-enantiomer and that the clearance was independent of the route of administration. This means that the ratio of S/R plasma concentrations decreases with time after each dose. There is little or no inversion of the R- to S- form in humans. The clearance of the racemate in normal subjects, elderly individuals, and in hepatically and renally impaired patients, is outlined in Table 2 (see
                                     CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY: Kinetics in Special Populations
                                 ).
                              The half-life of the ketorolac tromethamine S-enantiomer was approximately 2.5 hours (SD± 0.4) compared with 5 hours (SD±1.7) for the R-enantiomer. In other studies, the half-life for the racemate has been reported to lie within the range of 5 to 6 hours.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Accumulation
                           
                              Ketorolac tromethamine administered as an IV bolus, every 6 hours for 5 days to healthy subjects (n=13), showed no significant difference in Cmax on Day 1 and Day 5. Trough levels averaged 0.29 mcg/mL (SD± 0.13) on Day 1 and 0.55 mcg/mL (SD±0.23) on Day 6. Steady state was approached after the fourth dose.
                              Accumulation of ketorolac tromethamine has not been studied in special populations (geriatric, pediatric, renal failure, or hepatic disease patients).
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Kinetics in Special Populations
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Geriatric Patients
                           
                              Based on single-dose data only, the half-life of the ketorolac tromethamine racemate increased from 5 to 7 hours in the elderly (65 to 78 years) compared with young healthy volunteers (24 to 35 years) (see
                                     Table 2
                                 ). There was little difference in the Cmax for the two groups (elderly, 2.52 mcg/mL ± 0.77; young, 2.99 mcg/mL ± 1.03) (see
                                     PRECAUTIONS Geriatric Use
                                 ).
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Pediatric Patients
                           
                              Limited information is available regarding the pharmacokinetics of dosing of ketorolac tromethamine in the pediatric population. Following a single intravenous bolus dose of 0.5 mg/kg in 10 children 4 to 8 years old, the half-life was 5.8 ± 1.6 hours, the average clearance was 0.042 ± 0.01 L/hr/kg, the volume of distribution during the terminal phase (Vβ) was 0.34 ± 0.12 L/kg and the volume of distribution at steady state (Vss) was 0.26 ± 0.08 L/kg. The volume of distribution and clearance of ketorolac in pediatric patients was higher than those observed in adult subjects (see
                                     Table 1
                                 ). There are no pharmacokinetic data available for administration of ketorolac tromethamine by the IM route in pediatric patients.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Renal Insufficiency
                           
                              Based on single-dose data only, the mean half-life of ketorolac tromethamine in renally impaired patients is between 6 and 19 hours, and is dependent on the extent of the impairment. There is poor correlation between creatinine clearance and total ketorolac tromethamine clearance in the elderly and populations with renal impairment (r = 0.5).
                              In patients with renal disease, the AUC∞ of each enantiomer increased by approximately 100% compared with healthy volunteers. The volume of distribution doubles for the S-enantiomer and increases by 1/5th for the R-enantiomer. The increase in volume of distribution of ketorolac tromethamine implies an increase in unbound fraction.
                              The AUC∞ ratio of the ketorolac tromethamine enantiomers in healthy subjects and patients remained similar, indicating there was no selective excretion of either enantiomer in patients compared to healthy subjects (see
                                     WARNINGS - Renal Effects
                                 ).
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Hepatic Insufficiency
                           
                              There was no significant difference in estimates of half-life, AUC∞, Cmax, in 7 patients with liver disease compared to healthy volunteers (see
                                     PRECAUTIONS - Hepatic Effects
                                 ).
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Race
                           
                              Pharmacokinetic differences due to race have not been identified.
                              



                           



                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     IV Administration
                     
                        In normal adult subjects (n=37), the total clearance of 30 mg IV-administered ketorolac tromethamine was 0.030 (0.017–0.051) L/h/kg. The terminal half-life was 5.6 (4.0–7.9) hours. (See
                               Kinetics in Special Populations 
                           for use of IV dosing of ketorolac tromethamine in pediatric patients.)
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         