
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY:
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Systemic Absorption:
                     
                        A systemic absorption study was performed in which ciprofloxacin ophthalmic solution USP, 0.3% was administered in each eye every two hours while awake for two days followed by every four hours while awake for an additional 5 days. The maximum reported plasma concentration of ciprofloxacin was less than 5 ng/mL. The mean concentration was usually less than 2.5 ng/mL.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Microbiology:
                     
                        Ciprofloxacin has in vitro activity against a wide range of gram-negative and gram-positive organisms. The bactericidal action of ciprofloxacin results from interference with the enzyme DNA gyrase which is needed for the synthesis of bacterial DNA.
                        Ciprofloxacin has been shown to be active against most strains of the following organisms both in vitro and in clinical infections. (See INDICATIONS AND USAGE section).
                        
                           Gram-Positive:
                        
                        
                           Staphylococcus aureus
                           

                           Staphylococcus epidermidis
                           

                           Streptococcus pneumoniae
                           

                           Streptococcus (Viridans Group)
                        
                           Gram-Negative:
                        
                        
                           Haemophilus influenzae
                           

                           Pseudomonas aeruginosa
                           

                           Serratia marcescens
                        
                        Ciprofloxacin has been shown to be active in vitro against most strains of the following organisms, however, the clinical significance of these data is unknown:
                        
                        
                           Gram-Positive:
                        
                        
                           Enterococcus faecalis (Many strains are only moderately susceptible)

                           Staphylococcus haemolyticus
                           

                           Staphylococcus hominis
                           

                           Staphylococcus saprophyticus
                           

                           Streptococcus pyogenes
                        
                        
                           Gram-Negative:  
                        


                     



                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Other Organisms: 
                     
                        
                           Chlamydia trachomatis (only moderately susceptible) and Mycobacterium tuberculosis (only moderately susceptible).
                        Most strains of Pseudomonas cepacia and some strains of Pseudomonas maltophilia are resistant to ciprofloxacin as are most anaerobic bacteria, including Bacteroides fragilis and Clostridium difficile.
                        
                        The minimal bactericidal concentration (MBC) generally does not exceed the minimal inhibitory concentration (MIC) by more than a factor of 2. Resistance to ciprofloxacin in vitro usually develops slowly (multiple-step mutation).
                        Ciprofloxacin does not cross-react with other antimicrobial agents such as beta-latams or aminoglycosides; therefore, organisms resistant to these drugs may be susceptible to ciprofloxacin.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Clinical Studies:
                     
                        Following therapy with ciprofloxacin ophthalmic solution USP, 0.3%, 76% of the patients with corneal ulcers and positive bacterial cultures were clinically cured and complete re-epithelialization occurred in about 92% of the ulcers.
                        In 3 and 7 day multicenter clinical trials, 52% of the patients with conjunctivitis and positive conjunctival cultures were clinically cured and 70-80% had all causative pathogens eradicated by the end of treatment.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         