
               
               
               
                  12    CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Vinorelbine is a vinca alkaloid that interferes with microtubule assembly. The antitumor activity of vinorelbine is thought to be due primarily to inhibition of mitosis at metaphase through its interaction with tubulin.  Vinorelbine may also interfere with: 1) amino acid, cyclic AMP, and glutathione metabolism, 2) calmodulin-dependent Ca++-transport ATPase activity, 3) cellular respiration, and 4) nucleic acid and lipid biosynthesis. Vinorelbine inhibited mitotic microtubule formation in intact mouse embryo tectal plates at a concentration of 2 μM inducing a blockade of cells at metaphase, but produced depolymerization of axonal microtubules at a concentration
                        40 μM, suggesting a modest selectivity of vinorelbine for mitotic microtubules. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        The pharmacokinetics of vinorelbine were studied in 49 patients who received doses of 30 mg/m2 administered as 15- to 20-minute constant-rate infusions. Vinorelbine concentrations in plasma decay in a triphasic manner. The terminal phase half-life averages 27.7 to 43.6 hours and the mean plasma clearance ranges from 0.97 to 1.26 L/hr/kg. 
                        
                           Distribution
                        
                        Steady-state volume of distribution (VSS) values range from 25.4 to 40.1 L/kg. Vinorelbine demonstrated high binding to human platelets and lymphocytes. The free fraction was approximately 0.11 in human plasma over a concentration range of 234 to 1169 ng/mL. The binding to plasma constituents in cancer patients ranged from 79.6% to 91.2%. Vinorelbine binding was not altered in the presence of cisplatin, 5-fluorouracil, or doxorubicin.
                        
                           Metabolism
                        
                        Vinorelbine undergoes substantial hepatic elimination in humans, with large amounts recovered in feces. Two metabolites of vinorelbine have been identified in human blood, plasma, and urine; vinorelbine N-oxide and deacetylvinorelbine. Deacetylvinorelbine has been demonstrated to be the primary metabolite of vinorelbine in humans, and has been shown to possess antitumor activity similar to vinorelbine. Therapeutic doses of vinorelbine (30 mg/m2) yield very small, if any, quantifiable levels of either metabolite in blood or urine. The metabolism of vinorelbine is mediated by hepatic cytochrome P450 isoenzymes in the CYP3A subfamily. 
                        
                           Excretion
                        
                        After intravenous administration of radioactive vinorelbine, approximately 18% and 46% of administered radioactivity was recovered in urine and feces, respectively. In a different study, 10.9% + 0.7% of a 30-mg/m2 intravenous dose was excreted as parent drug in urine. 
                        
                           Specific Populations
                        
                        Elderly: Age has no effect on the pharmacokinetics (CL, VSS and t1/2) of vinorelbine. 
                        
                           Drug Interactions
                        
                        The pharmacokinetics of vinorelbine are not influenced by the concurrent administration of cisplatin.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         