
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
                  
               
               
               
                  
                     
                        Probenecid decreases the renal tubular secretion of amoxicillin. Concurrent use of AUGMENTIN XR and probenecid may result in increased and prolonged blood levels of amoxicillin.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1       Probenecid
                     
                        Probenecid decreases the renal tubular secretion of amoxicillin. Concurrent use with AUGMENTIN XR may result in increased and prolonged blood levels of amoxicillin. Coadministration of probenecid is not recommended.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 Oral Anticoagulants
                     
                        Abnormal prolongation of prothrombin time (increased international normalized ratio [INR]) has been reported in patients receiving amoxicillin and oral anticoagulants. Appropriate monitoring should be undertaken when anticoagulants are prescribed concurrently. Adjustments in the dose of oral anticoagulants may be necessary to maintain the desired level of anticoagulation.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3 Allopurinol 
                     
                        The concurrent administration of allopurinol and amoxicillin substantially increases the incidence of rashes in patients receiving both drugs as compared to patients receiving amoxicillin alone. It is not known whether this potentiation of amoxicillin rashes is due to allopurinol or the hyperuricemia present in these patients. In controlled clinical trials of AUGMENTIN XR, 25 patients received concomitant allopurinol and AUGMENTIN XR. No rashes were reported in these patients. However, this sample size is too small to allow for any conclusions to be drawn regarding the risk of rashes with concomitant AUGMENTIN XR and allopurinol use. 
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4       Oral Contraceptives
                     
                        In common with other broad-spectrum antibiotics, AUGMENTIN XR may reduce the efficacy of oral contraceptives.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.5 Effects on Laboratory Tests
                     
                     
                        High urine concentrations of amoxicillin may result in false-positive reactions when testing for the presence of glucose in urine using CLINITEST®, Benedict’s Solution, or Fehling’s Solution. Since this effect may also occur with AUGMENTIN, it is recommended that glucose tests based on enzymatic glucose oxidase reactions be used.  Following administration of amoxicillin to pregnant women, a transient decrease in plasma concentration of total conjugated estriol, estriol-glucuronide, conjugated estrone, and estradiol has been noted.
                     
                  
               
            
         