
                     
                     
                     Drug Interactions 
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 ACE Inhibitors
                              
                              
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              Reports suggest that NSAIDs may diminish the antihypertensive effect of ACE Inhibitors. This interaction should be given consideration in patients taking NSAIDs concomitantly with ACE Inhibitors.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Aspirin
                              
                              
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              As with other NSAIDs, concomitant administration of tolmetin sodium and aspirin is not generally recommended because of the potential of increased adverse effects.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Diuretics
                              
                              
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              Clinical studies, as well as post-marketing observations have shown that NSAIDs can reduce the natriuretic effect of furosemide and thiazides in some patients. This response has been attributed to inhibition of renal prostaglandin synthesis. During concomitant therapy with NSAIDs, the patient should be observed closely for signs of renal failure, as well as to assure diuretic efficacy.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Lithium
                              
                              
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              NSAIDs have produced an elevation of plasma lithium levels and a reduction in renal lithium clearance. The mean minimum lithium concentration increased 15% and the renal clearance was decreased by approximately 20%. These effects have been attributed to inhibition of renal prostaglandin synthesis by the NSAID. Thus, when NSAIDs and lithium are administered concurrently, subjects should be observed carefully for signs of lithium toxicity.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Methotrexate
                              
                              
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              NSAIDs have been reported to competitively inhibit methotrexate accumulation in rabbit kidney slices. This may indicate that they could enhance the toxicity of methotrexate. Caution should be used when NSAIDs are administered concomitantly with methotrexate.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Warfarin
                              
                              
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              The effects of warfarin and NSAIDs on GI bleeding are synergistic, such that users of both drugs together have a risk of serious GI bleeding higher than users of either drug alone. 
                              The in vitro binding of warfarin to human plasma proteins is unaffected by tolmetin, and tolmetin does not alter the prothrombin time of normal volunteers. However, increased prothrombin time and bleeding have been reported in patients on concomitant tolmetin and warfarin therapy. Therefore, caution should be exercised when administering tolmetin to patients on anticoagulants.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Hypoglycemic Agents
                              
                              
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              In adult diabetic patients under treatment with either sulfonylureas or insulin there is no change in the clinical effects of either tolmetin or the hypoglycemic agents.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               