
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Lanreotide, the active component of SOMATULINE DEPOT is an octapeptide analog of natural somatostatin. The mechanism of action of lanreotide is believed to be similar to that of natural somatostatin.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        Lanreotide has a high affinity for human somatostatin receptors (SSTR) 2 and 5 and a reduced binding affinity for human SSTR1, 3, and 4. Activity at human SSTR2 and 5 is the primary mechanism believed responsible for GH inhibition. Like somatostatin, lanreotide is an inhibitor of various endocrine, neuroendocrine, exocrine, and paracrine functions.
                        The primary pharmacodynamic effect of lanreotide is a reduction of GH and/or IGF-1 levels enabling normalization of levels in acromegalic patients [see Clinical Studies (14)
                           ]. In acromegalic patients, lanreotide reduces GH levels in a dose-dependent way. After a single injection of SOMATULINE DEPOT, plasma GH levels fall rapidly and are maintained for at least 28 days.
                        Lanreotide inhibits the basal secretion of motilin, gastric inhibitory peptide, and pancreatic polypeptide, but has no significant effect on the secretion of secretin. Lanreotide inhibits postprandial secretion of pancreatic polypeptide, gastrin, and cholecystokinin (CCK). In healthy subjects, lanreotide produces a reduction and a delay in postprandial insulin secretion, resulting in transient, mild glucose intolerance.
                        Lanreotide inhibits meal-stimulated pancreatic secretions, and reduces duodenal bicarbonate and amylase concentrations, and produces a transient reduction in gastric acidity.
                        Lanreotide has been shown to inhibit gallbladder contractility and bile secretion in healthy subjects [see Warnings and Precautions (5)
                           ].
                        In healthy subjects, lanreotide inhibits meal-induced increases in superior mesenteric artery and portal venous blood flow, but has no effect on basal or meal-stimulated renal blood flow. Lanreotide has no effect on renal plasma flow or renal vascular resistance. However, a transient decrease in glomerular filtration rate (GFR) and filtration fraction has been observed after a single injection of lanreotide.
                        In healthy subjects, non-significant reductions in glucagon levels were seen after lanreotide administration. In diabetic non-acromegalic subjects receiving a continuous infusion (21-day) of lanreotide, serum glucose concentrations were temporarily decreased by 20-30% after the start and end of the infusion. Serum glucose concentrations returned to normal levels within 24 hours. A significant decrease in insulin concentrations was recorded between baseline and Day 1 only [see Warnings and Precautions (5)
                           ].
                        Lanreotide inhibits the nocturnal increase in thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) seen in healthy subjects. Lanreotide reduces prolactin levels in acromegalic patients treated on a long-term basis.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        SOMATULINE DEPOT is thought to form a drug depot at the injection site due to the interaction of the formulation with physiological fluids. The most likely mechanism of drug release is a passive diffusion of the precipitated drug from the depot towards the surrounding tissues, followed by the absorption to the bloodstream.
                        After a single, deep subcutaneous administration, the mean absolute bioavailability of SOMATULINE DEPOT in healthy subjects was 73.4, 69.0, and 78.4% for the 60 mg, 90 mg, and 120 mg doses, respectively. Mean Cmax values ranged from 4.3 to 8.4 ng/mL during the first day. Single-dose linearity was demonstrated with respect to AUC and Cmax, and showed high inter-subject variability. SOMATULINE DEPOT showed sustained release of lanreotide with a half-life of 23 to 30 days. Mean serum concentrations were > 1 ng/mL throughout 28 days at 90 mg and 120 mg and > 0.9 ng/mL at 60 mg.
                        In studies evaluating excretion, <5% of lanreotide was excreted in urine and less than 0.5% was recovered unchanged in feces, indicative of some biliary excretion.
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Acromegaly
                              
                              In a repeat-dose administration pharmacokinetics (PK) study in acromegalic patients, rapid initial release was seen giving peak levels during the first day after administration. At doses of SOMATULINE DEPOT between 60 and 120 mg, linear pharmacokinetics were observed in acromegalic patients. At steady state, mean Cmax values were 3.8 ± 0.5, 5.7 ± 1.7, and 7.7 ± 2.5 ng/mL, increasing linearly with dose. The mean accumulation ratio index was 2.7, which is in line with the range of values for the half-life of SOMATULINE DEPOT. The steady-state trough serum lanreotide concentrations in patients receiving SOMATULINE DEPOT every 28 days were 1.8 ± 0.3; 2.5 ± 0.9 and 3.8 ± 1.0 ng/mL at 60 mg, 90 mg, and 120 mg doses, respectively. A limited initial burst effect and a low peak-to-trough fluctuation (81% to 108%) of the serum concentration at the plateau were observed.
                              For the same doses, similar values were obtained in clinical studies after at least four administrations (2.3 ± 0.9, 3.2 ± 1.1, and 4.0 ± 1.4 ng/mL, respectively).
                              Pharmacokinetic data from studies evaluating extended dosing use of SOMATULINE DEPOT 120 mg demonstrated mean steady-state, Cmin values between 1.6 and 2.3 ng/mL for the 8- and 6-week treatment interval, respectively.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Gastroenteropancreatic Neuroendocrine Tumors
                              
                              In patients with GEP-NETs treated with SOMATULINE DEPOT 120 mg every 4 weeks, steady state concentrations were reached after 4 to 5 injections and the mean trough serum lanreotide concentrations at steady state ranged from 5.3 to 8.6 ng/mL.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Specific Populations
                              
                              SOMATULINE DEPOT has not been studied in specific populations. However, the pharmacokinetics of lanreotide in renal impaired, hepatic impaired, and geriatric subjects were evaluated after IV administration of lanreotide immediate release formulation (IRF) at 7 mcg/kg dose.
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Geriatric
                                    
                                    Studies in healthy elderly subjects showed an 85% increase in half-life and a 65% increase in mean residence time (MRT) of lanreotide compared to those seen in healthy young subjects; however, there was no change in either AUC or Cmax of lanreotide in elderly as compared to healthy young subjects. Age has no effect on clearance of lanreotide based on population PK analysis in patients with GEP-NET which included 122 patients aged 65 to 85 years with neuroendocrine tumors.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Renal Impairment
                                    
                                    An approximate 2-fold decrease in total serum clearance of lanreotide, with a consequent 2-fold increase in half-life and AUC was observed. Patients with acromegaly and with moderate to severe renal impairment should begin treatment with SOMATULINE DEPOT 60 mg. Caution should be exercised when considering patients with moderate or severe renal impairment for an extended dosing interval of SOMATULINE DEPOT 120 mg every 6 or 8 weeks.
                                    Mild (CLcr 60-89 mL/min) or moderate (CLcr 30-59 mL/min) renal impairment has  no effect on clearance of lanreotide in patients with GEP-NET based on population PK analysis which included 106 patients with mild and 59 patients with moderate renal impairment treated with SOMATULINE DEPOT. GEP-NET patients with severe renal impairment (CLcr < 30 mL/min) were not studied.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Hepatic Impairment
                                    
                                    In subjects with moderate to severe hepatic impairment, a 30% reduction in clearance of lanreotide was observed. Patients with acromegaly and with moderate to severe hepatic impairment should begin treatment with SOMATULINE DEPOT 60 mg. Caution should be exercised when considering patients with moderate or severe hepatic impairment for an extended dosing interval of SOMATULINE DEPOT 120 mg every 6 or 8 weeks.
                                    The effect of hepatic impairment on clearance of lanreotide has not been studied in patients with GEP-NET.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         