
               
               
               
                  12  CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY

               
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        The mechanism by which niacin alters lipid profiles has not been well defined. It may involve several actions including partial inhibition of release of free fatty acids from adipose tissue, and increased lipoprotein lipase activity, which may increase the rate of chylomicron triglyceride removal from plasma. Niacin decreases the rate of hepatic synthesis of VLDL and LDL, and does not appear to affect fecal excretion of fats, sterols, or bile acids. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        
                           Absorption 
                        
                        Due to extensive and saturable first-pass metabolism, niacin concentrations in the general circulation are dose dependent and highly variable. Time to reach the maximum niacin plasma concentrations was about 5 hours following  niacin extended-release. To reduce the risk of gastrointestinal (GI) upset, administration of niacin extended-release with a low-fat meal or snack is recommended. 
                        Single-dose bioavailability studies have demonstrated that the 500 mg and 1000 mg tablet strengths are dosage form equivalent but the 500 mg and 750 mg tablet strengths are not dosage form equivalent. 
                        
                           Metabolism 
                        
                        The pharmacokinetic profile of niacin is complicated due to extensive first-pass metabolism that is dose-rate specific and, at the doses used to treat dyslipidemia, saturable. In humans, one pathway is through a simple conjugation step with glycine to form nicotinuric acid (NUA). NUA is then excreted in the urine, although there may be a small amount of reversible metabolism back to niacin. The other pathway results in the formation of nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD). It is unclear whether nicotinamide is formed as a precursor to, or following the synthesis of, NAD. Nicotinamide is further metabolized to at least N-methylnicotinamide (MNA) and nicotinamide-N-oxide (NNO). MNA is further metabolized to two other compounds, N-methyl-2-pyridone-5-carboxamide (2PY) and N-methyl-4-pyridone-5-carboxamide (4PY). The formation of 2PY appears to predominate over 4PY in humans. At the doses used to treat hyperlipidemia, these metabolic pathways are saturable, which explains the nonlinear relationship between niacin dose and plasma concentrations following multiple-dose niacin extended-release administration. 
                        Nicotinamide does not have hypolipidemic activity; the activity of the other metabolites is unknown. 
                        
                           Elimination 
                        
                        Following single and multiple doses, approximately 60% to 76% of the niacin dose administered as niacin extended-release was recovered in urine as niacin and metabolites; up to 12% was recovered as unchanged niacin after multiple dosing. The ratio of metabolites recovered in the urine was dependent on the dose administered. 
                        
                           Pediatric Use 
                        
                        No pharmacokinetic studies have been performed in this population (≤16 years) [see Use in Specific Populations (8.4)]. 
                        
                           Geriatric Use 
                        
                        No pharmacokinetic studies have been performed in this population (> 65 years) [see Use in Specific Populations (8.5)]. 
                        
                           Renal Impairment 
                        
                        No pharmacokinetic studies have been performed in this population. Niacin extended-release should be used with caution in patients with renal disease [see Warnings and Precautions (5)]. 
                        
                           Hepatic Impairment 
                        
                        No pharmacokinetic studies have been performed in this population. Active liver disease, unexplained transaminase elevations and significant or unexplained hepatic dysfunction are contraindications to the use of niacin extended-release [see 
                           
                              Contraindications (4)
                            and 
                              
                                 Warnings and Precautions (5.3)
                              ]. 
                        
                           Gender 
                        
                        Steady-state plasma concentrations of niacin and metabolites after administration of niacin extended-release are generally higher in women than in men, with the magnitude of the difference varying with dose and metabolite. This gender differences observed in plasma levels of niacin and its metabolites may be due to gender-specific differences in metabolic rate or volume of distribution. Recovery of niacin and metabolites in urine, however, is generally similar for men and women, indicating that absorption is similar for both genders [see Gender (8.8)]. 
                        
                           Drug interactions 
                        
                        
                           Fluvastatin
                        
                        Niacin did not affect fluvastatin pharmacokinetics [see Drug Interactions (7.1)].
                        
                           Lovastatin
                        
                        When niacin extended-release 2000 mg and lovastatin 40 mg were co-administered, niacin extended-release increased lovastatin Cmax and AUC by 2% and 14%, respectively, and decreased lovastatin acid Cmax and AUC by 22% and 2%, respectively. Lovastatin reduced niacin extended-release bioavailability by 2% to 3% [see Drug Interactions (7.1)]. 
                        
                           Simvastatin 
                        
                        When niacin extended-release 2000 mg and simvastatin 40 mg were co-administered, niacin extended-release increased simvastatin Cmax and AUC by 1% and 9%, respectively, and simvastatin acid Cmax and AUC by 2% and 18%, respectively. Simvastatin reduced niacin extended-release bioavailability by 2% [see Drug Interactions (7.1)]. 
                        
                           Bile Acid Sequestrants 
                        
                        An in vitro study was carried out investigating the niacin-binding capacity of colestipol and cholestyramine. About 98% of available niacin was bound to colestipol, with 10% to 30% binding to cholestyramine [see Drug Interactions (7.2)]. 
                        

                     
                     
                  
               
            
         