
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Vedolizumab is a humanized monoclonal antibody that specifically binds to the α4β7 integrin and blocks the interaction of α4β7 integrin with mucosal addressin cell adhesion molecule-1 (MAdCAM-1) and inhibits the migration of memory T-lymphocytes across the endothelium into inflamed gastrointestinal parenchymal tissue. Vedolizumab does not bind to or inhibit function of the α4β1 and αEβ7 integrins and does not antagonize the interaction of α4 integrins with vascular cell adhesion molecule-1 (VCAM-1). 
                        The α4β7 integrin is expressed on the surface of a discrete subset of memory T-lymphocytes that preferentially migrate into the gastrointestinal tract. MAdCAM-1 is mainly expressed on gut endothelial cells and plays a critical role in the homing of T-lymphocytes to gut lymph tissue. The interaction of the α4β7 integrin with MAdCAM-1 has been implicated as an important contributor to the chronic inflammation that is a hallmark of ulcerative colitis and Crohn’s disease.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        In clinical trials with ENTYVIO at doses ranging from 0.2 to 10 mg/kg (which includes doses outside of the recommended dose), saturation of α4β7 receptors on subsets of circulating lymphocytes involved in gut-immune surveillance was observed.
                        In clinical trials with ENTYVIO at doses ranging from 0.2 to 10 mg/kg and 180 to 750 mg (which include doses outside of the recommended dose) in healthy subjects and in patients with ulcerative colitis or Crohn’s disease, vedolizumab did not elevate neutrophils, basophils, eosinophils, B-helper and cytotoxic T-lymphocytes, total memory helper T-lymphocytes, monocytes or natural killer cells.
                        A reduction in gastrointestinal inflammation was observed in rectal biopsy specimens from Phase 2 ulcerative colitis patients exposed to ENTYVIO for four or six weeks compared to placebo control as assessed by histopathology.
                        In a study of 14 healthy subjects, ENTYVIO did not affect the CD4+ lymphocyte cell counts, CD8+ lymphocyte cell counts, or the CD4+:CD8+ ratios in the CSF [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        Similar pharmacokinetics were observed in ulcerative colitis and Crohn’s disease patients administered 300 mg ENTYVIO as a 30 minute intravenous infusion on Weeks 0 and 2, followed by 300 mg ENTYVIO every eight weeks starting from Week 6 (Table 2).
                        


                        


The presence of persistent anti-vedolizumab antibody was observed to substantially reduce serum concentrations of vedolizumab, either to undetectable or negligible levels at Weeks 6 and 52 (n=8).
                        Vedolizumab clearance depends on both linear and nonlinear pathways; the nonlinear clearance decreases with increasing concentrations. Population pharmacokinetic analyses indicated that the linear clearance was approximately 0.157 L/day, the serum half-life was approximately 25 days at 300 mg dosage, and the distribution volume was approximately 5 L.
                        Vedolizumab was not detected in the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) of 14 healthy subjects at five weeks after a single intravenous administration of 450 mg ENTYVIO (1.5 times the recommended dosage).
                        
                           
                              Special Populations
                           
                        
                        Population pharmacokinetic analysis showed that the severity of disease state, body weight, prior treatment with TNF blocker therapy, age (18 to 78 years), serum albumin, co-administered immunomodulators (including azathioprine, 6-mercaptopurine, methotrexate), and co-administered aminosalicylates did not have a clinically meaningful effect on the pharmacokinetics of ENTYVIO.
                        Pharmacokinetics of vedolizumab in patients with renal or hepatic insufficiency have not been studied.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         