
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Intramuscular Administration
                     
                        Amikacin is rapidly absorbed after intramuscular administration. In normal adult volunteers, average peak serum concentrations of about 12, 16 and 21 mcg/mL are obtained 1 hour after intramuscular administration of 250 mg (3.7 mg/kg), 375 mg (5 mg/kg), 500 mg (7.5 mg/kg), single doses, respectively. At 10 hours, serum levels are about 0.3 mcg/mL, 1.2 mcg/mL and 2.1 mcg/mL, respectively. 
                        Tolerance studies in normal volunteers reveal that amikacin is well tolerated locally following repeated intramuscular dosing, and when given at maximally recommended doses, no ototoxicity or nephrotoxicity has been reported. There is no evidence of drug accumulation with repeated dosing for 10 days when administered according to recommended doses. 
                        With normal renal function, about 91.9% of an intramuscular dose is excreted unchanged in the urine in the first 8 hours and 98.2% within 24 hours. Mean urine concentrations for 6 hours are 563 mcg/mL following a 250 mg dose, 697 mcg/mL following a 375 mg dose and 832 mcg/mL following a 500 mg dose. 
                        Preliminary intramuscular studies in newborns of different weights (less than 1.5 kg, 1.5 to 2 kg, over 2 kg) at a dose of 7.5 mg/kg revealed that, like other aminoglycosides, serum half-life values were correlated inversely with post-natal age and renal clearances of amikacin. The volume of distribution indicates that amikacin, like other aminoglycosides, remains primarily in the extracellular fluid space of neonates. Repeated dosing every 12 hours in all the above groups did not demonstrate accumulation after 5 days. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Intravenous Administration
                     
                        Single doses of 500 mg (7.5 mg/kg) administered to normal adults as an infusion over a period of 30 minutes produced a mean peak serum concentration of 38 mcg/mL at the end of the infusion and levels of 24 mcg/mL, 18 mcg/mL and 0.75 mcg/mL at 30 minutes, 1 hour and 10 hours post-infusion, respectively. Eighty-four percent of the administered dose was excreted in the urine in 9 hours and about 94% within 24 hours. 
                        Repeat infusions of 7.5 mg/kg every 12 hours in normal adults were well tolerated and caused no drug accumulation. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     General
                     
                        Pharmacokinetic studies in normal adult subjects reveal the mean serum half-life to be slightly over 2 hours with a mean total apparent volume of distribution of 24 liters (28% of the body weight). By the ultrafiltration technique, reports of serum protein binding range from 0 to 11%. The mean serum clearance rate is about 100 mL/min and the renal clearance rate is 94 mL/min in subjects with normal renal function. 
                        Amikacin is excreted primarily by glomerular filtration. Patients with impaired renal function or diminished glomerular filtration pressure excrete the drug much more slowly (effectively prolonging the serum half-life). Therefore, renal function should be monitored carefully and dosage adjusted accordingly (see suggested dosage schedule under 
                              DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION
                           ). 
                        Following administration at the recommended dose, therapeutic levels are found in bone, heart, gallbladder, and lung tissue in addition to significant concentrations in urine, bile, sputum, bronchial secretions, interstitial, pleural, and synovial fluids. 
                        Spinal fluid levels in normal infants are approximately 10 to 20% of the serum concentrations and may reach 50% when the meninges are inflamed. Amikacin has been demonstrated to cross the placental barrier and yield significant concentrations in amniotic fluid. The peak fetal serum concentration is about 16% of the peak maternal serum concentration and maternal and fetal serum half-life values are about 2 and 3.7 hours, respectively. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Microbiology
                     
                        
                           Mechanism of Action
                        
                        Amikacin, an aminoglycoside, binds to the prokaryotic ribosome, inhibiting protein synthesis in susceptible bacteria. It is bactericidal in vitro against Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria.
                        
                           Mechanism of Resistance
                        
                        Aminoglycosides are known to be ineffective against Salmonella and Shigella species in patients. Therefore, in vitro susceptibility test results should not be reported.
                        Amikacin resists degradation by certain aminoglycoside inactivating enzymes known to affect gentamicin, tobramycin, and kanamycin.
                        Aminoglycosides in general have a low order of activity against Gram-positive organisms other than Staphylococcal isolates.
                        
                           Interaction with Other Antimicrobials
                        
                        
                           In vitro studies have shown that amikacin sulfate combined with a beta-lactam antibiotic acts synergistically against many clinically significant Gram-negative organisms.
                        
                           Antimicrobial Activity
                        
                        Amikacin has been shown to be active against the following bacteria, both in vitro and in clinical infections (see 
                              INDICATIONS AND USAGE
                           ).
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Gram-positive Bacteria
                           
                           
                              
                                 Staphylococcus species
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Gram-negative Bacteria
                           
                           
                              
                                 Pseudomonas species
                              
                                 Escherichia coli
                              
                              
                                 Proteus species (indole-positive and indole-negative)
                              
                                 Klebsiella species
                              
                                 Enterobacter species
                              
                                 Serratia species
                              
                                 Acinetobacter species
                              Amikacin has demonstrated in vitro activity against the following bacteria. The safety and effectiveness of amikacin in treating clinical infections due to these bacteria have not been established in adequate and well-controlled trials.
                              
                                 Citrobacter freundii
                              
                              
                                 Susceptibility Test Methods
                              
                              When available, the clinical microbiology laboratory should provide cumulative results of the in vitro susceptibility tests for antimicrobial drugs used in local hospitals and practice areas to the physician as periodic reports that describe the susceptibility profile of nosocomial and community-acquired pathogens. These reports should aid the physician in selecting the most effective antimicrobial.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Dilution Techniques
                           
                           
                              Quantitative methods are used to determine antimicrobial minimal inhibitory concentrations (MICs). These MICs provide estimates of the susceptibility of bacteria to antimicrobial compounds. The MICs should be determined using a standardized test method.1, 3 Standardized procedures are based on a dilution method (broth or agar) or equivalent with standardized inoculum concentrations and standardized concentrations of amikacin powder. The MIC values should be interpreted according to the criteria provided in Table 1.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Diffusion Techniques
                           
                           
                              Quantitative methods that require measurement of zone diameters also provide reproducible estimates of the susceptibility of bacteria to antimicrobial compounds. One such standardized procedure requires the use of standardized inoculum concentrations and paper disks impregnated with 30 mcg of amikacin.2, 3 The disk diffusion values should be interpreted according to the criteria provided in Table 1.
                              Table 1: Susceptibility Test Interpretive Criteria for Amikacin
                              


                              


A report of “Susceptible” indicates that the antimicrobial is likely to inhibit growth of the pathogen if the antimicrobial compound reaches the concentration at the infection site necessary to inhibit growth of the pathogen. A report of “Intermediate” indicates that the result should be considered equivocal, and if the microorganism is not fully susceptible to alternative clinically feasible drugs, the test should be repeated. This category implies possible clinical applicability in body sites where the drug is physiologically concentrated. This category also provides a buffer zone that prevents small uncontrolled technical factors from causing major discrepancies in interpretation. A report of “Resistant” indicates that the antimicrobial is not likely to inhibit growth of the pathogen if the antimicrobial compound reaches the concentrations usually achievable at the infection site; other therapy should be selected.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Quality Control
                           
                           
                              Standardized susceptibility test procedures require the use of laboratory controls to monitor and ensure the accuracy and precision of supplies and reagents used in the assay, and the techniques of the individuals performing the test.1, 2, 3 Standard amikacin powder should provide the following range of MIC values provided in Table 2. For the diffusion technique using the 30-mcg amikacin disk the criteria provided in Table 2 should be achieved.
                              Table 2: Acceptable Quality Control Ranges for Amikacin
                              


