
                     
                     
                     Drug Interactions
                     
                        

                        When given concurrently the following drugs may interact with thiazide diuretics:
                              

                              
Alcohol, barbiturates, or narcotics - potentiation of ortho­static hypotension may occur.
                              

                              
Antidiabetic drugs - (oral agents and insulin) dosage adjustment of the antidiabetic drug may be required.
                              

                              
Other antihypertensive drugs  -  ­additive effect or potentiation.
                              

                              
Cholestyramine and colestipol resins - Cholestyramine and colestipol resins bind the hydrochlorothiazide and re­duce its absorption from the gastrointestinal tract by up to 85 and 43 percent, respectively.

                           

                           Corticosteroid, ACTH - intensi­fied electrolyte depletion, particularly hypokalemia.
                              

                              
Pressor amines (e.g., norepinephrine) - possible decreased response to pressor amines but not sufficient to preclude their use.
                              

                              
Skeletal muscle relaxants, non-depolarizing (e.g., tubocurarine) - possible increased responsiveness to the muscle relaxant.
                              

                              
Lithium - generally should not be given with diuretics. Diuretic agents reduce the renal clear­ance of lithium and greatly increase the risk of lithium tox­icity. Refer to the package insert for lithium preparations before use of such preparations with hydrochloro­thiazide.

                           
                              
Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs - In some patients, the administration of a non-steroidal anti-inflammatory agent can reduce the diuretic, natriuretic, and antihypertensive effects of loop, potassium-sparing and thiazide diuretics. When hydrochloro­thiazide and non-steroidal anti-inflammatory agents are used concomitantly, the patients should be observed closely to determine if the desired effect of the diuretic is obtained.
                     
                     
                  
               