
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  Phosphorus in the form of organic and inorganic phosphate
has a variety of important biochemical functions in the body and is involved
in many significant metabolic and enzyme reactions in almost all organs and
tissues. It exerts a modifying influence on the steady state of calcium levels,
a buffering effect on acid-base equilibrium and a primary role in the renal
excretion of hydrogen ion.
                  	Phosphorus is present in
plasma and other extracellular fluid, in cell membranes and intracellular
fluid, as well as in collagen and bone tissues. Phosphorus in the extracellular
fluid is primarily in inorganic form and plasma levels may vary somewhat with
age. The ratio of disodium phosphate and monosodium phosphate in the extracellular
fluid is 4 to 1 (80% to 20%) at the normal pH of 7.4. This buffer ratio varies
with the pH, but owing to its relatively low concentration, it contributes
little to the buffering capacity of the extracellular fluid.
                  	Phosphorus,
present in large amounts in erythrocytes and other tissue cells, plays a significant
intracellular role in the synthesis of high energy organic phosphates. It
has been shown to be essential to maintain red cell glucose utilization, lactate
production, and the concentration of both erythrocyte adenosine triphosphate
(ATP) and 2,3 diphosphoglycerate (DPG), and must be deemed as important to
other tissue cells. Hypophosphatemia should be avoided during periods of total
parenteral nutrition, or other lengthy periods of intravenous infusions. It
has been suggested that patients receiving total parenteral nutrition receive
12 to 15 mM phosphorus per 250 g of dextrose. Serum phosphorus levels should
be regularly monitored and appropriate amounts of phosphorus should be added
to the infusions to maintain normal serum phosphorus levels. Intravenous infusion
of inorganic phosphorus may be accompanied by a decrease in the serum level
and urinary excretion of calcium. The normal level of serum phosphorus is
3.0 to 4.5 mg/100 mL in adults; 4.0 to 7.0 mg/100 mL in children.
                  	Intravenously
infused phosphorus not taken up by the tissues is excreted almost entirely
in the urine. Plasma phosphorus is believed to be filterable by the renal
glomeruli, and the major portion of filtered phosphorus (greater than 80%)
is actively reabsorbed by the tubules. Many modifying influences tend to alter
the amount excreted in the urine.
                  	Sodium is the principal
cation of extracellular fluid. It comprises more than 90% of the total cations
at its normal plasma concentration of approximately 142 mEq/liter. While the
sodium ion can diffuse across cell membranes, intracellular sodium is maintained
at a much lower concentration than extracellular sodium through the expenditure
of energy by the cell (so called “sodium cation pump”). Loss
of intracellular potassium ion is usually accompanied by an increase in intracellular
sodium ion.
                  	When serum sodium concentration is low,
the secretion of antidiuretic hormone (ADH) by the pituitary is inhibited,
thereby preventing water reabsorption by the distal renal tubules. On the
other hand, adrenal secretion of aldosterone increases renal tubular reabsorption
of sodium in an effort to re-establish normal serum sodium concentration.
               
               
            
         