
               
               
               
                  CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGYPharmacodynamics

                  
Sulindac is a non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID) that exhibits 
anti-inflammatory, analgesic and antipyretic activities in animal models. The 
mechanism of action, like that of other NSAIDs, is not completely understood but 
may be related to prostaglandin synthetase inhibition.

                  
Pharmacokinetics

                  
Absorption

                  
The extent of sulindac absorption from sulindac tablets is similar as compared 
to sulindac solution.

                  
There is no information regarding food affect on sulindac absorption. Antacids 
containing magnesium hydroxide 200 mg and aluminum hydroxide 225 mg per 5 ml 
have been shown not to significantly decrease the extent of sulindac absorption.

                  

                  

Distribution




                  
Sulindac, and its sulfone and sulfide metabolites, are 93.1, 95.4, and 97.9% 
bound to plasma proteins, predominantly to albumin. Plasma protein binding 
measured over a concentration range (0.5-2.0 μg/mL) was constant. Following an 
oral, radiolabeled dose of sulindac in rats, concentrations of radiolabel in red 
blood cells were about 10% of those in plasma. Sulindac penetrates the 
blood-brain and placental barriers. Concentrations in brain did not exceed 4% of 
those in plasma. Plasma concentrations in the placenta and in the fetus were 
less than 25% and 5% respectively, of systemic plasma concentrations. Sulindac 
is excreted in rat milk; concentrations in milk were 10 to 20% of those levels 
in plasma. It is not known if sulindac is excreted in human milk.

                  
Metabolism

                  
Sulindac undergoes two major biotransformations of its sulfoxide moiety: 
oxidation to the inactive sulfone and reduction to the pharmacologically active 
sulfide. The latter is readily reversible in animals and in man. These 
metabolites are present as unchanged compounds in plasma and principally as 
glucuronide conjugates in human urine and bile. A dihydroxydihydro analog has 
also been identified as a minor metabolite in human urine.

                  

                  With the twice-a-day dosage regimen, plasma concentrations of sulindac and 
its two metabolites accumulate: mean concentration over a dosage interval at 
steady state relative to the first dose averages 1.5 and 2.5 times higher, 
respectively, for sulindac and its active sulfide metabolite.Sulindac and its sulfone metabolite undergo extensive enterohepatic 
circulation relative to the sulfide metabolite in animals. Studies in man have 
also demonstrated that recirculation of the parent drug sulindac and its sulfone 
metabolite is more extensive than that of the active sulfide metabolite. The 
active sulfide metabolite accounts for less than six percent of the total 
intestinal exposure to sulindac and its metabolites.

                  
Biochemical as well as pharmacological evidence indicates that the activity of 
sulindac resides in its sulfide metabolite. An in-vitro assay for inhibition of cyclooxygenase activity 
exhibited an EC50 of 0.02 μM for sulindac sulfide. In-vivo models of inflammation indicate that activity is 
more highly correlated with concentrations of the metabolite than with parent 
drug concentrations.

                  
Elimination

                  
Approximately 50% of the administered dose of sulindac is excreted in the urine 
with the conjugated sulfone metabolite accounting for the major portion. Less 
than 1% of the administered dose of sulindac appears in the urine as the sulfide 
metabolite. Approximately 25% is found in the feces, primarily as the sulfone 
and sulfide metabolites.

                  The mean effective half-life (T1/2) is 7.8 and 16.4 
hours, respectively, for sulindac and its active sulfide metabolite.
                  Because sulindac is excreted in the urine primarily as biologically inactive 
forms, it may possibly affect renal function to a lesser extent than other 
non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs; however, renal adverse experiences have 
been reported with sulindac (see 
                        ADVERSE REACTIONS
                     ).In a study of patients with chronic glomerular disease treated with therapeutic 
doses of sulindac, no effect was demonstrated on renal blood flow, glomerular 
filtration rate, or urinary excretion of prostaglandin E2 
and the primary metabolite of prostacyclin, 6-keto-PGF1α. 
However, in other studies in healthy volunteers and patients with liver disease, 
sulindac was found to blunt the renal responses to intravenous furosemide, i.e., 
the diuresis, natriuresis, increments in plasma renin activity and urinary 
excretion of prostaglandins. These observations may represent a differentiation 
of the effects of sulindac on renal functions based on differences in 
pathogenesis of the renal prostaglandin dependence associated with differing 
dose-response relationships of different NSAIDs to the various renal functions 
influenced by prostaglandins (see 
                     PRECAUTIONS
                  ).

                  
In healthy men, the average fecal blood loss, measured over a two-week period 
during administration of 400 mg per day of sulindac, was similar to that for 
placebo, and was statistically significantly less than that resulting from 4800 
mg per day of aspirin.

                  
                     

                  
                  
                     

                  
                  

               
               
            
         