
               
               
               
                  Drug Interactions
                  
                     ACE-Inhibitors and Angiotensin II 
Antagonists
                  
                  Reports suggest that NSAIDs may diminish the antihypertensive effect of 
ACE-inhibitors and angiotensin II antagonists. These interactions should be 
given consideration in patients taking NSAIDs concomitantly with ACE-inhibitors 
or angiotensin II antagonists. In some patients with compromised renal function, 
the co-administration of an NSAID and an ACE-inhibitor or an angiotensin II 
antagonist may result in further deterioration of renal function, including 
possible acute renal failure, which is usually reversible.
                  
                     Acetaminophen
                  
                  Acetaminophen had no effect on the plasma levels of sulindac or its sulfide 
metabolite.
                  
                     Aspirin
                  
                  The concomitant administration of aspirin with sulindac significantly 
depressed the plasma levels of the active sulfide metabolite. A double-blind 
study compared the safety and efficacy of sulindac 300 or 400 mg daily given 
alone or with aspirin 2.4 g/day for the treatment of osteoarthritis. The 
addition of aspirin did not alter the types of clinical or laboratory adverse 
experiences for sulindac; however, the combination showed an increase in the 
incidence of gastrointestinal adverse experiences. Since the addition of aspirin 
did not have a favorable effect on the therapeutic response to sulindac, the 
combination is not recommended.
                  
                     Cyclosporine
                  
                  Administration of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs concomitantly with 
cyclosporine has been associated with an increase in cyclosporine-induced 
toxicity, possibly due to decreased synthesis of renal prostacyclin. NSAIDs 
should be used with caution in patients taking cyclosporine, and renal function 
should be carefully monitored.
                  
                     Diflunisal
                  
                  The concomitant administration of sulindac and diflunisal in normal 
volunteers resulted in lowering of the plasma levels of the active sulindac 
sulfide metabolite by approximately one-third.
                  
                     Diuretics
                  
                  Clinical studies, as well as post marketing observations, have shown that 
sulindac can reduce the natriuretic effect of furosemide and thiazides in some 
patients. This response has been attributed to inhibition of renal prostaglandin 
synthesis. During concomitant therapy with NSAIDs, the patient should be 
observed closely for signs of renal failure (see 
                        WARNINGS, Renal 
Effects
                     ), as well as to assure diuretic efficacy.
                  
                     DMSO
                  
                  DMSO should not be used with sulindac. Concomitant administration has been 
reported to reduce the plasma levels of the active sulfide metabolite and 
potentially reduce efficacy. In addition, this combination has been reported to 
cause peripheral neuropathy.
                  
                     Lithium
                  
                  NSAIDs have produced an elevation of plasma lithium levels and a reduction in 
renal lithium clearance. The mean minimum lithium concentration increased 15% 
and the renal clearance was decreased by approximately 20%. These effects have 
been attributed to inhibition of renal prostaglandin synthesis by the NSAID. 
Thus, when NSAIDs and lithium are administered concurrently, subjects should be 
observed carefully for signs of lithium toxicity.
                  
                     Methotrexate
                  
                  NSAIDs have been reported to competitively inhibit methotrexate accumulation 
in rabbit kidney slices. This may indicate that they could enhance the toxicity 
of methotrexate. Caution should be used when NSAIDs are administered 
concomitantly with methotrexate.
                  
                     NSAIDs
                  
                  The concomitant use of sulindac with other NSAIDs is not recommended due to 
the increased possibility of gastrointestinal toxicity, with little or no 
increase in efficacy.
                  
                     Oral anticoagulants
                  
                  Although sulindac and its sulfide metabolite are highly bound to protein, 
studies in which sulindac was given at a dose of 400 mg daily have shown no 
clinically significant interaction with oral anticoagulants. However, patients 
should be monitored carefully until it is certain that no change in their 
anticoagulant dosage is required. Special attention should be paid to patients 
taking higher doses than those recommended and to patients with renal impairment 
or other metabolic defects that might increase sulindac blood levels. The 
effects of warfarin and NSAIDs on GI bleeding are synergistic, such that users 
of both drugs together have a risk of serious GI bleeding higher than users of 
either drug alone.
                  
                     Oral hypoglycemic agents
                  
                  Although sulindac and its sulfide metabolite are highly bound to protein, 
studies in which sulindac was given at a dose of 400 mg daily, have shown no 
clinically significant interaction with oral hypoglycemic agents. However, 
patients should be monitored carefully until it is certain that no change in 
their hypoglycemic dosage is required. Special attention should be paid to 
patients taking higher doses than those recommended and to patients with renal 
impairment or other metabolic defects that might increase sulindac blood 
levels.
                  
                     Probenecid
                  
                  Probenecid given concomitantly with sulindac had only a slight effect on 
plasma sulfide levels, while plasma levels of sulindac and sulfone were 
increased. Sulindac was shown to produce a modest reduction in the uricosuric 
action of probenecid, which probably is not significant under most 
circumstances.
                  
                     Propoxyphene hydrochloride
                  
                  Propoxyphene hydrochloride had no effect on the plasma levels of sulindac or 
its sulfide metabolitePregnancyTeratogenic Effects. Pregnancy Category C.Reproductive studies conducted in rats and rabbits have not 
demonstrated evidence of developmental abnormalities. However, animal 
reproduction studies are not always predictive of human response. There are no 
adequate and well-controlled studies in pregnant women. Sulindac should be used 
in pregnancy only if the potential benefit justifies the potential risk to the 
fetus.Nonteratogenic EffectsBecause of the known effects of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory 
drugs on the fetal cardiovascular system (closure of ductus arteriosus), use 
during pregnancy (particularly late pregnancy) should be avoided.
                  The known effects of drugs of this class on the human fetus during the third 
trimester of pregnancy include: constriction of the ductus arteriosus 
prenatally, tricuspid incompetence, and pulmonary hypertension; non-closure of 
the ductus arteriosus postnatally which may be resistant to medical management; 
myocardial degenerative changes, platelet dysfunction with resultant bleeding, 
intracranial bleeding, renal dysfunction or failure, renal injury/dysgenesis 
which may result in prolonged or permanent renal failure, oligohydramnios, 
gastrointestinal bleeding or perforation, and increased risk of necrotizing 
enterocolitis.
                  In reproduction studies in the rat, a decrease in average fetal weight and an 
increase in numbers of dead pups were observed on the first day of the 
postpartum period at dosage levels of 20 and 40 mg/kg/day (21/2 and 5 times the usual maximum daily dose in humans), 
although there was no adverse effect on the survival and growth during the 
remainder of the postpartum period. Sulindac prolongs the duration of gestation 
in rats, as do other compounds of this class. Visceral and skeletal 
malformations observed in low incidence among rabbits in some teratology studies 
did not occur at the same dosage levels in repeat studies, nor at a higher 
dosage level in the same species.Labor and DeliveryIn rat studies with NSAIDs, as with other drugs known to inhibit 
prostaglandin synthesis, an increased incidence of dystocia, delayed 
parturition, and decreased pup survival occurred. The effects of sulindac on 
labor and delivery in pregnant women are unknown.
                  Nursing MothersIt is not known whether this drug is excreted in human milk; 
however, it is secreted in the milk of lactacting rats. Because many drugs are 
excreted in human milk and because of the potential for serious adverse 
reactions in nursing infants from sulindac, a decision should be made whether to 
discontinue nursing or to discontinue the drug, taking into account the 
importance of the drug to the mother.Pediatric UseSafety and effectiveness in pediatric patients have not been 
established.
                  Geriatric UseAs with any NSAID, caution should be exercised in treating the 
elderly (65 years and older) since advancing age appears to increase the 
possibility of adverse reactions. Elderly patients seem to tolerate ulceration 
or bleeding less well than other individuals and many spontaneous reports of 
fatal GI events are in this population (see 
                        WARNINGS, Gastrointestinal Effects 
- Risk of Ulceration, Bleeding, and Perforation
                     ).
                  Sulindac is known to be substantially excreted by the kidney and the risk of 
toxic reactions to this drug may be greater in patients with impaired renal 
function. Because elderly patients are more likely to have decreased renal 
function, care should be taken in dose selection and it may be useful to monitor 
renal function (see 
                        WARNINGS, Renal 
Effects
                     ).
                  
                     

                  
               
               
            
         