
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        C1 esterase inhibitor (C1INH) is a normal constituent of human blood and is one of the serine protease inhibitors (serpins). The primary function of C1INH is to regulate the activation of the complement and contact system pathways. Regulation of these systems is performed through the formation of complexes between the protease and the inhibitor, resulting in inactivation of both and consumption of the C1INH.
                        C1INH exerts its inhibitory effect by irreversibly binding several proteases (target proteases) of the contact and complement systems. The effect of RUCONEST on the following target proteases was assessed in vitro: activated C1s, kallikrein, factor XIIa and factor XIa. Inhibition kinetics were found to be comparable with those observed for plasma-derived human C1INH.
                        HAE patients have low levels of endogenous or functional C1INH. Although the events that induce attacks of angioedema in HAE patients are not well defined, it is thought that contact system activation, and resulting increased vascular permeability lead to the clinical manifestation of HAE attacks. Suppression of contact system activation by C1INH through the inactivation of plasma kallikrein and factor XIIa is thought to modulate vascular permeability by preventing the generation of bradykinin.5
                        
                        Administration of RUCONEST increases plasma levels of functional C1INH activity.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        The complement component (protein) C4 is a substrate for activated C1.  Patients with HAE have low levels of C4 in the circulation; RUCONEST shows a dose-dependent restoration of complement homeostasis of C4 in HAE patients.  A dose of 50 IU/kg of RUCONEST increases plasma C1INH activity levels to greater than 0.7 IU/mL (the lower limit of normal) in HAE patients.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        The pharmacokinetics of RUCONEST was evaluated in a study of 12 asymptomatic HAE patients (dose ranged from 6.25 IU/kg to 100 IU/kg). Pharmacokinetics evaluation was performed by non-compartmental analysis, using functional C1INH levels. Following administration of RUCONEST (50 IU/kg) in asymptomatic HAE patients (Table 5), the mean Cmax was 1.2 IU/mL, and the elimination half-life was approximately 2.5 hours. The clearance of RUCONEST was nonlinear (clearance decreased with increasing dose) over the dose range of 25-100 IU/kg.
                        
                           Table 5: Baseline corrected pharmacokinetic parameters (Mean ± SD) following administration of 50 IU/kg and 100 IU/kg RUCONEST to asymptomatic HAE patients
                        
                        


                        


Studies have not been conducted to evaluate the PK of RUCONEST in special patient populations, identified by race, age (pediatric or geriatric), or the presence of renal or hepatic impairment.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         