
               
               
               
               
                  
                     CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY: Thallous Chloride TI 201 Injection with no carrier added has been found to accumulate in viable myocardium in a manner analogous to that of potassium.  Experiments in human volunteers using labeled microspheres have shown that the myocardial distribution of Thallous Chloride TI 201 Injection correlates well with regional perfusion.
                  In clinical studies, thallium images have been found to visualize areas of infarction as “cold” or nonlabeled regions which are confirmed by electro-cardiographic and enzyme changes. When the "cold" or nonlabeled regions comprise a substantial portion of the left ventricle, the prognosis for survival is unfavorable.  Regions of transient myocardial ischemia corresponding to areas perfused by coronary arteries with partial stenoses have been visualized when Thallous Chloride TI 201 Injection was administered in conjunction with an exercise stress test.  Body habitus may interfere with visualization of the inferior wall.
                  After intravenous administration, Thallous Chloride TI 201 Injection clears rapidly from the blood with maximal concentration by normal myocardium occurring at about ten minutes.  It will, in addition, localize in parathyroid adenomas; it is not specific since it will localize to a lesser extent in sites of parathyroid hyperplasia and other abnormal tissues such as thyroid adenoma, neoplasia (e.g., parathyroid carcinoma) and sarcoid. Biodistribution is generally proportional to organ blood flow at the time of injection. Blood clearance of Thallous Chloride TI 201 injection is primarily by the myocardium, kidneys, thyroid, liver and stomach with the remainder distributing fairly uniformly throughout the body.  The dosimetry data in Table 4 reflect this distribution pattern and are based on a biological half-life of 11 days and an effective half-life of 2.4 days. Thallous Chloride T1 201 Injection is excreted slowly and to an equal extent in both feces and urine.
                  This technique has limited sensitivity for detecting parathyroid adenomas smaller than 5 mm in diameter.
               
               
            
         