
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY

               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action

                     
                        Natalizumab binds to the α4-subunit of α4β1 and α4β7 integrins expressed on the surface of all leukocytes except neutrophils, and inhibits the α4-mediated adhesion of leukocytes to their counter-receptor(s).  The receptors for the α4 family of integrins include vascular cell adhesion molecule-1 (VCAM-1), which is expressed on activated vascular endothelium, and mucosal addressin cell adhesion molecule-1 (MAdCAM-1) present on vascular endothelial cells of the gastrointestinal tract.   Disruption of these molecular interactions prevents transmigration of leukocytes across the endothelium into inflamed parenchymal tissue.  In vitro, anti-α4-integrin antibodies also block α4-mediated cell binding to ligands such as osteopontin and an alternatively spliced domain of fibronectin, connecting segment-1 (CS-1).  In vivo, natalizumab may further act to inhibit the interaction of α4-expressing leukocytes with their ligand(s) in the extracellular matrix and on parenchymal cells, thereby inhibiting further recruitment and inflammatory activity of activated immune cells.

                         The specific mechanism(s) by which TYSABRI exerts its effects in multiple sclerosis and Crohn's disease have not been fully defined.  

                        In multiple sclerosis, lesions are believed to occur when activated inflammatory cells, including T-lymphocytes, cross the blood-brain barrier (BBB).  Leukocyte migration across the BBB involves interaction between adhesion molecules on inflammatory cells and their counter-receptors present on endothelial cells of the vessel wall.  The clinical effect of natalizumab in multiple sclerosis may be secondary to blockade of the molecular interaction of α4β1-integrin expressed by inflammatory cells with VCAM-1 on vascular endothelial cells, and with CS-1 and/or osteopontin expressed by parenchymal cells in the brain.  Data from an experimental autoimmune encephalitis animal model of multiple sclerosis demonstrate reduction of leukocyte migration into brain parenchyma and reduction of plaque formation detected by magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) following repeated administration of natalizumab.  The clinical significance of these animal data is unknown.

                         In Crohn's disease, the interaction of the α4β7 integrin with the endothelial receptor MAdCAM-1 has been implicated as an important contributor to the chronic inflammation that is a hallmark of the disease.  MAdCAM-1 is mainly expressed on gut endothelial cells and plays a critical role in the homing of T lymphocytes to gut lymph tissue found in Peyer's patches.  MAdCAM-1 expression has been found to be increased at active sites of inflammation in patients with CD, which suggests it may play a role in the recruitment of leukocytes to the mucosa and contribute to the inflammatory response characteristic of CD.  The clinical effect of natalizumab in CD may therefore be secondary to blockade of the molecular interaction of the α4ß7-integrin receptor with MAdCAM-1 expressed on the venular endothelium at inflammatory foci.  VCAM-1 expression has been found to be upregulated on colonic endothelial cells in a mouse model of IBD and appears to play a role in leukocyte recruitment to sites of inflammation.  The role of VCAM-1 in CD, however, is not clear.

                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics

                     
                        TYSABRI administration increases the number of circulating leukocytes (including lymphocytes, monocytes, basophils, and eosinophils) due to inhibition of transmigration out of the vascular space.  TYSABRI does not affect the absolute count of circulating neutrophils [see Warnings and Precautions (5.6)].  

                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics

                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Multiple Sclerosis (MS) Patients:
                              
                              In patients with MS, following the repeat intravenous administration of a 300 mg dose of TYSABRI, the mean ± SD maximum observed serum concentration was 110 ± 52 mcg/mL.  Mean average steady-state trough concentrations ranged from 23 mcg/mL to 29 mcg/mL.  The observed time to steady-state was approximately 24 weeks after every four weeks of dosing.  The mean ± SD half-life, volume of distribution, and clearance of natalizumab were 11 ± 4 days, 5.7 ± 1.9 L, and 16 ± 5 mL/hour, respectively.

                              The effects of covariates such as body weight, age, gender, and presence of anti-natalizumab antibodies on natalizumab pharmacokinetics were investigated in a population pharmacokinetic study (n=2195).  Natalizumab clearance increased with body weight in a less than proportional manner such that a 43% increase in body weight resulted in a 32% increase in clearance.  The presence of persistent anti-natalizumab antibodies increased natalizumab clearance approximately 3-fold [see Adverse Reactions (6.2)].

                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Crohn's Disease (CD) Patients:
                              
                              In patients with CD, following the repeat intravenous administration of a 300 mg dose of TYSABRI, the mean ± SD maximum observed serum concentration was 101 ± 34 mcg/mL.  The mean ± SD average steady-state trough concentration was 10 ± 9 mcg/mL.  The estimated time to steady-state was approximately 16 to 24 weeks after every four weeks of dosing.  The mean ± SD half-life, volume of distribution, and clearance of natalizumab were 10 ± 7 days, 5.2 ± 2.8 L, and 22 ± 22 mL/hour, respectively.

                              The effects of total body weight, age, gender, race, selected hematology and serum chemistry measures, co-administered medications (infliximab, immunosuppressants, or steroids), and the presence of anti-natalizumab antibodies were investigated in a population pharmacokinetic analysis (n=1156).  The presence of anti-natalizumab antibodies was observed to increase natalizumab clearance [see Adverse Reactions (6.2)].

                              Pharmacokinetics of natalizumab in patients with renal or hepatic insufficiency have not been studied.

                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         