
               
               
               Drug Interactions section
               
                  
                  
                  Simvastatin, like several other inhibitors of HMG-CoA reductase, is a substrate of CYP3A4. Simvastatin is metabolized by CYP3A4 but has no CYP3A4 inhibitory activity; therefore it is not expected to affect the plasma concentrations of other drugs metabolized by CYP3A4.
                  The risk of myopathy is increased by reducing the elimination of simvastatin. Hence when simvastatin is used with an inhibitor of CYP3A4 (e.g., as listed below), elevated plasma levels of HMG-CoA reductase inhibitory activity can increase the risk of myopathy and rhabdomyolysis, particularly with higher doses of simvastatin. [See Warnings and Precautions (5.1) and Clinical Pharmacology (12.3).]
                  
                  
                     Itraconazole, ketoconazole, and other antifungal azoles
                  
                  
                     Macrolide antibiotics erythromycin, clarithromycin, and the ketolide antibiotic telithromycin
                  
                  
                     HIV protease inhibitors
                  
                  
                     Antidepressant nefazodone
                  
                  
                     Grapefruit juice in large quantities (>1 quart daily)
                  
                  Concomitant use of these drugs and any medication labeled as having a strong inhibitory effect on CYP3A4 should be avoided unless the benefits of combined therapy outweigh the increased risk. If treatment with itraconazole, ketoconazole, erythromycin, clarithromycin or telithromycin is unavoidable, therapy with simvastatin tablets should be suspended during the course of treatment.
                  
 

                  
                  
                  The risk of myopathy is increased by gemfibrozil [see Dosage and Administration (2.6)] and to a lesser extent by other fibrates [see Warnings and Precautions (5.1)].
                  
 

                  
                  
                  The risk of myopathy/rhabdomyolysis is increased by concomitant administration of cyclosporine or danazol particularly with higher doses of simvastatin [see Warnings and Precautions (5.1) and Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                  
 

                  
                  
                  The risk of myopathy/rhabdomyolysis is increased by concomitant administration of amiodarone, verapamil or diltiazem with higher doses of simvastatin[see Warnings and Precautions (5.1)].
                  
 

                  
                  
                  Cases of myopathy/rhabdomyolysis have been observed with simvastatin coadministered with lipid-modifying doses (≥ 1 g/day niacin) of niacin-containing products. In particular, caution should be used when treating Chinese patients with simvastatin coadministered with lipid-modifying doses of niacin-containing products. Because the risk for myopathy is dose-related, Chinese patients should not receive simvastatin 80 mg coadministered with lipid-modifying doses of niacin-containing products. [see Warnings and Precautions (5.1) and Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                  
 

                  
                  
                  In one study, concomitant administration of digoxin with simvastatin resulted in a slight elevation in digoxin concentrations in plasma. Patients taking digoxin should be monitored appropriately when simvastatin is initiated [see  Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                  
 

                  
                  
                  In two clinical studies, one in normal volunteers and the other in hypercholesterolemic patients, simvastatin 20 to 40 mg/day modestly potentiated the effect of coumarin anticoagulants: the prothrombin time, reported as International Normalized Ratio (INR), increased from a baseline of 1.7 to 1.8 and from 2.6 to 3.4 in the volunteer and patient studies, respectively. With other statins, clinically evident bleeding and/or increased prothrombin time has been reported in a few patients taking coumarin anticoagulants concomitantly. In such patients, prothrombin time should be determined before starting simvastatin and frequently enough during early therapy to ensure that no significant alteration of prothrombin time occurs. Once a stable prothrombin time has been documented, prothrombin times can be monitored at the intervals usually recommended for patients on coumarin anticoagulants. If the dose of simvastatin is changed or discontinued, the same procedure should be repeated. Simvastatin therapy has not been associated with bleeding or with changes in prothrombin time in patients not taking anticoagulants.
                  
 

               
               
            
         