
                     
                     
                     Drug Interactions
                     
                        
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Concomitant diuretic therapy
                           
                              As with other ACE inhibitors, patients on diuretics, especially thoseon recently instituted diuretic therapy may occasionally experience an excessive reduction of bloodpressure after initiation of therapy with quinapril hydrochloride. The possibility of hypotensive effectswith quinapril hydrochloride may be minimized by either discontinuing the diuretic or cautiouslyincreasing salt intake prior to initiation of treatment with quinapril hydrochloride. If it is not possibleto discontinue the diuretic, the starting dose of quinapril should be reduced (see DOSAGE ANDADMINISTRATION).
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Agents increasing serum potassium
                           
                              Quinapril can attenuate potassium loss caused by thiazidediuretics and increase serum potassium when used alone. If concomitant therapy of quinaprilhydrochloride with potassium-sparing diuretics (eg, spironolactone, triamterene, or amiloride),potassium supplements, or potassium-containing salt substitutes is indicated, they should be usedwith caution along with appropriate monitoring of serum potassium (see PRECAUTIONS).
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Tetracycline and other drugs that interact with magnesium
                           
                              Simultaneous administration oftetracycline with quinapril hydrochloride reduced the absorption of tetracycline by approximately28% to 37%, possibly due to the high magnesium content in quinapril hydrochloride tablets. Thisinteraction should be considered if coprescribing quinapril hydrochloride and tetracycline or otherdrugs that interact with magnesium.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Lithium
                           
                              Increased serum lithium levels and symptoms of lithium toxicity have been reported inpatients receiving concomitant lithium and ACE inhibitor therapy. These drugs should becoadministered with caution and frequent monitoring of serum lithium levels is recommended. If adiuretic is also used, it may increase the risk of lithium toxicity.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Other agents
                           
                              Drug interaction studies of quinapril hydrochloride with other agents showed:
                              
                                 
                                    Multiple dose therapy with propranolol or cimetidine has no effect on the pharmacokinetics ofsingle doses of quinapril hydrochloride.
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                    The anticoagulant effect of a single dose of warfarin (measured by prothrombin time) was notsignificantly changed by quinapril coadministration twice-daily.
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                    quinapril hydrochloride treatment did not affect the pharmacokinetics of digoxin.
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                    No pharmacokinetic interaction was observed when single doses of quinapril hydrochloride andhydrochlorothiazide were administered concomitantly.
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                    Co-administration of multiple 10 mg doses of atorvastatin with 80 mg of quinapril hydrochlorideresulted in no significant change in the steady-state pharmacokinetic parameters of atorvastatin.
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               