
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Lisdexamfetamine is a prodrug of dextroamphetamine.  Amphetamines are non-catecholamine sympathomimetic amines with CNS stimulant activity.  Amphetamines block the reuptake of norepinephrine and dopamine into the presynaptic neuron and increase the release of these monoamines into the extraneuronal space.  The parent drug, lisdexamfetamine, does not bind to the sites responsible for the reuptake of norepinephrine and dopamine in vitro.  
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        Pharmacokinetic studies of dextroamphetamine after oral administration of lisdexamfetamine have been conducted in patients ages 6 to 12 years with ADHD and in healthy adult volunteers.  
                        In 18 patients ages 6 to 12 years with ADHD, the Tmax of dextroamphetamine was approximately 3.5 hours following single-dose oral administration of lisdexamfetamine dimesylate either 30 mg, 50 mg, or 70 mg after an 8-hour overnight fast.  The Tmax of lisdexamfetamine was approximately 1 hour.  Linear pharmacokinetics of dextroamphetamine after single-dose oral administration of lisdexamfetamine dimesylate was established over the dose range of 30 mg to 70 mg in children ages 6 to 12 years and over a range of 50 mg to 250 mg in adults.  Dextroamphetamine pharmacokinetic parameters following administration of lisdexamfetamine dimesylate in adults exhibited low inter-subject (<25%) and intra-subject (<8%) variability. Safety and efficacy have not been studied above the maximum recommended dose of 70mg.
                        There is no accumulation of dextroamphetamine AUC at steady state in healthy adults and no accumulation of lisdexamfetamine after once-daily dosing for 7 consecutive days.
                        Neither food (a high fat meal or yogurt) nor orange juice affect the observed AUC and Cmax of dextroamphetamine in healthy adults after single-dose oral administration of 70 mg of VYVANSE capsules.  Food prolongs Tmax by approximately 1 hour (from 3.8 hrs at fasted state to 4.7 hrs after a high fat meal or to 4.2 hrs with yogurt).  After an 8-hour fast, the AUCs for dextroamphetamine following oral administration of lisdexamfetamine dimesylate in solution and as intact capsules were equivalent.
                        Weight/Dose normalized AUC and Cmax were 22% and 12% lower, respectively, in adult females than in males on day 7 following a 70 mg/day dose of lisdexamfetamine dimesylate for 7 days. Weight/Dose normalized AUC and Cmax values were the same in pediatric patients ages 6 to 12 years following single doses of 30-70 mg. 
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Metabolism and Excretion
                              
                              After oral administration, lisdexamfetamine is rapidly absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract. Lisdexamfetamine is converted to dextroamphetamine and l-lysine primarily in blood due to the hydrolytic activity of red blood cells.  In vitro data demonstrated that red blood cells have a high capacity for metabolism of lisdexamfetamine; substantial hydrolysis occurred even at low hematocrit levels (33% of normal). Lisdexamfetamine is not metabolized by cytochrome P450 enzymes.  Following the oral administration of a 70 mg dose of radiolabeled lisdexamfetamine dimesylate to 6 healthy subjects, approximately 96% of the oral dose radioactivity was recovered in the urine and only 0.3% recovered in the feces over a period of 120 hours.  Of the radioactivity recovered in the urine, 42% of the dose was related to amphetamine, 25% to hippuric acid, and 2% to intact lisdexamfetamine.  Plasma concentrations of unconverted lisdexamfetamine are low and transient, generally becoming non-quantifiable by 8 hours after administration.  The plasma elimination half-life of lisdexamfetamine typically averaged less than one hour in studies of lisdexamfetamine dimesylate in volunteers. 
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Drug Interaction Studies
                                    
                                    



                                 



                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Figure 1
                                       
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Figure 2
                                       
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Studies in Specific Populations
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                       
                                       
                                          
                                             Renal Impairment
                                          
                                          In a pharmacokinetic study of lisdexamfetamine in subjects with normal and impaired renal function mean d-amphetamine clearance was reduced from 0.7 L/hr/kg in normal subjects to 0.4 L/hr/kg in subjects with severe renal impairment (GFR 15 to <30mL/min/1.73m2) and 0.3 L/hr/kg in ESRD patients. Dialysis did not significantly affect the clearance of d-amphetamine; the mean clearance of d-amphetamine was 0.3 L/hr/kg for both pre- and post- dialysis [see Use in Specific Populations (8.6)].
                                          


                                       



                                       
                                       
                                          
                                             Figure 3
                                             
                                                
                                             
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         