
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        
                           Carbidopa
                        
                        When levodopa is administered
orally, it is rapidly decarboxylated to dopamine in extracerebral
tissues so that only a small portion of a given dose is transported
unchanged to the central nervous system.  Carbidopa inhibits the decarboxylation
of peripheral levodopa, making more levodopa available for delivery
to the brain.
                        
                           Levodopa
                        
                        Levodopa is the metabolic precursor of dopamine, does cross the blood-brain
barrier, and presumably is converted to dopamine in the brain.  This
is thought to be the mechanism whereby levodopa treats the symptoms
of Parkinson's disease.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        Because its decarboxylase inhibiting activity is limited to extracerebral
tissues, administration of carbidopa with levodopa makes more levodopa
available to the brain.  The addition of carbidopa to levodopa reduces
the peripheral effects (e.g., nausea and vomiting) due to decarboxylation
of levodopa; however, carbidopa does not decrease the adverse reactions
due to the central effects of levodopa.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        The pharmacokinetics of carbidopa and levodopa with 16-hour intrajejunal infusion of DUOPA was evaluated in 18 patients with advanced Parkinson's disease who had been on DUOPA therapy for 30 days or longer. Patients remained on their individualized DUOPA doses. 
                        The plasma concentrations versus time profile for levodopa with DUOPA 16-hour intrajejunal infusion is presented in Figure 1.
                        
                           Figure 1. Plasma Concentrations (mean ± standard deviation) versus Time Profile of Levodopa with DUOPA (levodopa, 1580 ± 403 mg; carbidopa, 366 ± 92 mg) 16-Hour Infusion
                        
                        
                           Absorption and Bioavailability
                        
                        Following initiation of the 16-hour intrajejunal infusion of DUOPA, peak plasma levels of levodopa is reached at 2.5 hours. The absorption of levodopa may be decreased in patients on a high-protein diet because levodopa competes with certain amino acids for transport across the gut wall. The gastric emptying rate does not influence the absorption of DUOPA since it is administered by continuous intestinal infusion. In a cross-study population pharmacokinetic analysis, DUOPA had comparable bioavailability to the oral immediate-release carbidopa-levodopa (25/100 mg) tablets (over-encapsulated tablets). The estimated bioavailability for levodopa from DUOPA relative to oral immediate-release carbidopa-levodopa tablets was 97% (95% confidence interval; 95% to 98%).
                        In the controlled clinical trial, the intra-subject variability in carbidopa and levodopa plasma concentrations were lower for patients treated with DUOPA (N=33, 25% and 21%, respectively) than in patients treated with oral immediate-release carbidopa-levodopa (25/100 mg) tablets (N=28, 39% and 67%, respectively).
                        
                           Distribution
                        
                        Carbidopa is approximately 36% bound to plasma proteins.  Levodopa is approximately 10-30% bound to plasma proteins.
                        
                           Metabolism and Elimination
                        
                        
                           Carbidopa
                        
                        Carbidopa is metabolized to two main metabolites (α-methyl-3-methoxy-4-hydroxyphenylpropionic acid and α-methyl-3,4-dihydroxyphenylpropionic acid). These 2 metabolites are primarily eliminated in the urine unchanged or as glucuronide conjugates. Unchanged carbidopa accounts for 30% of the total urinary excretion. The elimination half-life of carbidopa is approximately 2 hours.
                        
                           Levodopa
                        
                        Levodopa is mainly eliminated via metabolism by the aromatic amino acid decarboxylase (AAAD) and the catechol-O-methyl-transferase (COMT) enzymes. Other routes of metabolism are transamination and oxidation. The decarboxylation of levodopa to dopamine by AAAD is the major enzymatic pathway when no enzyme inhibitor is co-administered. O-methylation of levodopa by COMT forms 3-O-methyldopa. When administered with carbidopa, the elimination half-life of levodopa is approximately 1.5 hours (see Figure 1).
                        
                           Drug Interaction Studies
                        
                        
                           COMT Inhibitors
                        
                        Systemic exposure of levodopa is expected to increase in the presence of entacapone.
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           levodopa plasma conc over time
                           
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         