
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           Selective MAO-B inhibitors: May cause orthostatic hypotension (7.1)
                           
                           Antihypertensive drugs: May cause symptomatic postural hypotension.
Dosage adjustment of the antihypertensive drug may be needed (7.2)
                           
                           Dopamine D2 receptor antagonists, isoniazid, iron salts,
and high-protein diet may reduce the effectiveness of DUOPA (7.3, 7.4, 7.5)
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 Monoamine Oxidase
(MAO) Inhibitors
                     
                        The
use of nonselective MAO inhibitors with DUOPA is contraindicated [see Contraindications (4)].  Discontinue use of any nonselective MAO inhibitors at least two
weeks prior to initiating DUOPA.  
                        The use of selective MAO-B inhibitors (e.g.,
rasagiline and selegiline) with DUOPA may be associated with orthostatic
hypotension. Monitor patients who are taking these drugs. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 Antihypertensive
Drugs
                     
                        The concurrent
use of DUOPA with antihypertensive medications can cause symptomatic
postural hypotension. A dose reduction of the antihypertensive medication
may be needed after starting or increasing the dose of DUOPA.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3 Dopamine D2 Receptor
Antagonists and Isoniazid
                     
                        Dopamine D2 receptor antagonists (e.g., phenothiazines, butyrophenones,
risperidone, metoclopramide, papaverine) and isoniazid may reduce
the effectiveness of levodopa. Monitor patients for worsening Parkinson’s
symptoms.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4 Iron Salts
                     
                        Iron
salts or multi-vitamins containing iron salts can form chelates with
levodopa, carbidopa, and can cause a reduction in the bioavailability
of DUOPA. If iron salts or multi-vitamins containing iron salts are
co-administered with DUOPA, monitor patients for worsening Parkinson’s
symptoms. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.5 High-Protein Diet
                     
                        Because levodopa competes with certain
amino acids for transport across the gut wall, the absorption of levodopa
may be decreased in patients on a high-protein diet. Advise patients
that a high-protein diet may reduce the effectiveness of DUOPA.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         