
               
               
               12. CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        The mechanism of action of imiquimod cream in treating AK is unknown.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     12.2 Pharmadynamics
                     
                        
                           Actinic Keratosis
                        
                        In a study of 18 subjects with AK comparing imiquimod cream to vehicle, increases from baseline in week 2 biomarker levels were reported for CD3, CD4, CD8, CD11c, and CD68 for imiquimod cream treated subjects; however, the clinical relevance of these findings is unknown.
                        
                           External Genital Warts
                        
                        Imiquimod has no direct antiviral activity in cell culture. A study in 22 subjects with genital/perianal warts comparing imiquimod cream and vehicle shows that imiquimod cream induces mRNA encoding cytokines including interferon-α at the treatment site. In addition HPVL1 mRNA and HPV DNA are significantly decreased following treatment. However, the clinical relevance of these findings is unknown.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        Systemic absorption of imiquimod across the affected skin of 58 subjects with AK was observed with a dosing frequency of 3 applications per week for 16 weeks. Mean peak serum drug concentrations at the end of week 16 were approximately 0.1, 0.2, and 3.5 ng/mL for the applications to face (12.5 mg imiquimod, 1 single-use packet), scalp (25 mg, 2 packets) and hands/arms (75 mg, 6 packets), respectively.
                        


                        


The application surface area was not controlled when more than one packet was used. Dose proportionality was not observed. However it appears that systemic exposure may be more dependent on surface area of application than amount of applied dose. The apparent half-life was approximately 10 times greater with topical dosing than the 2 hour apparent half-life seen following subcutaneous dosing, suggesting prolonged retention of drug in the skin. Mean urinary recoveries of imiquimod and metabolites combined were 0.08 and 0.15% of the applied dose in the group using 75 mg (6 packets) for males and females, respectively following 3 applications per week for 16 weeks.
                        Systemic absorption of imiquimod was observed across the affected skin of 12 subjects with genital/perianal warts, with an average dose of 4.6 mg. Mean peak drug concentration of approximately 0.4 ng/mL was seen during the study. Mean urinary recoveries of imiquimod and metabolites combined over the whole course of treatment, expressed as percent of the estimated applied dose, were 0.11 and 2.41% in the males and females, respectively.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         