
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  
                  Corticosteroids suppress the inflammatory response to a variety of agents and they probably delay or slow healing. Since corticosteroids may inhibit the body's defense mechanism against infection, a concomitant antimicrobial drug may be used when this inhibition is considered to be clinically significant in a particular case.
                  When a decision to administer both a corticosteroid and an antimicrobial is made, the administration of such drugs in combination has the advantage of greater patient compliance and convenience, with the added assurance that the appropriate dosage of both drugs is administered, plus assured compatibility of ingredients when both types of drugs are in the same formulation and, particularly, that the correct amount of drug is delivered and retained.
                  The relative potency of a corticosteroid depends on the molecular structure, concentration, and release from the vehicle.
                  
 

                  
                  Sulfacetamide sodium exerts a bacteriostatic effect against susceptible bacteria by restricting the synthesis of folic acid required for growth through competition with p-aminobenzoic acid.
                  Some strains of bacteria may be resistant to sulfacetamide or resistant strains may emerge in-vivo.
                  The anti-infective component in sulfacetamide sodium and prednisolone sodium phosphate ophthalmic solution is included to provide action against specific organisms susceptible to it. Sulfacetamide sodium is active in-vitro against susceptible strains of the following microorganisms: Escherichia coli, Staphylococcus aureus, Streptococcus (viridans group),Haemophilus influenzae, Klebsiella species and Enterobacter species. The product does not provide adequate coverage against: Neisseria species, Pseudomonas species, Serratia marcescens. (see INDICATIONS AND USAGE.)
                  
 

               
               
            
         