
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        ZERBAXA is an antibacterial drug [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.4)].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        As with other beta-lactam antibacterial agents, the time that the plasma concentration of ceftolozane exceeds the minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) of the infecting organism has been shown to be the best predictor of efficacy in animal models of infection. The time above a threshold concentration has been determined to be the parameter that best predicts the efficacy of tazobactam in in vitro nonclinical models. The exposure-response analyses in Phase 2 trials support the recommended dose of ZERBAXA.
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Cardiac Electrophysiology
                              
                              In a randomized, positive and placebo-controlled crossover thorough QTc study, 51 healthy subjects were administered a single therapeutic dose of ZERBAXA 1.5 gram (ceftolozane 1 g and tazobactam 0.5 g) and a supratherapeutic dose of ZERBAXA 4.5 gram (ceftolozane 3 g and tazobactam 1.5 g). No significant effects of ZERBAXA on heart rate, electrocardiogram morphology, PR, QRS, or QT interval were detected. Therefore, ZERBAXA does not affect cardiac repolarization.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        The mean pharmacokinetic parameters of ZERBAXA in healthy adults with normal renal function after single and multiple 1-hour intravenous infusions of ZERBAXA 1.5 gram (ceftolozane 1 g and tazobactam 0.5 g) administered every 8 hours are summarized in Table 6. Pharmacokinetic parameters were similar for single- and multiple-dose administration.
                        


                        


The Cmax and AUC of ZERBAXA increase in proportion to dose. Plasma levels of ZERBAXA do not increase appreciably following multiple intravenous infusions of ZERBAXA up to 3 g (ceftolozane 2 g and tazobactam 1 g) administered every 8 hours for up to 10 days in healthy adults with normal renal function. The elimination half-life (t½) of ceftolozane is independent of dose.
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Distribution
                              
                              The binding of ceftolozane and tazobactam to human plasma proteins is approximately 16% to 21% and 30%, respectively. The mean (CV%) steady-state volume of distribution of ZERBAXA in healthy adult males (n = 51) following a single intravenous dose of ZERBAXA 1.5 g (ceftolozane 1 g and tazobactam 0.5 g) was 13.5 L (21%) and 18.2 L (25%) for ceftolozane and tazobactam, respectively, similar to extracellular fluid volume.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Metabolism
                              
                              Ceftolozane is eliminated in the urine as unchanged parent drug and thus does not appear to be metabolized to any appreciable extent. The beta-lactam ring of tazobactam is hydrolyzed to form the pharmacologically inactive tazobactam metabolite M1.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Excretion
                              
                              Ceftolozane and the tazobactam metabolite M1 are eliminated by the kidneys. Following administration of a single ZERBAXA 1.5 g (ceftolozane 1 g and tazobactam 0.5 g) intravenous dose to healthy male adults, greater than 95% of ceftolozane was excreted in the urine as unchanged parent drug. More than 80% of tazobactam was excreted as the parent compound with the remainder excreted as the tazobactam M1 metabolite. After a single dose of ZERBAXA, renal clearance of ceftolozane (3.41 – 6.69 L/h) was similar to plasma CL (4.10 to 6.73 L/h) and similar to the glomerular filtration rate for the unbound fraction, suggesting that ceftolozane is eliminated by the kidney via glomerular filtration.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Specific Populations
                              
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Renal Impairment
                                    
                                    ZERBAXA and the tazobactam metabolite M1 are eliminated by the kidneys.
                                    The ceftolozane dose normalized geometric mean AUC increased up to 1.26-fold, 2.5-fold, and 5-fold in subjects with mild, moderate, and severe renal impairment, respectively, compared to healthy subjects with normal renal function. The respective tazobactam dose normalized geometric mean AUC increased approximately up to 1.3-fold, 2-fold, and 4-fold. To maintain similar systemic exposures to those with normal renal function, dosage adjustment is required [see Dosage and Administration (2.2)].
                                    In subjects with ESRD on HD, approximately two-thirds of the administered ZERBAXA dose is removed by HD. The recommended dose in subjects with ESRD on HD is a single loading dose of ZERBAXA 750 mg (ceftolozane 500 mg and tazobactam 250 mg), followed by a ZERBAXA 150 mg (ceftolozane 100 mg and tazobactam 50 mg) maintenance dose administered every 8 hours for the remainder of the treatment period. On HD days, administer the dose at the earliest possible time following completion of HD [see Dosage and Administration (2.2)].
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Hepatic Impairment
                                    
                                    As ZERBAXA does not undergo hepatic metabolism, the systemic clearance of ZERBAXA is not expected to be affected by hepatic impairment.
                                    No dose adjustment is recommended for ZERBAXA in subjects with hepatic impairment.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Geriatric Patients
                                    
                                    In a population pharmacokinetic analysis of ZERBAXA, no clinically relevant trend in exposure was observed with regard to age.
                                    No dose adjustment of ZERBAXA based on age is recommended.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Pediatric Patients
                                    
                                    Safety and effectiveness in pediatric patients have not been established.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Gender
                                    
                                    In a population pharmacokinetic analysis of ZERBAXA, no clinically relevant differences in AUC were observed for ceftolozane (116 males compared to 70 females) and tazobactam (80 males compared to 50 females).
                                    No dose adjustment is recommended based on gender.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Race
                                    
                                    In a population pharmacokinetic analysis of ZERBAXA, no clinically relevant differences in ZERBAXA AUC were observed in Caucasians (n = 156) compared to all other races combined (n = 30).
                                    No dose adjustment is recommended based on race.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Drug Interactions
                              
                              No drug-drug interaction was observed between ceftolozane and tazobactam in a clinical study in 16 healthy subjects. In vitro and in vivo data indicate that ZERBAXA is unlikely to cause clinically relevant drug-drug interactions related to CYPs and transporters at therapeutic concentrations.
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Drug Metabolizing Enzymes
                                    
                                    
                                       In vivo data indicated that ZERBAXA is not a substrate for CYPs. Thus clinically relevant drug-drug interactions involving inhibition or induction of CYPs by other drugs are unlikely to occur.
                                    
                                       In vitro studies demonstrated that ceftolozane, tazobactam and the M1 metabolite of tazobactam did not inhibit CYP1A2, CYP2B6, CYP2C8, CYP2C9, CYP2C19, CYP2D6, or CYP3A4 and did not induce CYP1A2, CYP2B6, or CYP3A4 at therapeutic plasma concentrations. In vitro induction studies in primary human hepatocytes demonstrated that ceftolozane, tazobactam, and the tazobactam metabolite M1 decreased CYP1A2 and CYP2B6 enzyme activity and mRNA levels in primary human hepatocytes as well as CYP3A4 mRNA levels at supratherapeutic plasma concentrations. Tazobactam metabolite M1 also decreased CYP3A4 activity at supratherapeutic plasma concentrations. A clinical drug-drug interaction study was conducted and results indicated drug interactions involving CYP1A2 and CYP3A4 inhibition by ZERBAXA are not anticipated.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Membrane Transporters
                                    
                                    Ceftolozane and tazobactam were not substrates for P-gp or BCRP, and tazobactam was not a substrate for OCT2, in vitro at therapeutic concentrations.
                                    Tazobactam is a known substrate for OAT1 and OAT3. Co-administration of tazobactam with the OAT1/OAT3 inhibitor probenecid has been shown to prolong the half-life of tazobactam by 71%. Co-administration of ZERBAXA with drugs that inhibit OAT1 and/or OAT3 may increase tazobactam plasma concentrations.
                                    
                                       In vitro data indicate that ceftolozane did not inhibit P-gp, BCRP, OATP1B1, OATP1B3, OCT1, OCT2, MRP, BSEP, OAT1, OAT3, MATE1, or MATE2-K in vitro at therapeutic plasma concentrations.
                                    
                                       In vitro data indicate that neither tazobactam nor the tazobactam metabolite M1 inhibit P-gp, BCRP, OATP1B1, OATP1B3, OCT1, OCT2, or BSEP transporters at therapeutic plasma concentrations. In vitro, tazobactam inhibited human OAT1 and OAT3 transporters with IC50 values of 118 and 147 mcg/mL, respectively. A clinical drug-drug interaction study was conducted and results indicated clinically relevant drug interactions involving OAT1/OAT3 inhibition by ZERBAXA are not anticipated.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.4	Microbiology
                     
                     
                        
                           
                              
                                 
To reduce the development of drug-resistant bacteria and maintain the effectiveness of ZERBAXA and other antibacterial drugs, ZERBAXA should be used only to treat infections that are proven or strongly suspected to be caused by susceptible bacteria. 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Mechanism of Action
                              
                              Ceftolozane belongs to the cephalosporin class of antibacterial drugs. The bactericidal action of ceftolozane results from inhibition of cell wall biosynthesis, and is mediated through binding to penicillin-binding proteins (PBPs). Ceftolozane is an inhibitor of PBPs of P. aeruginosa (e.g., PBP1b, PBP1c, and PBP3) and E. coli (e.g., PBP3).
                              Tazobactam sodium has little clinically relevant in vitro activity against bacteria due to its reduced affinity to penicillin-binding proteins. It is an irreversible inhibitor of some beta-lactamases (e.g., certain penicillinases and cephalosporinases), and can bind covalently to some chromosomal and plasmid-mediated bacterial beta-lactamases.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Resistance
                              
                              Mechanisms of beta-lactam resistance may include the production of beta-lactamases, modification of PBPs by gene acquisition or target alteration, up-regulation of efflux pumps, and loss of outer membrane porin.
                              Clinical isolates may produce multiple beta-lactamases, express varying levels of beta-lactamases, or have amino acid sequence variations, and other resistance mechanisms that have not been identified.
                              Culture and susceptibility information and local epidemiology should be considered in selecting or modifying antibacterial therapy.
                              ZERBAXA demonstrated in vitro activity against Enterobacteriaceae in the presence of some extended-spectrum beta-lactamases (ESBLs) and other beta-lactamases of the following groups: TEM, SHV, CTX-M, and OXA. ZERBAXA is not active against bacteria that produce serine carbapenemases [K. pneumoniae carbapenemase (KPC)], and metallo-beta-lactamases.
                              In ZERBAXA clinical trials, some isolates of E. coli and K. pneumoniae, that produced beta-lactamases, were susceptible to ZERBAXA (minimum inhibitory concentration ≤2 mcg/mL). These isolates produced one or more beta-lactamases of the following enzyme groups: CTX-M, OXA, TEM, or SHV.
                              Some of these beta-lactamases were also produced by isolates of E. coli and K. pneumoniae that were not susceptible to ZERBAXA (minimum inhibitory concentration >2 mcg/mL). These isolates produced one or more beta-lactamases of the following enzyme groups: CTX-M, OXA, TEM, or SHV.
                              ZERBAXA demonstrated in vitro activity against P. aeruginosa isolates tested that had chromosomal AmpC, loss of outer membrane porin (OprD), or up-regulation of efflux pumps (MexXY, MexAB).
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Cross-Resistance
                              
                              Isolates resistant to other cephalosporins may be susceptible to ZERBAXA, although cross-resistance may occur.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Interaction with Other Antimicrobials
                              
                              
                                 In vitro synergy studies suggest no antagonism between ZERBAXA and other antibacterial drugs (e.g., meropenem, amikacin, aztreonam, levofloxacin, tigecycline, rifampin, linezolid, daptomycin, vancomycin, and metronidazole).
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 List of Microorganisms 
                              
                              ZERBAXA has been shown to be active against the following bacteria, both in vitro and in clinical infections [see Indications and Usage (1)].
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Complicated Intra-abdominal Infections
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                       
                                       
                                          
                                             Gram-negative bacteria:
                                          
                                          
                                             
                                                 
                                                Enterobacter cloacae
                                             
                                             
                                                 
                                                Escherichia coli
                                             
                                             
                                                 
                                                Klebsiella oxytoca
                                             
                                             
                                                 
                                                Klebsiella pneumoniae
                                             
                                             
                                                 
                                                Proteus mirabilis
                                             
                                             
                                                 
                                                Pseudomonas aeruginosa
                                             
                                          
                                       
                                       
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                       
                                       
                                          
                                             Gram-positive bacteria:
                                          
                                          
                                             
                                                 
                                                Streptococcus anginosus
                                             
                                             
                                                 
                                                Streptococcus constellatus
                                             
                                             
                                                 
                                                Streptococcus salivarius
                                             
                                          
                                       
                                       
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                       
                                       
                                          
                                             Anaerobic bacteria:
                                          
                                          
                                             
                                                 
                                                Bacteroides fragilis
                                             
                                          
                                       
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Complicated Urinary Tract Infections, Including Pyelonephritis
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                       
                                       
                                          
                                             Gram-negative bacteria:
                                          
                                          
                                             
                                                 
                                                Escherichia coli
                                             
                                             
                                                 
                                                Klebsiella pneumoniae
                                             
                                             
                                                 
                                                Proteus mirabilis
                                             
                                             
                                                 
                                                Pseudomonas aeruginosa
                                             
                                          
                                          The following in vitro data are available, but their clinical significance is unknown. At least 90% of the following microorganisms exhibit an in vitro minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) less than or equal to 2 mcg/mL for ceftolozane and tazobactam. The safety and effectiveness of ZERBAXA in treating clinical infections due to these bacteria have not been established in adequate and well-controlled clinical trials.
                                       
                                       
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                       
                                       
                                          
                                             Gram-negative bacteria:
                                          
                                          
                                             
                                                 
                                                Acinetobacter baumannii
                                             
                                             
                                                 
                                                Burkholderia cepacia
                                             
                                             
                                                 
                                                Citrobacter freundii
                                             
                                             
                                                 
                                                Citrobacter koseri
                                             
                                             
                                                 
                                                Enterobacter aerogenes
                                             
                                             
                                                 
                                                Enterobacter cloacae
                                             
                                             
                                                 
                                                Haemophilus influenzae
                                             
                                             
                                                 
                                                Moraxella catarrhalis
                                             
                                             
                                                 
                                                Morganella morganii
                                             
                                             
                                                 
                                                Pantoea agglomerans
                                             
                                             
                                                 
                                                Proteus vulgaris
                                             
                                             
                                                 
                                                Providencia rettgeri
                                             
                                             
                                                 
                                                Providencia stuartii
                                             
                                             
                                                 
                                                Serratia liquefaciens
                                             
                                             
                                                 
                                                Serratia marcescens
                                             
                                          
                                       
                                       
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                       
                                       
                                          
                                             Gram-positive bacteria:
                                          
                                          
                                             
                                                 
                                                Streptococcus agalactiae
                                             
                                             
                                                 
                                                Streptococcus intermedius
                                             
                                             
                                                 
                                                Streptococcus pyogenes
                                             
                                             
                                                 
                                                Streptococcus pneumoniae 
                                             
                                          
                                       
                                       
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                       
                                       
                                          
                                             Anaerobic bacteria:
                                          
                                          
                                             
                                                 
                                                Fusobacterium spp.
                                             
                                                 
                                                Prevotella spp.
                                          
                                       
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Susceptibility Test Methods
                              
                              When available, the clinical microbiology laboratory should provide the results of in vitro susceptibility test results for antimicrobial drugs used in local hospitals and practice areas to the physician as periodic reports that describe the susceptibility profile of nosocomial and community-acquired pathogens. These reports should aid the physician in selecting an antibacterial drug product for treatment.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Dilution Techniques
                              
                              Quantitative methods are used to determine antimicrobial MICs. Ceftolozane and tazobactam susceptibility testing is performed with a fixed 4 mcg/mL concentration of tazobactam. These MICs provide estimates of the susceptibility of bacteria to antibacterial compounds. The MICs should be determined using a standardized test method (broth, and/or agar).1,4 The MIC values should be interpreted according to the criteria in Table 7.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Diffusion Techniques
                              
                              Quantitative methods that require measurement of zone diameters can also provide reproducible estimates of the susceptibility of bacteria to antimicrobial compounds. The zone size provides an estimate of the susceptibility of bacteria to antimicrobial compounds. The zone size should be determined using a standardized test method.2,4 This procedure uses paper disks impregnated with 30 mcg of ceftolozane and 10 mcg of tazobactam to test the susceptibility of microorganisms to ceftolozane and tazobactam. The disk diffusion should be interpreted according to the criteria in Table 7.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Anaerobic Techniques
                              
                              For anaerobic bacteria, the susceptibility to ceftolozane and tazobactam can be determined by standardized test method.3 The MIC values obtained should be interpreted according to criteria provided in Table 7.
                              


                              


A report of "Susceptible" indicates that the antimicrobial is likely to inhibit growth of the pathogen if the antimicrobial drug reaches the concentration usually achievable at the site of infection. A report of "Intermediate" indicates that the result should be considered equivocal, and if the microorganism is not fully susceptible to alternative clinically feasible drugs, the test should be repeated. This category implies possible clinical applicability in body sites where the drug is physiologically concentrated. This category also provides a buffer zone that prevents small uncontrolled technical factors from causing major discrepancies in interpretation. A report of "Resistant" indicates that the antimicrobial is not likely to inhibit growth of the pathogen if the antimicrobial drug reaches the concentrations usually achievable at the infection site; other therapy should be selected.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Quality Control
                              
                              Standardized susceptibility test procedures require the use of laboratory controls to monitor and ensure the accuracy and precision of supplies and reagents used in the assay, and the techniques of the individuals performing the test.1,2,3,4 Standard ceftolozane and tazobactam powder should provide the following range of MIC values provided in Table 8. For the diffusion technique using the 30 mcg ceftolozane/10 mcg tazobactam disk, the criteria provided in Table 8 should be achieved.4
                              
                              


