
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  Vancomycin is poorly absorbed after oral administration; it is given intravenously for therapy of systemic infections. Intramuscular injection is painful.
                  Vancomycin Hydrochloride for Injection, USP is administered intravenously for therapy of systemic infections.
                  In subjects with normal kidney function, multiple intravenous dosing of 1 g of vancomycin (15 mg/kg) infused over 60 minutes produces mean plasma concentrations of approximately 63 mcg/mL immediately after the completion of infusion, mean plasma concentrations of approximately 23 mcg/mL two hours after infusion, and mean plasma concentrations of approximately 8 mcg/mL eleven hours after the end of the infusion. Multiple dosing of 500 mg infused over 30 minutes produces mean plasma concentrations of about 49 mcg/mL at the completion of infusion, mean plasma concentrations of about 19 mcg/mL two hours after infusion, and mean plasma concentrations of about 10 mcg/mL six hours after infusion. The plasma concentrations during multiple dosing are similar to those after a single dose. 
                  The mean elimination half-life of vancomycin from plasma is 4 to 6 hours in subjects with normal renal function. In the first 24 hours, about 75% of an administered dose of vancomycin is excreted in urine by glomerular filtration. Mean plasma clearance is about 0.058 L/kg/hr, and mean renal clearance is about 0.048 L/kg/hr. Renal dysfunction slows excretion of vancomycin. In anephric patients, the average half-life of elimination is 7.5 days. The distribution coefficient is from 0.3 to 0.43 L/kg. There is no apparent metabolism of the drug. About 60% of an intraperitoneal dose of vancomycin administered during peritoneal dialysis is absorbed systemically in six hours. Serum concentrations of about 10 mcg/mL are achieved by intraperitoneal injection of 30 mg/kg of vancomycin. 
                  However, the safety and efficacy of the intraperitoneal use of vancomycin has not been established in adequate and well-controlled trials (see 
                        
                           PRECAUTIONS
                        
                     ). 
                  Total systemic and renal clearance of vancomycin may be reduced in the elderly. 
                  Vancomycin is approximately 55% serum protein bound as measured by ultrafiltration at vancomycin serum concentrations of 10 to 100 mcg/mL. After I.V. administration of vancomycin hydrochloride, inhibitory concentrations are present in pleural, pericardial, ascitic, and synovial fluids; in urine; in peritoneal dialysis fluid; and in atrial appendage tissue. Vancomycin hydrochloride does not readily diffuse across normal meninges into the spinal fluid; but, when the meninges are inflamed, penetration into the spinal fluid occurs.
                  
                     
                        Microbiology
                     
                  
                  The bactericidal action of vancomycin results primarily from inhibition of cell-wall biosynthesis. In addition, vancomycin alters bacterial-cell-membrane permeability and RNA synthesis. There is no cross-resistance between vancomycin and other antibiotics. Vancomycin is not active 
                        in vitro 
                     against gram-negative bacilli, mycobacteria, or fungi.
                  
                     
                        Synergy
                     
                  
                  The combination of vancomycin and an aminoglycoside acts synergistically 
                        in vitro 
                     against many strains of 
                        Staphylococcus aureus
                     , 
                        Streptococcus bovis
                     , enterococci, and the viridans group streptococci. 
                  Vancomycin has been shown to be active against most strains of the following microorganisms, both 
                        in vitro 
                     and in clinical infections as described in the 
                        
                           INDICATIONS AND USAGE 
                     section. 
                  
                     
                        Aerobic gram-positive microorganisms

                        
                     Diphtheroids

    Enterococci (e.g., 
                        Enterococcus faecalis
                     )

    Staphylococci, including 
                        Staphylococcus aureus 
                     and 
                        Staphylococcus epidermidis 
                     (including heterogeneous methicillin-resistant strains) 

                     
                        Streptococcus bovis

                        
                     Viridans group streptococci
                  The following 
                        in vitro
                      data are available, 
                        
                           but their clinical significance is unknown
                        
                     . Vancomycin exhibits 
                        in vitro 
                     MIC’s of 1 mcg/mL or less against most (≥90%) strains of streptococci listed below and MIC’s of 4 mcg/mL or less against most (≥90%) strains of other listed microorganisms; however, the safety and effectiveness of vancomycin in treating clinical infections due to these microorganisms have not been established in adequate and well-controlled clinical trials.
                  
                     
                        Aerobic gram-positive microorganisms

                        
                     
                     
                        Listeria monocytogenes

                        
                     
                     
                        Streptococcus pyogenes

                        
                     
                     
                        Streptococcus pneumoniae 
                     (including penicillin-resistant strains)

                     
                        Streptococcus agalactiae
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Anaerobic gram-positive  microorganisms

                        
                     
                     
                        Actinomyces 
                     species

                     
                        Lactobacillus 
                     species
                  
                     
                        Susceptibility Test Methods
                     
                  
                  When available, the clinical microbiology laboratory should provide the results of 
                        in vitro 
                     susceptibility test results for antimicrobial drugs used in local hospitals and practice areas to the physician as periodic reports that describe the susceptibility profile of nosocomial and community-acquired pathogens. These reports should aid the physician in selecting the most effective antimicrobial.
                  
                     
                        Dilution Techniques
                     
                  
                  Quantitative methods are used to determine antimicrobial minimum inhibitory concentrations (MIC’s). These MIC’s provide estimates of the susceptibility of bacteria to antimicrobial compounds. The MIC’s should be determined using a standardized procedure. Standardized procedures are based on dilution method1,2 (broth, agar or microdilution) or equivalent using standardized inoculum and concentrations of vancomycin powder. The MIC values should be interpreted according to the criteria in Table 1.
                  
                     
                        Diffusion Techniques
                     
                  
                  Quantitative methods that require measurement of zone diameters also provide reproducible estimates of the susceptibility of bacteria to antimicrobial compounds. One such standardized procedure2,3 requires the use of standardized inoculum concentrations. This procedure uses paper disks impregnated with 30 mcg of vancomycin to test the susceptibility of microorganisms to vancomycin. Interpretation involves correlation of the diameter obtained in the disk test with the MIC for vancomycin.
                  Reports from the laboratory providing results of the standard single-disk susceptibility test with a
                  30 mcg vancomycin disk should be interpreted according to the following criteria in Table 1.
                  


                  


A report of “Susceptible” indicates that the pathogen is likely to be inhibited if the antimicrobial compound in the blood reaches the concentrations usually achievable. A report of “Intermediate” indicates that the result should be considered equivocal, and, if the microorganism is not fully susceptible to alternative, clinically feasible drugs, the test should be repeated. This category implies possible clinical applicability in body sites where the drug is physiologically concentrated or in situations where high dosage of drug can be used. This category also provides a buffer zone which prevents small uncontrolled technical factors from causing major discrepancies in interpretation. A report of “Resistant” indicates that the pathogen is not likely to be inhibited if the antimicrobial compound in the blood reaches the concentrations usually achievable; other therapy should be selected.
                  
                     
                        Quality Control
                     
                  
                  Standardized susceptibility test procedures require the use of laboratory control microorganisms to monitor and ensure the accuracy and precision of the supplies and reagents used in the assay, and the techniques of the individuals performing the test. When tested against appropriate quality control strains, standard vancomycin powder should provide MIC values shown in Table 2. For the diffusion technique, the 30 mcg vancomycin disk should provide the following zone diameters in Table 2 with the quality control strain. 
                  


                  


 
               
               
            
         