
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS

               
                  No drug-drug interaction studies have been conducted with NAMENDA XR, specifically.

               
               
               
                  
                     
                        Use with other NMDA antagonists (amantadine, ketamine, and dextromethorphan) has not been systematically evaluated and such use should be approached with caution. (7.1)

                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 Use with other N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) Antagonists

                     
                        The combined use of NAMENDA XR with other NMDA antagonists (amantadine, ketamine, and dextromethorphan) has not been systematically evaluated and such use should be approached with caution.

                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 Effect of Memantine on the Metabolism of Other Drugs

                     
                        
                           In vitro studies conducted with marker substrates of CYP450 enzymes (CYP1A2, -2A6, -2C9, -2D6, -2E1, -3A4) showed minimal inhibition of these enzymes by memantine. In addition, in vitro studies indicate that at concentrations exceeding those associated with efficacy, memantine does not induce the cytochrome P450 isozymes CYP1A2, -2C9, -2E1 and -3A4/5. No pharmacokinetic interactions with drugs metabolized by these enzymes are expected.

                        Pharmacokinetic studies evaluated the potential of memantine for interaction with donepezil (See Section 7.7 Use with Cholinesterase Inhibitors) and bupropion. Coadministration of memantine with the AChE inhibitor donepezil HCl does not affect the pharmacokinetics of either compound. Memantine did not affect the pharmacokinetics of the CYP2B6 substrate bupropion or its metabolite hydroxybupropion.

                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3 Effect of Other Drugs on Memantine

                     
                        Memantine is predominantly renally eliminated, and drugs that are substrates and/or inhibitors of the CYP450 system are not expected to alter the pharmacokinetics of memantine. A clinical drug-drug interaction study indicated that bupropion did not affect the pharmacokinetics of memantine.

                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4 Drugs Eliminated via Renal Mechanisms

                     
                        Because memantine is eliminated in part by tubular secretion, coadministration of drugs that use the same renal cationic system, including hydrochlorothiazide (HCTZ), triamterene (TA), metformin, cimetidine, ranitidine, quinidine, and nicotine, could potentially result in altered plasma levels of both agents. However, coadministration of memantine and HCTZ/TA did not affect the bioavailability of either memantine or TA, and the bioavailability of HCTZ decreased by 20%. In addition, coadministration of memantine with the antihyperglycemic drug Glucovance® (glyburide and metformin HCl) did not affect the pharmacokinetics of memantine, metformin and glyburide. Furthermore, memantine did not modify the serum glucose lowering effect of Glucovance®, indicating the absence of a pharmacodynamic interaction.

                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.5 Drugs That Make the Urine Alkaline

                     
                        The clearance of memantine was reduced by about 80% under alkaline urine conditions at pH 8. Therefore, alterations of urine pH towards the alkaline condition may lead to an accumulation of the drug with a possible increase in adverse effects. Urine pH is altered by diet, drugs (e.g. carbonic anhydrase inhibitors, sodium bicarbonate) and clinical state of the patient (e.g. renal tubular acidosis or severe infections of the urinary tract). Hence, memantine should be used with caution under these conditions.

                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.6 Drugs Highly Bound to Plasma Proteins

                     
                        Because the plasma protein binding of memantine is low (45%), an interaction with drugs that are highly bound to plasma proteins, such as warfarin and digoxin, is unlikely [see Section 7.]
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.7 Use with Cholinesterase Inhibitors

                     
                        Coadministration of memantine with the AChE inhibitor donepezil HCl did not affect the pharmacokinetics of either compound.  In a 24-week controlled clinical study in patients with moderate to severe Alzheimer's disease, the adverse event profile observed with a combination of memantine immediate-release and donepezil was similar to that of donepezil alone.

                     
                     
                  
               
            
         