
               
               
               DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
                  

                  

                  
                     In vitro data on metabolic
              interactions indicate that levetiracetam is unlikely to produce, or be subject
              to, pharmacokinetic interactions. Levetiracetam and its major metabolite, at
              concentrations well above Cmax levels achieved within the
              therapeutic dose range, are neither inhibitors of nor high affinity substrates
              for human liver cytochrome P450 isoforms, epoxide hydrolase or
              UDP-glucuronidation enzymes. In addition, levetiracetam does not affect the
              in vitro glucuronidation of valproic acid.
            
                  
              Levetiracetam circulates largely unbound (greater then 10% bound) to plasma proteins;
              clinically significant interactions with other drugs through competition for
              protein binding sites are therefore unlikely.
            
                  
              Potential pharmacokinetic interactions were assessed in clinical
              pharmacokinetic studies (phenytoin, valproate, oral contraceptive, digoxin,
              warfarin, probenecid) and through pharmacokinetic screening in the
              placebo-controlled clinical studies in epilepsy patients.
            
                  
                  
                  Drug-Drug Interactions Between Levetiracetam and
            Other Antiepileptic Drugs (AEDs)
                  
                  Phenytoin
              Levetiracetam (3000 mg daily) had no effect on the
              pharmacokinetic disposition of phenytoin in patients with refractory epilepsy.
              Pharmacokinetics of levetiracetam were also not affected by phenytoin.
            
                  
                  
                  Valproate
              Levetiracetam (1500 mg twice daily) did not alter the
              pharmacokinetics of valproate in healthy volunteers. Valproate 500 mg twice
              daily did not modify the rate or extent of levetiracetam absorption or its
              plasma clearance or urinary excretion. There also was no effect on exposure to
              and the excretion of the primary metabolite, ucb L057.
            
                  
              Potential drug interactions between levetiracetam and other AEDs
              (carbamazepine, gabapentin, lamotrigine, phenobarbital, phenytoin, primidone and
              valproate) were also assessed by evaluating the serum concentrations of
              levetiracetam and these AEDs during placebo-controlled clinical studies. These
              data indicate that levetiracetam does not influence the plasma concentration of
              other AEDs and that these AEDs do not influence the pharmacokinetics of
              levetiracetam.
            
                  
                  
                  Effect of AEDs in Pediatric Patients
              There was about a 22% increase of apparent total body clearance
              of levetiracetam when it was coadministered with enzyme-inducing AEDs. Dose
              adjustment is not recommended. Levetiracetam had no effect on plasma
              concentrations of carbamazepine, valproate, topiramate, or lamotrigine.
            
                  
                  
                  Other Drug Interactions
                  
                  Oral Contraceptives
              Levetiracetam (500 mg twice daily) did not influence the
              pharmacokinetics of an oral contraceptive containing 0.03 mg ethinyl estradiol
              and 0.15 mg levonorgestrel, or of the luteinizing hormone and progesterone
              levels, indicating that impairment of contraceptive efficacy is unlikely.
              Coadministration of this oral contraceptive did not influence the
              pharmacokinetics of levetiracetam.
            
                  
                  
                  Digoxin
              Levetiracetam (1000 mg twice daily) did not influence the
              pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics (ECG) of digoxin given as a 0.25 mg dose
              every day. Coadministration of digoxin did not influence the pharmacokinetics of
              levetiracetam.
            
                  
                  
                  Warfarin
              Levetiracetam (1000 mg twice daily) did not influence the
              pharmacokinetics of R and S warfarin. Prothrombin time was not affected by
              levetiracetam. Coadministration of warfarin did not affect the pharmacokinetics
              of levetiracetam.
            
                  
                  
                  Probenecid
              Probenecid, a renal tubular secretion blocking agent,
              administered at a dose of 500 mg 4 times a day, did not change the
              pharmacokinetics of levetiracetam 1000 mg twice daily. Css
                     max of the metabolite, ucb L057, was
              approximately doubled in the presence of probenecid while the fraction of drug
              excreted unchanged in the urine remained the same. Renal clearance of ucb L057
              in the presence of probenecid decreased 60%, probably related to competitive
              inhibition of tubular secretion of ucb L057. The effect of levetiracetam on
              probenecid was not studied.
            
                  
                  
                  Carcinogenesis, Mutagenesis, Impairment of
            Fertility
                  
                  Carcinogenesis
              Rats were dosed with levetiracetam in the diet for 104 weeks at
              doses of 50, 300 and 1800 mg/kg/day. The highest dose corresponds to 6 times the
              maximum recommended daily human dose (MRHD) of 3000 mg on a mg/m2 basis and it also provided systemic exposure (AUC)
              approximately 6 times that achieved in humans receiving the MRHD. There was no
              evidence of carcinogenicity. A study was conducted in which mice received
              levetiracetam in the diet for 80 weeks at doses of 60, 240 and 960 mg/kg/day
              (high dose is equivalent to 2 times the MRHD on a mg/m2
              or exposure basis). Although no evidence for carcinogenicity was seen, the
              potential for a carcinogenic response has not been fully evaluated in that
              species because adequate doses have not been studied.
            
                  
                  
                  Mutagenesis
              Levetiracetam was not mutagenic in the Ames test or in mammalian
              cells in vitro in the Chinese hamster ovary/HGPRT
              locus assay. It was not clastogenic in an in vitro
              analysis of metaphase chromosomes obtained from Chinese hamster ovary cells or
              in an in vivo mouse micronucleus assay. The
              hydrolysis product and major human metabolite of levetiracetam (ucb L057) was
              not mutagenic in the Ames test or the in vitro mouse lymphoma assay.
            
                  
                  
                  Impairment of Fertility
              No adverse effects on male or female fertility or reproductive
              performance were observed in rats at doses up to 1800 mg/kg/day (approximately 6
              times the maximum recommended human dose on a mg/m2 or
              exposure basis).
            
                  

               
               
            
         