
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  Tetracyclines are readily absorbed and are bound to plasma proteins in varying degrees. They are concentrated by the liver in the bile and excreted in the urine and feces at high concentrations in a biologically active form. Doxycycline is virtually completely absorbed after oral administration.
                  Following a 200 mg dose of doxycycline monohydrate, 24 normal adult volunteers averaged the following serum concentration values:
                  



                  


Excretion of doxycycline by the kidney is about 40%/72 hours in individuals with normal function (creatinine clearance about 75 mL/min). This percentage excretion may fall as low as 1 to 5%/72 hours in individuals with severe renal insufficiency (creatinine clearance below 10 mL/ min). Studies have shown no significant difference in serum half-life of doxycycline (range 18 to 22 hours) in individuals with normal and severely impaired renal function. 
                  Hemodialysis does not alter serum half-life.
                  
                     
                        Microbiology:
                     
                  
                  
                     Mechanism of Action
                  
                  Doxycycline inhibits bacterial protein synthesis by binding to the 30S ribosomal subunit. Doxycycline has  bacteriostatic activity against a broad range of Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria. Cross resistance with other tetracyclines is common. Doxycycline has been shown to be active against most isolates of the following microorganisms, both in vitro and in clinical infections as described in the INDICATIONS AND USAGE section of the package insert.
                  
                     Gram-Negative Bacteria: 
                     

                     Acinetobacter species 

                     Bartonella bacilliformis 
                     

                     Brucella species 

                     Calymmatobacterium granulomatis 
                     

                     Campylobacter fetus 
                     

                     Enterobacter aerogenes 
                     

                     Escherichia coli 
                     

                     Francisella tularensis 
                     

                     Haemophilus ducreyi 
                     

                     Haemophilus influenzae 
                     

                     Klebsiella species

                     Neisseria gonorrhoeae 
                     

                     Shigella species 

                     Vibrio cholerae 
                     

                     Yersinia pestis 
                  
                  
                     Gram-Positive Bacteria:
                     

                     Bacillus anthracis
                     

                     Streptococcus pneumonia
                  
                  
                     Anaerobic Bacteria:
                     

                     Clostridium species 

                     Fusobacterium fusiforme 
                     

                     Propionibacterium acnes
                  
                  
                     Other Bacteria:
                     

                     Nocardiae and other Actinomyces species

                     Borrelia recurrentis 
                     

                     Chlamydophila psittaci 
                     

                     Chlamydia trachomatis 
                     

                     Mycoplasma pneumoniae 
                     

                     Rickettsiae 
                     

                     Treponema pallidum 
                     

                     Treponema pertenue 
                     

                     Ureaplasma urealyticum
                  
                  
                     Parasites
                     

                     Balantidium coli
                     

                     Entamoeba species
                  
                     Susceptibility Testing Methods 
                  
                  When available, the clinical microbiology laboratory should provide the results of in vitro susceptibility test results for antimircrobial drugs used in resident hospitals to the physician as periodic reports that describe the susceptibility profile of nosocomial and community-acquired pathogens. These reports should aid the physician in selecting the most effective antimicrobial.
                  
                     Dilution techniques 
                  
                  Quantitative methods are used to determine antimicrobial minimum inhibitory concentrations (MICs). These MICs provide estimates of the susceptibility of bacteria to antimicrobial compounds. The MICs should be determined using a standardized test method (broth and/or agar).1,2,4 The MIC values should be interpreted according to criteria provided in 
                        Table 1.
                  
                  
                     Diffusion techniques
                  
                  Quantitative methods that require measurement of zone diameters can also provide reproducible estimates of the susceptibility of bacteria to antimicrobial compounds. The zone size provides an estimate of the susceptibility of bacteria to antimicrobial compounds.
                  The zone size should be determined using a standardized test method. 1,3,4 This procedure uses paper disks impregnated with 30 mcg doxycycline to test the susceptibility of microorganisms to doxycycline. The disk diffusion interpretive criteria are provided in 
                        Table 1.
                  
                  
                     Anaerobic techniques
                  
                  For anaerobic bacteria, the susceptibility to doxycycline can be determined by a standardized test method. 5 The MIC values obtained should be interpreted according to the criteria provided in 
                        Table 1
                     .
                  


                  


A report of Susceptible (S) indicates that the antimicrobial is likely to inhibit growth of the pathogen if the antimicrobial compound reaches the concentrations at the infection site necessary to inhibit growth of the pathogen. A report of Intermediate (I) indicates that the result should be considered equivocal, and, if the bacteria is not fully susceptible to alternative, clinically feasible drugs, the test should be repeated. This category implies possible clinical applicability in body sites where the drug product is physiologically concentrated or in situations where high dosage of drug can be used. This category also provides a buffer zone that prevents small uncontrolled technical factors from causing major discrepancies in interpretation. A report of Resistant (R) indicates that the antimicrobial is not likely to inhibit growth of the pathogen if the antimicrobial compound reaches the concentrations usually achievable at the infection site; other therapy should be selected.
                  
                     Quality Control
                  
                  Standardized susceptibility test procedures require the use of laboratory controls to monitor and ensure the accuracy and precision of the supplies and reagents used in the assay, and the techniques of the individuals performing the test.1,2,3,4,5,6,7
                  
                  Standard doxycycline and tetracycline powders should provide the following range of MIC values noted in 
                        Table 2
                     . For the diffusion technique using the 30 mcg doxycycline disk the criteria noted in 
                        Table 2
                      should be achieved.
                  


