
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS

               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           Other adrenergic drugs may potentiate effect. Use with caution. (5.3, 7.1)

                           Xanthine derivatives, steroids, diuretics, or non-potassium sparing diuretics may potentiate hypokalemia or ECG changes. Use with caution. (5.7, 7.2, 7.3)

                           MAO inhibitors, tricyclic antidepressants and drugs that prolong the QTc interval may potentiate effect on the cardiovascular system. Use with extreme caution. (7.4)

                           Beta-blockers may decrease effectiveness. May block bronchodilatory effects of beta-agonists. Use with caution and only when medically necessary. (7.5)

                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 Adrenergic Drugs

                     
                         If additional adrenergic drugs are to be administered by any route, they should be used with caution because the sympathetic effects of arformoterol may be potentiated [see WARNINGS AND PRECAUTIONS (5.3, 5.5, 5.6, 5.7)].

                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 Xanthine Derivatives, Steroids, or Diuretics

                     
                         Concomitant treatment with methylxanthine (aminophylline, theophylline), steroids, or diuretics may potentiate any hypokalemic effect of adrenergic agonists including BROVANA Inhalation Solution [see WARNINGS AND PRECAUTIONS (5.7)].

                         The concurrent use of intravenously or orally administered methylxanthines (e.g., aminophylline, theophylline) by patients receiving BROVANA Inhalation Solution has not been completely evaluated.  In two combined 12-week, placebo-controlled trials that included BROVANA Inhalation Solution doses of 15 mcg twice daily, 25 mcg twice daily, and 50 mcg once daily, 54 of 873 BROVANA Inhalation Solution-treated subjects received concomitant theophylline at study entry.  In a 12-month controlled trial that included a 50 mcg once daily BROVANA Inhalation Solution dose, 30 of the 528 BROVANA Inhalation Solution-treated subjects received concomitant theophylline at study entry.  In these trials, heart rate and systolic blood pressure were approximately 2-3 bpm and 6-8 mm Hg higher, respectively, in subjects on concomitant theophylline compared with the overall population.

                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3 Non-potassium Sparing Diuretics

                     
                         The ECG changes and/or hypokalemia that may result from the administration of non-potassium sparing diuretics (such as loop or thiazide diuretics) can be acutely worsened by beta-agonists, especially when the recommended dose of the beta-agonist is exceeded. Although the clinical significance of these effects is not known, caution is advised in the co-administration of beta-agonists, including BROVANA Inhalation Solution, with non-potassium sparing diuretics.

                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4 MAO Inhibitors, Tricyclic Antidepressants, QTc Prolonging Drugs

                     
                         BROVANA Inhalation Solution, as with other beta-agonists, should be administered with extreme caution to patients being treated with monoamine oxidase inhibitors, tricyclic antidepressants, or drugs known to prolong the QTc interval because of the effect of adrenergic agonists on the cardiovascular system may be potentiated by these agents. Drugs that are known to prolong the QTc interval have an increased risk of ventricular arrhythmias.

                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.5 Beta-Blockers

                     
                         Beta-adrenergic receptor antagonists (beta-blockers) and BROVANA Inhalation Solution may inhibit the effect of each other when administered concurrently. Beta-blockers not only block the therapeutic effects of beta-agonists, but may produce severe bronchospasm in COPD patients. Therefore, patients with COPD should not normally be treated with beta-blockers. However, under certain circumstances, e.g., as prophylaxis after myocardial infarction, there may be no acceptable alternatives to the use of beta-blockers in patients with COPD. In this setting, cardioselective beta-blockers could be considered, although they should be administered with caution.

                     
                     
                  
               
            
         