
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           Hydrochlorothiazide (7):
                        
                        
                           Alcohol, Barbiturates, Narcotics: Potentiation of orthostatic hypotension
                           Antidiabetic Drugs: Dosage adjustment of antidiabetic may be required
                           Cholestyramine and colestipol: Reduced absorption of thiazides
                           Corticosteroids, ACTH: Hypokalemia, electrolyte depletion
                           Lithium: Reduced renal clearance and high risk of lithium toxicity when used with diuretics. Should not be given with diuretics.
                           NSAIDs: Can reduce diuretic, natriuretic, and antihypertensive effects of diuretics. Observe patient closely.
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           Irbesartan
                        
                        No significant drug-drug interactions have been reported with irbesartan. [See Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)
                           .]
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           Hydrochlorothiazide
                        
                        When administered concurrently the following drugs may interact with thiazide diuretics:
                        
                           Alcohol, Barbiturates, or Narcotics: potentiation of orthostatic hypotension may occur.
                        
                           Antidiabetic Drugs (oral agents and insulin): dosage adjustment of the antidiabetic drug may be required.
                        
                           Other Antihypertensive Drugs: additive effect or potentiation.
                        
                           Cholestyramine and Colestipol Resins: absorption of hydrochlorothiazide is impaired in the presence of anionic exchange resins. Single doses of either cholestyramine or colestipol resins bind the hydrochlorothiazide and reduce its absorption from the gastrointestinal tract by up to 85% and 43%, respectively.
                        
                           Corticosteroids, ACTH: intensified electrolyte depletion, particularly hypokalemia.
                        
                           Pressor Amines (eg, Norepinephrine): possible decreased response to pressor amines but not sufficient to preclude their use.
                        
                           Skeletal Muscle Relaxants, Nondepolarizing (eg, Tubocurarine): possible increased responsiveness to the muscle relaxant.
                        
                           Lithium: should not generally be given with diuretics. Diuretic agents reduce the renal clearance of lithium and add a high risk of lithium toxicity. Refer to the package insert for lithium preparations before use of such preparations with AVALIDE. [See Warnings and Precautions (5.5)
                           .]
                        
                           Non-steroidal Anti-inflammatory Drugs: in some patients, the administration of a non-steroidal anti-inflammatory agent can reduce the diuretic, natriuretic, and antihypertensive effects of loop, potassium-sparing and thiazide diuretics. Therefore, when AVALIDE (irbesartan-hydrochlorothiazide) Tablets and non-steroidal anti-inflammatory agents are used concomitantly, the patient should be observed closely to determine if the desired effect of the diuretic is obtained.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         