
               
               
               
                  7
                   
                  DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           Contraceptives: 12 mg once daily may decrease the effectiveness of hormonal contraceptives containing levonorgestrel (7.1)

                           
                           Cytochrome P450 Inducers: Carbamazepine, oxcarbazepine, and phenytoin increase clearance of perampanel and decrease perampanel plasma concentrations and decrease FYCOMPA’s effectiveness. When these or related enzyme-inducing AEDs are introduced or withdrawn, patients should be closely monitored. Dose adjustment of FYCOMPA may be necessary (7.2)

                           
                           Strong CYP3A Inducers Other than AEDs (e.g., rifampin, St. John’s wort): concomitant use is not recommended (7.2)
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        7.1 Contraceptives
                     
                     
                        With concomitant use, FYCOMPA at a dose of 12 mg per day reduced levonorgestrel exposure by approximately 40% [see Clinical Pharmacology (
                           
                              12.3
                           
                           )]. Use of FYCOMPA with oral or implant contraceptives containing levonorgestrel may render them less effective. Additional non-hormonal forms of contraception are recommended.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        7.2
                         
                        C
                        ytochrome 
                        P450 Inducers
                         
                         
                     
                     
                        The concomitant use of known cytochrome P450 (CYP) enzyme inducers including carbamazepine, phenytoin, or oxcarbazepine with FYCOMPA decreased the plasma levels of perampanel by approximately 50-67% [see Clinical Pharmacology (
                           
                              12.3
                           
                           )]. The starting doses for FYCOMPA should be increased in the presence of enzyme-inducing AEDs [s
                           e
                           e Dos
                           age
                            and Administration (
                           
                              2.3
                           
                           )].  
                        When these enzyme-inducing AEDs are introduced or withdrawn from a patient’s treatment regimen, the patient should be closely monitored for clinical response and tolerability. Dose adjustment of FYCOMPA may be necessary [see 
                           Dosage and Administration (
                           
                              2.3
                           
                           )]. 
                        Concomitant use of FYCOMPA with other strong CYP3A inducers (e.g., rifampin, St. John’s wort) is not recommended. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        7.3 Alcohol 
                        and Other CNS Depressants
                     
                     
                        The concomitant use of FYCOMPA and CNS depressants including alcohol may increase CNS depression. A pharmacodynamic interaction study in healthy subjects found that the effects of FYCOMPA on complex tasks such as driving ability were additive or supra-additive to the impairment effects of alcohol [see Clinical Pharmacology (
                           
                              12.3
                           
                           )]. Multiple dosing of FYCOMPA 12 mg per day also enhanced the effects of alcohol to interfere with vigilance and alertness, and increased levels of anger, confusion, and depression. These effects may also be seen when FYCOMPA is used in combination with other CNS depressants. Care should be taken when administering FYCOMPA with these agents. Patients should limit activity until they have experience with concomitant use of CNS depressants (e.g., benzodiazepines, narcotics, barbiturates, sedating antihistamines). Advise patients not to drive or operate machinery until they have gained sufficient experience on FYCOMPA to gauge whether it adversely affects these activities.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         