
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  Amiloride hydrochloride and hydrochlorothiazide tablets provide 
diuretic and antihypertensive activity (principally due to the 
hydrochlorothiazide component), while acting through the amiloride component to 
prevent the excessive potassium loss that may occur in patients receiving a 
thiazide diuretic. Due to its amiloride component, the urinary excretion of 
magnesium is less with amiloride and hydrochlorothiazide than with a thiazide or 
loop diuretic used alone (see PRECAUTIONS). The onset 
of the diuretic action of this product is within 1 to 2 hours and this action 
appears to be sustained for approximately 24 hours.
                  
                  Amiloride hydrochlorideAmiloride hydrochloride is a potassium-conserving 
(antikaliuretic) drug that possesses weak (compared with thiazide diuretics) 
natriuretic, diuretic, and antihypertensive activity. These effects have been 
partially additive to the effects of thiazide diuretics in some clinical 
studies. Amiloride HCl has potassium-conserving activity in patients receiving 
kaliuretic-diuretic agents.
                  Amiloride HCl is not an aldosterone antagonist and its effects are seen even 
in the absence of aldosterone.
                  Amiloride HCl exerts its potassium sparing effect through the inhibition of 
sodium reabsorption at the distal convoluted tubule, cortical collecting tubule 
and collecting duct; this decreases the net negative potential of the tubular 
lumen and reduces both potassium and hydrogen secretion and their subsequent 
excretion. This mechanism accounts in large part for the potassium sparing 
action of amiloride.
                  Amiloride HCl usually begins to act within 2 hours after an oral dose. Its 
effect on electrolyte excretion reaches a peak between 6 to 10 hours and lasts 
about 24 hours. Peak plasma levels are obtained in 3 to 4 hours and the plasma 
half-life varies from 6 to 9 hours. Effects on electrolytes increase with single 
doses of amiloride hydrochloride up to approximately 15 mg.
                  Amiloride HCl is not metabolized by the liver but is excreted unchanged by 
the kidneys. About 50 percent of a 20 mg dose of amiloride hydrochloride is 
excreted in the urine and 40 percent in the stool within 72 hours. Amiloride HCl 
has little effect on glomerular filtration rate or renal blood flow. Because 
amiloride HCl is not metabolized by the liver, drug accumulation is not 
anticipated in patients with hepatic dysfunction, but accumulation can occur if 
the hepatorenal syndrome develops.
                  
                  HydrochlorothiazideThe mechanism of the antihypertensive effect of thiazides is 
unknown. Thiazides do not usually affect normal blood pressure.
                  Hydrochlorothiazide is a diuretic and antihypertensive. It affects the distal 
renal tubular mechanism of electrolyte reabsorption. Hydrochlorothiazide 
increases excretion of sodium and chloride in approximately equivalent amounts. 
Natriuresis may be accompanied by some loss of potassium and bicarbonate.
                  After oral use diuresis begins within two hours, peaks in about four hours 
and lasts about 6 to 12 hours.
                  Hydrochlorothiazide is not metabolized but is eliminated rapidly by the 
kidney. When plasma levels have been followed for at least 24 hours, the plasma 
half-life has been observed to vary between 5.6 and 14.8 hours. At least 61 
percent of the oral dose is eliminated unchanged within 24 hours. 
Hydrochlorothiazide crosses the placental but not the blood-brain barrier and is 
excreted in breast milk.
               
               
            
         