
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY:
               
                  
                  
                  
                     PureVit DualFe Plus is unique in that it utilizes two
different forms of iron, i.e., Ferrous Fumarate and Polysaccharide Iron
Complex (as cell-contracted
akaganeite), making available a total of 106 mg of elemental iron per
capsule as follows:
                  
Ferrous Fumarate (anhydrous)                     162 mg
Polysaccharide Iron Complex (PIC)          115.2 mg

                  
Subclinical
B-Group vitamin deficiencies have greatly increased in recent years due
to changes in dietetic habits, increase in the use of sugar, and the
excessive milling of flour and cereals. With thiamine deficiencies so
prevalent in a healthy populace, it is self-evident that the unwell
person is particularly prone to thiamine avitaminosis. This is true of
the anemic individual with his or her poor appetite and disturbed
digestive functions. Folic acid is best known for its role in
megaloblastic anemias. Zinc has been recognized in the nutrition of animals and humans, even though the evidence for an
uncomplicated zinc deficiency in humans is limited.

                  
                     Ferrous Fumarate: Provides
about 53 mg of elemental iron per dose. Ferrous Fumarate is an
anhydrous salt of a combination of ferrous iron and fumaric acid,
containing 33% of iron per weight. The acute toxicity in experimental
animals is low and Ferrous Fumarate is well tolerated clinically. As a
ferrous salt, it is more efficiently absorbed in the duodenum. Ferrous
Fumarate contrasts very favorably with the availability of the 20% of
elemental iron of ferrous sulfate, and the 13% of elemental iron of
ferrous gluconate.

                  
                  
                     Polysaccharide Iron Complex: Provides
about 53 mg of elemental iron, as a cell-contracted akaganeite. It is a
product of ferric iron complexed to a low molecular weight
polysaccharide. This polysaccharide is produced by extensive hydrolysis
of starch and is a dark brown powder that dissolves in water to form a
very dark brown solution, which is virtually odorless and tasteless.
                  
                     
Folic Acid: Folic Acid is one of the most important hematopoetic agents necessary for
proper regeneration of the blood-forming elements and their function.
Folic acid is a precursor to a large family of compounds which serve as
coenzymes in carbon transfer reactions. These reactions are required
for the synthesis of purine and pyrimidine bases, inter-conversion of
glycine and serine, biosynthesis of methionine methyl groups and degradation of histidine. Additionally, folic acid increases jejunal glycolytic enzymes and is involved in the desaturation and hydroxylation of
long-chain fatty acids in the brain. A deficiency in folic acid results
in megaloblastic anemia.
               
            
         