
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY

               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action

                     
                        Granisetron is a selective 5-hydroxytryptamine3 (5-HT3) receptor antagonist with little or no affinity for other serotonin receptors, including  5-HT1; 5-HT1A; 5-HT1B/C; 5-HT2; for alpha1-, alpha2- or beta-adrenoreceptors; for dopamine-D2; or for histamine-H1; benzodiazepine; picrotoxin or opioid receptors.

                        Serotonin receptors of the 5-HT3 type are located peripherally on vagal nerve terminals and centrally in the chemoreceptor trigger zone of the area postrema. During chemotherapy-induced vomiting, mucosal enterochromaffin cells release serotonin, which stimulates 5-HT3 receptors. This evokes vagal afferent discharge and may induce vomiting. Animal studies demonstrate that, in binding to 5-HT3 receptors, granisetron blocks serotonin stimulation and subsequent vomiting after emetogenic stimuli such as cisplatin. In the ferret animal model, a single granisetron injection prevented vomiting due to high-dose cisplatin or arrested vomiting within 5 to 30 seconds.

                        In most human studies, granisetron has had little effect on blood pressure, heart rate or ECG. No evidence of an effect on plasma prolactin or aldosterone concentrations has been found in other studies.

                        Granisetron hydrochloride injection exhibited no effect on oro-cecal transit time in normal volunteers given a single intravenous infusion of 50 mcg/kg or 200 mcg/kg. Single and multiple oral doses slowed colonic transit in normal volunteers.

                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics

                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Chemotherapy-Induced Nausea and Vomiting
                              
                              In adult cancer patients undergoing chemotherapy and in volunteers, mean pharmacokinetic data obtained from an infusion of a single 40 mcg/kg dose of granisetron hydrochloride injection are shown in 
                                    Table 3
                                 .

                              


                           



                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Distribution
                              
                              Plasma protein binding is approximately 65% and granisetron distributes freely between plasma and red blood cells.

                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Metabolism
                              
                              Granisetron metabolism involves N-demethylation and aromatic ring oxidation followed by conjugation. In vitro liver microsomal studies show that granisetron's major route of metabolism is inhibited by ketoconazole, suggestive of metabolism mediated by the cytochrome P-450 3A subfamily. Animal studies suggest that some of the metabolites may also have 5-HT3 receptor antagonist activity.

                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Elimination
                              
                              Clearance is predominantly by hepatic metabolism. In normal volunteers, approximately 12% of the administered dose is eliminated unchanged in the urine in 48 hours. The remainder of the dose is excreted as metabolites, 49% in the urine, and 34% in the feces.

                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Subpopulations
                              
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Gender
                              
                              There was high inter- and intra-subject variability noted in these studies. No difference in mean AUC was found between males and females, although males had a higher Cmax generally.

                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Elderly
                              
                              The ranges of the pharmacokinetic parameters in elderly volunteers (mean age 71 years), given a single 40 mcg/kg intravenous dose of granisetron hydrochloride injection, were generally similar to those in younger healthy volunteers; mean values were lower for clearance and longer for half-life in the elderly patients (see 
                                    Table 3
                                 ).

                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Pediatric Patients
                              
                              A pharmacokinetic study in pediatric cancer patients (2 to 16 years of age), given a single 40 mcg/kg intravenous dose of granisetron hydrochloride injection, showed that volume of distribution and total clearance increased with age. No relationship with age was observed for peak plasma concentration or terminal phase plasma half-life. When volume of distribution and total clearance are adjusted for body weight, the pharmacokinetics of granisetron are similar in pediatric and adult cancer patients.

                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Renal Failure Patients
                              
                              Total clearance of granisetron was not affected in patients with severe renal failure who received a single 40 mcg/kg intravenous dose of granisetron hydrochloride injection.

                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Hepatically Impaired Patients
                              
                              A pharmacokinetic study in patients with hepatic impairment due to neoplastic liver involvement showed that total clearance was approximately halved compared to patients without hepatic impairment. Given the wide variability in pharmacokinetic parameters noted in patients, dosage adjustment in patients with hepatic functional impairment is not necessary.

                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         