


CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY





Mechanism of Action and Electrophysiology
Studies of the effects of therapeutic concentrations of lidocaine on the electrophysiological properties of mammalian Purkinje fibers have shown that lidocaine attenuates phase 4 diastolic depolarization, decreases automaticity, and causes a decrease or no change in excitability and membrane responsiveness.  Action potential duration and effective refractory period of Purkinje fibers are decreased, while the ratio of effective refractory period to action potential is increased.  Action potential duration and effective refractory period of ventricular muscle are also decreased.  Effective refractory period of the AV node may increase, decrease or remain unchanged, and atrial effective refractory period is unchanged. Lidocaine raises the ventricular fibrillation threshold.  No significant interactions between lidocaine and the autonomic nervous system have been described and consequently, lidocaine has little or no effect on autonomic tone.Clinical electrophysiological studies with lidocaine have demonstrated no change in sinus node recovery time or sinoatrial conduction time.  AV nodal conduction time is unchanged or shortened, and His-Purkinje conduction time is unchanged.







Hemodynamics
At therapeutic doses, lidocaine has minimal hemodynamic effects in normal subjects and in patients with heart disease.  Lidocaine has been shown to cause no, or minimal, decrease in ventricular contractility, cardiac output, arterial pressure or heart rate.







Pharmacokinetics and Metabolism
Lidocaine is rapidly metabolized by the liver, and less than 10% of a dose is excreted unchanged in the urine. Oxidative N-dealkylation, a major pathway of metabolism, results in the  metabolites monoethylglycinexylidide and glycinexylidide. The pharmacological/toxicological activities of these metabolites are similar to, but less potent than, lidocaine. The primary metabolite in urine is a conjugate of 4-hydroxy-2,6-dimethylaniline.The elimination half-life of lidocaine following an intravenous bolus injection is typically 1.5 to 2 hours.  There are data that indicate that the half-life may be 3 hours or longer following infusions of greater than 24 hours.  Because of the rapid rate at which lidocaine is metabolized, any condition that alters liver function, including changes in liver blood flow, which could result from severe congestive heart failure or shock, may alter lidocaine kinetics.  The half-life may be two-fold or greater in patients with liver dysfunction.  Renal dysfunction does not affect lidocaine kinetics, but may increase the accumulation of metabolites.Therapeutic effects of lidocaine are generally associated with plasma levels of 6 to 25 µmole/L (1.5 to 6 µg freebase per mL).  The blood to plasma distribution ratio is approximately 0.84.  Objective adverse manifestations become increasingly apparent with increasing plasma levels above 6 µg freebase per mL.µmole/L (1.5 to 6 The plasma protein binding of lidocaine is dependent on drug concentration, and the fraction bound decreases with increasing concentration.  At concentrations of 1 to 4 µg freebase per mL, 60 to 80 percent of lidocaine is protein bound.  In addition to lidocaine concentration, the binding is dependent on the plasma concentration of the α-1-acid glycoprotein.µg freebase per mL, 60 to 80 percent of lidocaine is protein bound.  In addition to lidocaine concentration, the binding is dependent on the plasma concentration of the α-1-acid glycoprotein.Lidocaine readily crosses the placental and blood-brain barriers.  Dialysis has negligible effects on the kinetics of lidocaine.




