
               
               
               7  DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
                  Table 4 lists the drugs that have been tested in binding, drug interaction studies with colesevelam and/or drugs with postmarketing reports consistent with potential drug-drug interactions. Orally administered drugs that have not been tested for interaction with colesevelam, especially those with a narrow therapeutic index, should also be administered at least 4 hours prior to WELCHOL. Alternatively, the physician should monitor drug levels of the co-administered drug.
                            in vitro
                     in vivo
                  
                  


                  


In an drug interaction study, WELCHOL and warfarin coadministration had no effect on warfarin drug levels. This study did not assess the effect of WELCHOL and warfarin coadministration on INR. In post-marketing reports, concomitant use of WELCHOL and warfarin has been associated with reduced INR. Therefore, in patients on warfarin therapy, the INR should be monitored before initiating WELCHOL and frequently enough during early WELCHOL therapy to ensure that no significant alteration in INR occurs. Once the INR is stable, continue to monitor the INR at intervals usually recommended for patients on warfarin
                            in vivo
                     [See Post-marketing Experience ( )].
                                6.2
                     
                  
               
               
               
                  
                     
                        In drug interaction studies, WELCHOL reduced levels of cyclosporine, glimepiride, glipizide, glyburide, levothyroxine, olmesartan medoxomil, and oral contraceptives containing ethinyl estradiol and norethindrone. WELCHOL increased levels of metformin when coadministered with metformin extended release. There have been postmarketing reports of decreases in phenytoin levels in patients receiving phenytoin concomitantly with WELCHOL and decreases in INR in patients receiving warfarin concomitantly with WELCHOL ( , , ).
                                    5.5
                           7
                           12.3
                        
                        

                     
                  
               
            
         