
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Endothelin-1 (ET-1) is a potent autocrine and paracrine peptide. Two receptor subtypes, ET
         
 
  A and ET
         
 
  B, mediate the effects of ET-1 in the vascular smooth muscle and endothelium. The primary actions of ET
         
 
  A are vasoconstriction and cell proliferation, while the predominant actions of ET
         
 
  B are vasodilation, antiproliferation, and ET-1 clearance.
        

 
                        In patients with PAH, plasma ET-1 concentrations are increased as much as 10-fold and correlate with increased mean right atrial pressure and disease severity. ET-1 and ET-1 mRNA concentrations are increased as much as 9-fold in the lung tissue of patients with PAH, primarily in the endothelium of pulmonary arteries. These findings suggest that ET-1 may play a critical role in the pathogenesis and progression of PAH.
                        Ambrisentan is a high-affinity (K
         
 
  i=0.011 nM) ET
         
 
  A receptor antagonist with a high selectivity for the ET
         
 
  A versus ET
         
 
  B receptor (>4000-fold). The clinical impact of high selectivity for ET
         
 
  A is not known.
        

 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics 
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                    Cardiac Electrophysiology 
                                 
                              
                              In a randomized, positive- and placebo-controlled, parallel-group study, healthy subjects received either Letairis 10 mg daily followed by a single dose of 40 mg, placebo followed by a single dose of moxifloxacin 400 mg, or placebo alone. Letairis 10 mg daily had no significant effect on the QTc interval. The 40 mg dose of Letairis increased mean QTc at t
           
 
  max by 5 ms with an upper 95% confidence limit of 9 ms. For patients receiving Letairis 5–10 mg daily and not taking metabolic inhibitors, no significant QT prolongation is expected.
          

 
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        The pharmacokinetics of ambrisentan (S-ambrisentan) in healthy subjects is dose proportional. The absolute bioavailability of ambrisentan is not known. Ambrisentan is absorbed with peak concentrations occurring approximately 2 hours after oral administration in healthy subjects and PAH patients. Food does not affect its bioavailability. In vitro studies indicate that ambrisentan is a substrate of P-gp. Ambrisentan is highly bound to plasma proteins (99%). The elimination of ambrisentan is predominantly by non-renal pathways, but the relative contributions of metabolism and biliary elimination have not been well characterized. In plasma, the AUC of 4-hydroxymethyl ambrisentan accounts for approximately 4% relative to parent ambrisentan AUC. The in vivo inversion of S-ambrisentan to R-ambrisentan is negligible. The mean oral clearance of ambrisentan is 38 mL/min and 19 mL/min in healthy subjects and in PAH patients, respectively. Although ambrisentan has a 15-hour terminal half-life, the mean trough concentration of ambrisentan at steady-state is about 15% of the mean peak concentration and the accumulation factor is about 1.2 after long-term daily dosing, indicating that the effective half-life of ambrisentan is about 9 hours.
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                    Drug Interactions
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       In Vitro Studies
                                    
                                    Studies with human liver tissue indicate that ambrisentan is metabolized by CYP3A, CYP2C19, and uridine 5'-diphosphate glucuronosyltransferases (UGTs) 1A9S, 2B7S, and 1A3S. In vitro studies suggest that ambrisentan is a substrate of the Organic Anion Transporting Polypeptides OATP1B1 and OATP1B3, and P-glycoprotein (P-gp). Drug interactions might be expected because of these factors; however, a clinically relevant interaction has been demonstrated only with cyclosporine 
             
 
  [see 
              
  
   Drug Interactions (7)]
             
 
  . In vitro studies found ambrisentan to have little to no inhibition of human hepatic transporters. Ambrisentan demonstrated weak dose-dependent inhibition of OATP1B1, OATP1B3, and NTCP (IC
             
 
  50 of 47 µM, 45 µM, and approximately 100 µM, respectively) and no transporter-specific inhibition of BSEP, BRCP, P-gp, or MRP2. Ambrisentan does not inhibit or induce drug metabolizing enzymes at clinically relevant concentrations.
            

 
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       In Vivo Studies
                                    
                                    The effects of other drugs on ambrisentan pharmacokinetics and the effects of ambrisentan on the exposure to other drugs are shown in Figure 2 and Figure 3, respectively.
                                    Figure 2	Effects of Other Drugs on Ambrisentan Pharmacokinetics
                                    
                                       
                                    
                                    * Omeprazole: based on population pharmacokinetic analysis in PAH patients
                                    ** Rifampin: AUC and C
             
 
  max were measured at steady-state. On Day 3 of coadministration a transient 2-fold increase in AUC was noted that was no longer evident by Day 7. Day 7 results are presented.
            

 
                                    Figure 3	Effects of Ambrisentan on Other Drugs
                                    
                                       
                                    
                                    * Active metabolite of mycophenolate mofetil
                                    ** GMR (95% CI) for INR
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Figure 2
                                       
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Figure 3
                                       
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         