
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Like other topical corticosteroids, mometasone furoate has anti-inflammatory, antipruritic, and vasoconstrictive properties. The mechanism of the anti-inflammatory activity of the topical steroids, in general, is unclear. However, corticosteroids are thought to act by the induction of phospholipase A2 inhibitory proteins, collectively called lipocortins. It is postulated that these proteins control the biosynthesis of potent mediators of inflammation such as prostaglandins and leukotrienes by inhibiting the release of their common precursor arachidonic acid. Arachidonic acid is released from membrane phospholipids by phospholipase A2.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        Studies performed with mometasone furoate lotion indicate that it is in the medium range of potency as compared with other topical corticosteroids.
                        In a study evaluating the effects of mometasone furoate lotion on the HPA axis, 15 mL were applied without occlusion twice daily (30 mL per day) for 7 days to 4 adult subjects with scalp and body psoriasis. At the end of treatment, the plasma cortisol levels for each of the 4 subjects remained within the normal range and changed little from baseline [see Warnings and Precautions (5.1)].
                        Sixty-five pediatric subjects ages 6 to 23 months, with atopic dermatitis, were enrolled in an open-label, HPA axis safety trial. Mometasone furoate lotion was applied once daily for approximately 3 weeks over a mean body surface area of 40% (range 16%-90%). In approximately 29% of subjects who showed normal adrenal function by Cortrosyn test before starting treatment, adrenal suppression was observed at the end of treatment with mometasone furoate lotion. The criteria for suppression were: basal cortisol level of ≤5 mcg/dL, 30-minute poststimulation level of ≤18 mcg/dL, or an increase of <7 mcg/dL. Follow-up testing 2 to 4 weeks after stopping treatment, available for 8 of the subjects, demonstrated suppressed HPA axis function in 1 subject, using these same criteria [see Use in Specific Populations (8.4)].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        The extent of percutaneous absorption of topical corticosteroids is determined by many factors including the vehicle and the integrity of the epidermal barrier. Studies in humans indicate that approximately 0.7% of the applied dose of mometasone furoate ointment enters the circulation after 8 hours of contact on normal skin without occlusion. A similar minimal degree of absorption of the corticosteroid from the lotion formulation would be anticipated. Inflammation and/or other disease processes in the skin may increase percutaneous absorption.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         