
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
                  
                     
                        G-CSF:
                      Concomitant administration of G-CSF can prolong the duration of neutropenia, so if G-CSF is to be used, do not initiate it until day 6 of the course of therapy, 24 hours after completion of treatment with topotecan hydrochloride for injection.
      

 
                  
                     
                        Platinum and Other Cytotoxic Agents:
                      Myelosuppression was more severe when topotecan hydrochloride for injection, at a dose of 1.25 mg/m
       
 
  2/day for 5 days, was given in combination with cisplatin at a dose of 50 mg/m
       
 
  2 in Phase 1 trials. In one trial, 1 of 3 patients had severe neutropenia for 12 days and a second patient died with neutropenic sepsis.
      

 
                  Greater myelosuppression is also likely to be seen when topotecan hydrochloride for injection is used in combination with other cytotoxic agents, thereby necessitating a dose reduction. However, when combining topotecan hydrochloride for injection with platinum agents (e.g., cisplatin or carboplatin), a distinct sequence-dependent interaction on myelosuppression has been reported. Coadministration of a platinum agent on day 1 of dosing with topotecan hydrochloride for injection required lower doses of each agent compared to coadministration on day 5 of the dosing schedule for topotecan hydrochloride for injection.
                  For information on the pharmacokinetics, efficacy, safety, and dosing of topotecan hydrochloride for injection at a dose of 0.75 mg/m
       
 
  2/day on days 1, 2, and 3 in combination with cisplatin 50 mg/m
       
 
  2 on day 1 for cervical cancer, see 
       
 
  Dosage and Administration (2), 
       
 
  Adverse Reactions (6), 
       
 
  Clinical Pharmacology (12.3), and 
       
 
  Clinical Studies(14).
      

 
               
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           Do not initiate G-CSF until 24 hours after completion of treatment with topotecan hydrochloride for injection. Concomitant administration can prolong duration of neutropenia. (
          
  
     7)
         
 
    
                           Greater myelosuppression is likely to be seen when used in combination with other cytotoxic agents. (
          
  
     7)
          
  
     
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         