
               
               
                12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                      12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Timolol maleate is a beta1 and beta2 (non-selective) adrenergic receptor inhibitor that does not have significant intrinsic sympathomimetic, direct myocardial depressant, or local anesthetic (membrane-stabilizing) activity. Timolol GFS, when applied topically to the eye, has the action of reducing elevated, as well as normal, intraocular pressure, whether or not accompanied by glaucoma. Elevated intraocular pressure is a major risk factor in the pathogenesis of glaucomatous visual field loss and optic nerve damage. The precise mechanism of the ocular hypotensive action of Timolol GFS is not clearly established at this time. Tonography and fluorophotometry studies of Timolol GFS in man suggest that its predominant action may be related to reduced aqueous formation. However, in some studies, a slight increase in outflow facility was also observed. Beta-adrenergic receptor blockade reduces cardiac output in both healthy subjects and patients with heart disease. In patients with severe impairment of myocardial function beta-adrenergic receptor inhibitors may inhibit the stimulatory effect of the sympathetic nervous system necessary to maintain adequate cardiac function. Beta-adrenergic receptor blockade in the bronchi and bronchioles results in increased airway resistance from unopposed parasympathetic activities. Such an effect in patients with asthma or other bronchospastic conditions is potentially dangerous.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                      12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        Because in some patients the intraocular pressure-lowering response to Timolol GFS may require a few weeks to stabilize, evaluation should include a determination of intraocular pressure after approximately 4 weeks of treatment with Timolol GFS. If the patient's intraocular pressure is still not at a satisfactory level on this regimen, concomitant therapy can be considered.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                      12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        Following topical ocular administration of timolol to humans, low concentrations of drug are found in plasma. After bilateral administration of a 0.5% timolol maleate solution to healthy volunteers, maximum plasma concentrations were generally below 5 ng/mL. Dosages higher than one drop of 0.5% Timolol GFS once daily have not been studied.
                        Pharmacokinetic studies in humans using this gel forming solution formulation were not performed. However, systemic uptake from a gel matrix is expected to be slower than from a non-gel forming solution based on studies using other gel forming solutions. The maximum plasma timolol concentration from the gel forming drop is not expected to exceed those of the 0.5% timolol maleate solution.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         