
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  
                  The mechanism of action of SEROQUEL is unknown. However, it has been proposed that the efficacy of SEROQUEL in schizophrenia and its mood stabilizing properties in bipolar depression and mania are mediated through a combination of dopamine type 2 (D2) and serotonin type 2 (5HT2) antagonism.  Antagonism at receptors other than dopamine and 5HT2 with similar receptor affinities may explain some of the other effects of SEROQUEL.  
                  SEROQUEL’s antagonism of histamine H1 receptors may explain the somnolence observed with this drug.
                  SEROQUEL’s antagonism of adrenergic α1 receptors may explain the orthostatic hypotension observed with this drug.
                  
 

                  
                  SEROQUEL is an antagonist at multiple neurotransmitter receptors in the brain: serotonin 5HT1A and 5HT2 (IC50s=717 & 148nM, respectively), dopamine D1 and D2 (IC50s=1268 & 329nM, respectively), histamine H1 (IC50=30nM), and adrenergic α1 and α2 receptors (IC50s=94 & 271nM, respectively).  SEROQUEL has no appreciable affinity at cholinergic muscarinic and benzodiazepine receptors (IC50s>5000 nM).
                  Effect on QT Interval 
                  In clinical trials quetiapine was not associated with a persistent increase in QT intervals. However, the QT effect was not systematically evaluated in a thorough QT study. In post marketing experience there were cases reported of QT prolongation in patients who overdosed on quetiapine [see Overdosage (10.1)
                     ], in patients with concomitant illness, and in patients taking medicines known to cause electrolyte imbalance or increase QT interval.
                  
 

                  
                  Adults
                  Quetiapine fumarate activity is primarily due to the parent drug. The multiple-dose pharmacokinetics of quetiapine are dose-proportional within the proposed clinical dose range, and quetiapine accumulation is predictable upon multiple dosing.  Elimination of quetiapine is mainly via hepatic metabolism with a mean terminal half-life of about 6 hours within the proposed clinical dose range.  Steady-state concentrations are expected to be achieved within two days of dosing.  Quetiapine is unlikely to interfere with the metabolism of drugs metabolized by cytochrome P450 enzymes.
                  Children and Adolescents
                  At steady-state the pharmacokinetics of the parent compound, in children and adolescents (10-17 years of age), were similar to adults.  However, when adjusted for dose and weight, AUC and Cmax of the parent compound were 41% and 39% lower, respectively, in children and adolescents than in adults.  For the active metabolite, norquetiapine, AUC and Cmax were 45% and 31% higher, respectively, in children and adolescents than in adults.  When adjusted for dose and weight, the pharmacokinetics of the metabolite, norquetiapine, was similar between children and adolescents and adults [see Use in Specific Populations (8.4)
                     ].
                  
                     Absorption
                  
                  Quetiapine fumarate is rapidly absorbed after oral administration, reaching peak plasma concentrations in 1.5 hours.  The tablet formulation is 100% bioavailable relative to solution.  The bioavailability of quetiapine is marginally affected by administration with food, with Cmax and AUC values increased by 25% and 15%, respectively.
                  
                     Distribution
                  
                  Quetiapine is widely distributed throughout the body with an apparent volume of distribution of 10±4 L/kg.  It is 83% bound to plasma proteins at therapeutic concentrations.  In vitro, quetiapine did not affect the binding of warfarin or diazepam to human serum albumin.  In turn, neither warfarin nor diazepam altered the binding of quetiapine.
                  
                     Metabolism and Elimination
                  
                  Following a single oral dose of 14C-quetiapine, less than 1% of the administered dose was excreted as unchanged drug, indicating that quetiapine is highly metabolized.  Approximately 73% and 20% of the dose was recovered in the urine and feces, respectively. 
                  Quetiapine is extensively metabolized by the liver.  The major metabolic pathways are sulfoxidation to the sulfoxide metabolite and oxidation to the parent acid metabolite; both metabolites are pharmacologically inactive.  In vitro studies using human liver microsomes revealed that the cytochrome P450 3A4 isoenzyme is involved in the metabolism of quetiapine to its major, but inactive, sulfoxide metabolite and in the metabolism of its active metabolite N-desalkyl quetiapine.
                  
                     Age
                  
                  Oral clearance of quetiapine was reduced by 40% in elderly patients (≥ 65 years, n=9) compared to young patients (n=12), and dosing adjustment may be necessary [see Dosage and Administration (2.2)
                     ].
                  
                     Gender
                  
                  There is no gender effect on the pharmacokinetics of quetiapine.
                  
                     Race
                  
                  There is no race effect on the pharmacokinetics of quetiapine.
                  
                     Smoking
                  
                  Smoking has no effect on the oral clearance of quetiapine.
                  
                     Renal Insufficiency
                  
                  Patients with severe renal impairment (Clcr=10-30 mL/min/1.73 m2, n=8) had a 25% lower mean oral clearance than normal subjects (Clcr > 80 mL/min/1.73 m2, n=8), but plasma quetiapine concentrations in the subjects with renal insufficiency were within the range of concentrations seen in normal subjects receiving the same dose.  Dosage adjustment is therefore not needed in these patients [see Use in Specific Populations (8.6)
                     ]. 
                  
                     Hepatic Insufficiency
                  
                  Hepatically impaired patients (n=8) had a 30% lower mean oral clearance of quetiapine than normal subjects.  In two of the 8 hepatically impaired patients, AUC and Cmax were 3 times higher than those observed typically in healthy subjects.  Since quetiapine is extensively metabolized by the liver, higher plasma levels are expected in the hepatically impaired population, and dosage adjustment may be needed [see 
                        Dosage and Administration (2.3) and Use in Specific Populations (8.7)
                     ].
                  
                     Drug-Drug Interaction Studies
                  
                  The in vivo assessments of effect of other drugs on the pharmacokinetics of quetiapine are summarized in Table 17 [see Dosage and Administration (2.4 and 2.5) and Drug Interactions (7.1)
                     ].
                  


                  



                     In vitro enzyme inhibition data suggest that quetiapine and 9 of its metabolites would have little inhibitory effect on in vivo metabolism mediated by cytochromes CYP 1A2, 2C9, 2C19, 2D6 and 3A4. Quetiapine at doses of 750 mg/day did not affect the single dose pharmacokinetics of antipyrine, lithium or lorazepam (Table 18) [see Drug Interactions (7.2)
                     ].
                  


                  



 

               
               
            
         