
               
               
               7. DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           Skeletal muscle relaxants: Enhance action of and increased degree of respiratory depression (7.2)
                           Drugs that inhibit CYP3A4 activity may decrease clearance of oxycodone and lead to an increase in oxycodone plasma concentrations. (7.4)
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 CNS Depressants
                     
                        Patients receiving narcotic analgesics, general anesthetics, phenothiazines, other tranquilizers, sedative-hypnotics or other CNS depressants (including alcohol) concomitantly with Oxycodone Hydrochloride Oral Solution may exhibit an additive CNS depression. Interactive effects resulting in respiratory depression, hypotension, profound sedation, or coma may result if these drugs are taken in combination with the usual dosage of Oxycodone Hydrochloride Oral Solution. When such combined therapy is contemplated, the dose of one or both agents should be reduced.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 Neuromuscular Blocking Agents
                     
                        Oxycodone may enhance the neuromuscular blocking action of skeletal muscle relaxants and produce an increased degree of respiratory depression.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3 Mixed Agonist/Antagonist Opioid Analgesics
                     
                        Agonist/antagonist analgesics (i.e., pentazocine, nalbuphine, butorphanol and buprenorphine) should be administered with caution to patients who have received or are receiving a course of therapy with a pure opioid agonist analgesic such as Oxycodone Hydrochloride Oral Solution. In this situation, mixed agonist/antagonist analgesics may reduce the analgesic effect of Oxycodone Hydrochloride Oral Solution and/or may precipitate withdrawal symptoms in these patients.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4 Agents Affecting Cytochrome P450 Enzymes
                     
                        
                           CYP3A4 Inhibitors 
                        A published study showed that the co-administration with voriconazole, a CYP3A4 inhibitor, significantly increased the plasma concentrations of oxycodone. Inhibition of CYP3A4 activity by its inhibitors, such as macrolide antibiotics (e.g., erythromycin), azole-antifungal agents (e.g., ketoconazole), and protease inhibitors (e.g., ritonavir), may prolong opioid effects. If co-administration is necessary, caution is advised when initiating therapy with, currently taking, or discontinuing CYP3A4 inhibitors. Evaluate these patients at frequent intervals and consider dose adjustments until stable drug effects are achieved [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                        
                           CYP3A4 Inducers 
                        A published study showed that the co-administration of rifampin, a drug metabolizing enzyme inducer, significantly decreased plasma oxycodone concentrations. Induction of CYP3A4 activity by its inducers, such as rifampin, carbamazepine, and phenytoin, may lead to a lack of efficacy or, possibly, development of an abstinence syndrome in a patient who had developed physical dependence to oxycodone. If co-administration is necessary, caution is advised when initiating therapy with, currently taking, or discontinuing CYP3A4 inducers. Evaluate these patients at frequent intervals and consider dose adjustments until stable drug effects are achieved [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)]. 
                        
                           CYP2D6 Inhibitors 
                        Oxycodone is metabolized in part to oxymorphone via the Cytochrome P450 Isoenzyme CYP2D6. While this pathway may be blocked by a variety of drugs (e.g., certain cardiovascular drugs and antidepressants), such blockade has not yet been shown to be of clinical significance with this agent. However, clinicians should be aware of this possible interaction.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.5 Monoamine Oxidase Inhibitors (MAOIs)
                     
                        MAOIs have been reported to intensify the effects of at least one opioid drug, causing anxiety, confusion and significant depression of respiration or coma. The use of Oxycodone Hydrochloride Oral Solution is not recommended for patients taking MAOIs or within 14 days of stopping such treatment.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.6 Anticholinergics
                     
                        Anticholinergics or other medications with anticholinergic activity, when used concurrently with opioid analgesics including oxycodone hydrochloride, may result in increased risk of urinary retention and/or severe constipation, which may lead to paralytic ileus.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         