
               
               
               
                  
                     CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
                  
               
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        
                        Mechanism of Action
                        Fexofenadine hydrochloride, the major active metabolite of 
terfenadine, is an antihistamine with selective peripheral H1-receptor antagonist activity. Fexofenadine hydrochloride 
inhibited antigen-induced bronchospasm in sensitized guinea pigs and histamine 
release from peritoneal mast cells in rats. In laboratory animals, no 
anticholinergic or alpha1-adrenergic-receptor blocking 
effects were observed. Moreover, no sedative or other central nervous system 
effects were observed. Radiolabeled tissue distribution studies in rats 
indicated that fexofenadine does not cross the blood-brain barrier.
                        Pseudoephedrine hydrochloride is an orally active sympathomimetic amine and 
exerts a decongestant action on the nasal mucosa. Pseudoephedrine hydrochloride 
is recognized as an effective agent for the relief of nasal congestion due to 
allergic rhinitis. Pseudoephedrine produces peripheral effects similar to those 
of ephedrine and central effects similar to, but less intense than, 
amphetamines. It has the potential for excitatory side effects. 
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        
                        Pharmacokinetics
                        The pharmacokinetics of fexofenadine hydrochloride in subjects 
with seasonal allergic rhinitis were similar to those in healthy volunteers. 

                        
                        AbsorptionFexofenadine hydrochloride and pseudoephedrine hydrochloride 
administered as ALLEGRA-D 24 HOUR tablets are absorbed at a similar rate and are 
equally available under single-dose and steady-state conditions as the separate 
administration of the components. Coadministration of fexofenadine and 
pseudoephedrine does not significantly affect the bioavailability of either 
component. The administration of ALLEGRA-D 24 HOUR tablets 30 minutes or 1.5 
hour after a high-fat meal decreased the bioavailability of fexofenadine by 
approximately 50% (AUC 42% and Cmax 54%). Pseudoephedrine 
pharmacokinetics were unaffected when coadministered with a high-fat meal. 
Therefore, ALLEGRA-D 24 HOUR should be taken on an empty stomach with water (see 
DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION).
                        A pharmacokinetic study following single and multiple oral doses over 7 days 
of ALLEGRA-D 24 HOUR in 66 healthy volunteers showed that fexofenadine, the 
immediate release component of ALLEGRA-D 24 HOUR, was rapidly absorbed with mean 
maximum plasma concentrations of 634 ng/mL and 674 ng/mL after single and 
multiple doses, respectively. The median time to maximum concentration of 
fexofenadine was 1.8–2.0 hours post-dose. In the same study, the mean maximum 
plasma concentrations of pseudoephedrine, the extended-release component of 
ALLEGRA-D 24 HOUR, were 394 ng/mL and 495 ng/mL after single and multiple doses, 
respectively, with median time to maximum concentration of 12 hours post-dose. 
Pseudoephedrine concentrations at the end of the dosing interval (mean: 172 
ng/mL) at steady state were equivalent to those observed from a comparator 
pseudoephedrine hydrochloride 240 mg tablet.
                        
                        DistributionFexofenadine hydrochloride is 60% to 70% bound to plasma 
proteins, primarily albumin and α1-acid glycoprotein. The 
protein binding of pseudoephedrine in humans is not known. Pseudoephedrine 
hydrochloride is extensively distributed into extravascular sites (apparent 
volume of distribution between 2.6 and 3.5 L/kg).
                        
                        MetabolismApproximately 5% of the total dose of fexofenadine hydrochloride 
and less than 1% of the total oral dose of pseudoephedrine hydrochloride were 
eliminated by hepatic metabolism.
                        
                        EliminationThe mean terminal elimination half-life of fexofenadine was 14.6 
hours following administration of ALLEGRA-D 24 HOUR tablets in healthy 
volunteers, which is consistent with observations from separate administration. 
Human mass balance studies documented a recovery of approximately 80% and 11% of 
the [14C]-fexofenadine hydrochloride dose in the feces 
and urine, respectively. Because the absolute bioavailability of fexofenadine 
hydrochloride has not been established, it is unknown if the fecal component is 
primarily unabsorbed drug or the result of biliary excretion. The mean terminal 
half-life of pseudoephedrine was 7 hours following single-dose administration of 
ALLEGRA-D 24 HOUR tablets.
                        Pseudoephedrine has been shown to have a mean elimination half-life of 4–6 
hours which is dependent on urine pH. The elimination half-life is decreased at 
urine pH lower than 6 and may be increased at urine pH higher than 8.
                        
                        Special PopulationsPharmacokinetics in special populations (for renal, hepatic 
impairment, and age), obtained after a single dose of 80 mg fexofenadine 
hydrochloride, were compared to those from healthy volunteers in a separate 
study of similar design.
                        
                        Effect of AgeIn older subjects (≥65 years old), peak plasma levels of 
fexofenadine were 99% greater than those observed in younger subjects (less than 65 
years old). Mean fexofenadine elimination half-lives were similar to those 
observed in younger subjects.
                        
                        Renally ImpairedIn subjects with mild (creatinine clearance 41–80 mL/min) to 
severe (creatinine clearance 11–40 mL/min) renal impairment, peak plasma levels 
of fexofenadine were 87% and 111% greater, respectively, and mean elimination 
half-lives were 59% and 72% longer, respectively, than observed in healthy 
volunteers. Peak plasma levels in subjects on dialysis (creatinine clearance ≤10 
mL/min) were 82% greater and half-life was 31% longer than observed in healthy 
volunteers. No data are available on the pharmacokinetics of pseudoephedrine in 
renally impaired subjects. However, most of the oral dose of pseudoephedrine 
hydrochloride (43–96%) is excreted unchanged in the urine. A decrease in renal 
function is, therefore, likely to decrease the clearance of pseudoephedrine 
significantly, thus prolonging the half-life and resulting in accumulation. (See 
PRECAUTIONS and DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION.)
                        
                        Hepatically ImpairedThe pharmacokinetics of fexofenadine hydrochloride in subjects 
with hepatic disease did not differ substantially from that observed in healthy 
volunteers. The effect on pseudoephedrine pharmacokinetics is unknown.
                        
                        Effect of GenderAcross several trials, no clinically significant gender-related 
differences were observed in the pharmacokinetics of fexofenadine hydrochloride.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        
                        Pharmacodynamics
                        
                        Wheal and FlareHuman histamine skin wheal and flare studies following single and 
twice daily doses of 20 mg and 40 mg fexofenadine hydrochloride demonstrated 
that the drug exhibits an antihistamine effect by 1 hour, achieves maximum 
effect at 2–3 hours, and an effect is still seen at 12 hours. There was no 
evidence of tolerance to these effects after 28 days of dosing. The clinical 
significance of these observations is unknown.
                        
                        Effects on QTc
                        In dogs (30 mg/kg orally twice daily for 5 days) and rabbits (10 
mg/kg intravenously over 1 hour), fexofenadine hydrochloride did not prolong 
QTc at plasma concentrations that were at least 7 and 15 
times, respectively, the therapeutic plasma concentrations in man (based on a 
180 mg once daily fexofenadine hydrochloride dose when administered as ALLEGRA-D 
24 HOUR). No effect was observed on calcium channel current, delayed K+ channel current, or action potential duration in guinea pig 
myocytes, Na+ current in rat neonatal myocytes, or on the 
delayed rectifier K+ channel cloned from human heart at 
concentrations up to 1 × 10−5 M of fexofenadine. This 
concentration was at least 8 times the therapeutic plasma concentration in man 
(based on a 180 mg once daily fexofenadine hydrochloride dose). 
                        No statistically significant increase in mean QTc 
interval compared to placebo was observed in 714 subjects with seasonal allergic 
rhinitis given fexofenadine hydrochloride capsules in doses of 60 mg to 240 mg 
twice daily for 2 weeks or in 40 healthy volunteers given fexofenadine 
hydrochloride as an oral solution at doses up to 400 mg twice daily for 6 days. 

                        A 1-year study designed to evaluate safety and tolerability of 240 mg of 
fexofenadine hydrochloride (n=240) compared to placebo (n=237) in healthy 
volunteers, did not reveal a statistically significant increase in the mean 
QTc interval for the fexofenadine hydrochloride treated 
group when evaluated pretreatment and after 1, 2, 3, 6, 9, and 12 months of 
treatment.
                        Administration of the 60 mg fexofenadine hydrochloride/120 mg pseudoephedrine 
hydrochloride combination tablet for approximately 2 weeks to 213 subjects with 
seasonal allergic rhinitis demonstrated no statistically significant increase in 
the mean QTc interval compared to fexofenadine 
hydrochloride administered alone (60 mg twice daily, n=215), or compared to 
pseudoephedrine hydrochloride (120 mg twice daily, n=215) administered alone. 
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        
                        Clinical Studies
                        Clinical efficacy and safety studies were not conducted with 
ALLEGRA-D 24 HOUR Extended-Release Tablets. The effectiveness of ALLEGRA-D 24 
HOUR for the treatment of seasonal allergic rhinitis is based on an 
extrapolation of the demonstrated efficacy of ALLEGRA 180 mg and the nasal 
decongestant properties of pseudoephedrine hydrochloride.
                        In one 2-week, multicenter, randomized, double-blind clinical trial in 
subjects 12 to 65 years of age with seasonal allergic rhinitis (n=863), 
fexofenadine hydrochloride 180 mg once daily significantly reduced total symptom 
scores (the sum of the individual scores for sneezing, rhinorrhea, itchy 
nose/palate/throat, itchy/watery/red eyes) compared to placebo. Although the 
number of subjects in some of the subgroups was small, there were no significant 
differences in the effect of fexofenadine hydrochloride across subgroups of 
subjects defined by gender, age, and race.
                     
                  
               
            
         