
               
               
               12  CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  Patients with ESRD retain phosphorus and can develop hyperphosphatemia.  High serum phosphorus can precipitate serum calcium resulting in ectopic calcification.  Hyperphosphatemia also plays a role in the development of secondary hyperparathyroidism in patients with ESRD.
               
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1	Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Calcium acetate, when taken with meals, combines with dietary phosphate to form an insoluble calcium-phosphate complex, which is excreted in the feces, resulting in decreased serum phosphorus concentrations.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2	Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        Orally administered calcium acetate from pharmaceutical dosage forms is systemically absorbed up to approximately 40% under fasting conditions and up to approximately 30% under non-fasting conditions.  This range represents data from both healthy subjects and renal dialysis patients under various conditions.
                        A randomized, 3-arm, open-label, cross-over study in healthy volunteers evaluated the bioavailability of PHOSLYRA compared to calcium acetate gelcaps.  Each subject received ~1000 mg elemental calcium from each dose of the following study medications:  30 mL PHOSLYRA (test), 6 calcium acetate gelcaps (reference), or 5 calcium citrate caplets (positive control) in three periods.  The study medications were administered three times per day with meals from Day 0 through Day 2 and one morning dose on Day 3 of each period.
                        Treatment (baseline-subtracted) related changes (AUC and Cmax) in serum calcium and phosphorus assessed over the 6 hours following dosing were similar for PHOSLYRA and calcium acetate gelcaps.  Urinary excretion of calcium and phosphorus were not significantly increased with PHOSLYRA compared to calcium acetate gelcaps.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        
                           Drug Interactions
                        
                        
                           In vivo
                        
                        In a study of 15 healthy subjects, a co-administered single dose of 4 calcium acetate tablets (approximately 2.7 g) decreased the bioavailability of ciprofloxacin by approximately 50%.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         