
               
               
               12.	CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1	Mechanism of action
                     
                        Bosentan is a specific and competitive antagonist at endothelin receptor types ETA and ETB. Bosentan has a slightly higher affinity for ETA receptors than for ETB receptors. The clinical impact of dual endothelin blockage is unknown.
                        Endothelin-1 (ET-1) is a neurohormone, the effects of which are mediated by binding to ETA and ETB receptors in the endothelium and vascular smooth muscle. ET-1 concentrations are elevated in plasma and lung tissue of patients with pulmonary arterial hypertension, suggesting a pathogenic role for ET-1 in this disease. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3	Pharmacokinetics
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 General
                              
                              After oral administration, maximum plasma concentrations of bosentan are attained within 3–5 hours and the terminal elimination half-life (t1/2) is about 5 hours in healthy adult subjects. The exposure to bosentan after intravenous and oral administration is about 2-fold greater in adult patients with pulmonary arterial hypertension than in healthy adult subjects.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Absorption and Distribution
                              
                              The absolute bioavailability of bosentan in normal volunteers is about 50% and is unaffected by food. The volume of distribution is about 18 L. Bosentan is highly bound (> 98%) to plasma proteins, mainly albumin. Bosentan does not penetrate into erythrocytes.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Metabolism and Elimination
                              
                              Bosentan has three metabolites, one of which is pharmacologically active and may contribute 10%–20% of the effect of bosentan. Bosentan is an inducer of CYP2C9 and CYP3A and possibly also of CYP2C19. Total clearance after a single intravenous dose is about 4 L/hr in patients with pulmonary arterial hypertension. Upon multiple oral dosing, plasma concentrations in healthy adults decrease gradually to 50-65% of those seen after single dose administration, probably the effect of auto-induction of the metabolizing liver enzymes. Steady-state is reached within 3-5 days. Bosentan is eliminated by biliary excretion following metabolism in the liver. Less than 3% of an administered oral dose is recovered in urine.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Special Populations
                              
                              It is not known whether bosentan's pharmacokinetics is influenced by gender, race, or age.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Hepatic Impairment
                              
                              
                                 In vitro and in vivo evidence showing extensive hepatic metabolism of bosentan suggests that liver impairment could significantly increase exposure of bosentan. In a study comparing 8 patients with mild liver impairment (Child-Pugh Class A) to 8 controls, the single- and multiple-dose pharmacokinetics of bosentan was not altered in patients with mild hepatic impairment.
                              In another small (N=8) pharmacokinetic study, the steady-state AUC of bosentan was on average 4.7 times higher and the active metabolite Ro 48-5033 was 12.4 times higher in 5 patients with moderately impaired liver function (Child-Pugh Class B) and pulmonary arterial hypertension associated with portal hypertension than in 3 patients with normal liver function and pulmonary arterial hypertension of other etiologies.
                              The pharmacokinetics of Tracleer has not been evaluated in patients with severe liver impairment (Child-Pugh Class C) [see Dosage and Administration (2.2), Warnings and Precautions (5.3), Use in Specific Populations (8.6)].
                              
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Renal Impairment
                              
                              In patients with severe renal impairment (creatinine clearance 15–30 mL/min), plasma concentrations of bosentan were essentially unchanged and plasma concentrations of the three metabolites were increased about 2-fold compared to people with normal renal function. These differences do not appear to be clinically important.
                              
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         