
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
                  See also 
                        Contraindications (4)
                      and 
                        Clinical Pharmacology (12.3).
                  
               
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           STRIBILD is a complete regimen for the treatment of HIV-1 infection; therefore, STRIBILD should not be administered with other antiretroviral medications for treatment of HIV-1 infection. (5.4, 7.1)
                           STRIBILD can alter the concentration of drugs metabolized by CYP3A or CYP2D6. Drugs that induce CYP3A can alter the concentrations of one or more components of STRIBILD. Consult the full prescribing information prior to and during treatment for potential drug-drug interactions. (4, 7.2, 7.3, 12.3)
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1       Other Antiretroviral Medications
                     
                        
                           STRIBILD is a complete regimen for the treatment of HIV-1 infection; therefore, STRIBILD should not be administered with other antiretroviral medications for treatment of HIV-1 infection. Complete information regarding potential drug-drug interactions with other antiretroviral medications is not provided. 
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2       Potential for STRIBILD to Affect Other Drugs
                     
                        Cobicistat, a component of STRIBILD, is an inhibitor of CYP3A and CYP2D6 and an  inhibitor of the following transporters: p-glycoprotein (P-gp), BCRP, OATP1B1 and OATP1B3. Thus, coadministration of STRIBILD with drugs that are primarily metabolized by CYP3A or CYP2D6, or are substrates of P-gp, BCRP, OATP1B1 or OATP1B3 may result in increased plasma concentrations of such drugs. Elvitegravir is a modest inducer of CYP2C9 and may decrease the plasma concentrations of CYP2C9 substrates.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3       Potential for Other Drugs to Affect One or More Components of STRIBILD
                     
                        Elvitegravir and cobicistat, components of STRIBILD, are metabolized by CYP3A. Cobicistat is also metabolized, to a minor extent, by CYP2D6.
                        Drugs that induce CYP3A activity are expected to increase the clearance of elvitegravir and cobicistat, resulting in decreased plasma concentration of cobicistat and elvitegravir, which may lead to loss of therapeutic effect of STRIBILD and development of resistance (see Table 6).
                        Coadministration of STRIBILD with other drugs that inhibit CYP3A may decrease the clearance and increase the plasma concentration of cobicistat (see Table 6).
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4       Drugs Affecting Renal Function
                     
                        Because emtricitabine and tenofovir, components of STRIBILD are primarily excreted by the kidneys by a combination of glomerular filtration and active tubular secretion, coadministration of STRIBILD with drugs that reduce renal function or compete for active tubular secretion may increase concentrations of emtricitabine, tenofovir, and other renally eliminated drugs and this may increase the risk of adverse reactions. Some examples of drugs that are eliminated by active tubular secretion include, but are not limited to acyclovir, cidofovir, ganciclovir, valacyclovir, valganciclovir, aminoglycosides (e.g., gentamicin), and high-dose or multiple NSAIDs [see Warnings and Precautions (5.3)].  
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.5       Established and Other Potentially Significant Interactions 
                     
                        Table 6 provides a listing of established or potentially clinically significant drug interactions. The drug interactions described are based on studies conducted with either STRIBILD, the components of STRIBILD, (elvitegravir, cobicistat, emtricitabine, and tenofovir DF) as individual agents and/or in combination, or are predicted drug interactions that may occur with STRIBILD [for magnitude of interaction, see 
                              Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)
                           ]. The table includes potentially significant interactions but is not all inclusive.
                        


                     



                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.6       Drugs without Clinically Significant Interactions with STRIBILD
                     
                        Based on drug interaction studies conducted with the components of STRIBILD, no clinically significant drug interactions have been either observed or are expected when STRIBILD is combined with the following drugs: entecavir, famciclovir, H2 receptor antagonists, methadone, proton pump inhibitors, and ribavirin.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         