
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        Mechanism of Action
                     
                     
                        Leflunomide is an isoxazole immunomodulatory agent which inhibits dihydroorotate dehydrogenase (an enzyme involved in de novo pyrimidine synthesis) and has antiproliferative activity. Several in vivo and in vitro experimental models have demonstrated an anti-inflammatory effect. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        Pharmacokinetics
                     
                     
                        Following oral administration, leflunomide is metabolized to an active metabolite A77 1726 (hereafter referred to as M1) which is responsible for essentially all of its activity in vivo.  Plasma levels of leflunomide are occasionally seen, at very low levels. Studies of the pharmacokinetics of leflunomide have primarily examined the plasma concentrations of this active metabolite. 
                        
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           Leflunomide-02
                           
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Absorption
                           
                           
                              Following oral administration, peak levels of the active metabolite, M1, occurred between 6 to 12 hours after dosing. Due to the very long half-life of M1 (~2 weeks), a loading dose of 100 mg for 3 days was used in clinical studies to facilitate the rapid attainment of steady-state levels of M1. Without a loading dose, it is estimated that attainment of steady-state plasma concentrations would require nearly two months of dosing. The resulting plasma concentrations following both loading doses and continued clinical dosing indicate that M1 plasma levels are dose proportional. 
                              


                              


Relative to an oral solution, leflunomide tablets are 80% bioavailable. Co-administration of leflunomide tablets with a high fat meal did not have a significant impact on M1 plasma levels. 
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Distribution 
                           
                           
                              M1 has a low volume of distribution (Vss = 0.13 L/kg) and is extensively bound (>99.3%) to albumin in healthy subjects. Protein binding has been shown to be linear at therapeutic concentrations. The free fraction of M1 is slightly higher in patients with rheumatoid arthritis and approximately doubled in patients with chronic renal failure; the mechanism and significance of these increases are unknown. 
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Metabolism 
                           
                           
                              Leflunomide is metabolized to one primary (M1) and many minor metabolites. Of these minor metabolites, only 4-trifluoromethylaniline (TFMA) is quantifiable, occurring at low levels in the plasma of some patients. The parent compound is rarely detectable in plasma. At the present time the specific site of leflunomide metabolism is unknown. In vivo and in vitro studies suggest a role for both the GI wall and the liver in drug metabolism. No specific enzyme has been identified as the primary route of metabolism for leflunomide; however, hepatic cytosolic and microsomal cellular fractions have been identified as sites of drug metabolism. 
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Elimination
                           
                           
                              The active metabolite M1 is eliminated by further metabolism and subsequent renal excretion as well as by direct biliary excretion. In a 28 day study of drug elimination (n=3) using a single dose of radiolabeled compound, approximately 43% of the total radioactivity was eliminated in the urine and 48% was eliminated in the feces. Subsequent analysis of the samples revealed the primary urinary metabolites to be leflunomide glucuronides and an oxanilic acid derivative of M1. The primary fecal metabolite was M1. Of these two routes of elimination, renal elimination is more significant over the first 96 hours after which fecal elimination begins to predominate. In a study involving the intravenous administration of M1, the clearance was estimated to be 31 mL/hr. 
                              In small studies using activated charcoal (n=1) or cholestyramine (n=3) to facilitate drug elimination, the in vivo plasma half-life of M1 was reduced from >1 week to approximately 1 day (see 
                                    PRECAUTIONS, General,  
                                 
                                 
                                    Need for Drug Elimination
                                 
                                 ), Similar reductions in plasma half-life were observed for a series of volunteers (n=96) enrolled in pharmacokinetic trials who were given cholestyramine. This suggests that biliary recycling is a major contributor to the long elimination half-life of M1. Studies with both hemodialysis and CAPD (chronic ambulatory peritoneal dialysis) indicate that M1 is not dialyzable.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Special Populations
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    Gender
                                 
                                 
                                    Gender has not been shown to cause a consistent change in the in vivo pharmacokinetics of M1.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    Age
                                 
                                 
                                    Age has been shown to cause a change in the in vivo pharmacokinetics of M1 (see 
                                          CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY, 
                                          Special Populations, 
                                       
                                       
                                           Pediatrics
                                       ).
                                    
                                    
                                    
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    Smoking
                                 
                                 
                                    A population based pharmacokinetic analysis of the phase III data indicates that smokers have a 38% increase in clearance over non-smokers; however, no difference in clinical efficacy was seen between smokers and nonsmokers.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    Chronic Renal Insufficiency
                                 
                                 
                                    In single dose studies in patients (n=6) with chronic renal insufficiency requiring either chronic ambulatory peritoneal dialysis (CAPD) or hemodialysis, neither had a significant impact on circulating levels of M1. The free fraction of M1 was almost doubled, but the mechanism of this increase is not known. In light of the fact that the kidney plays a role in drug elimination and without adequate studies of leflunomide use in subjects with renal insufficiency, caution should be used when leflunomide is administered to these patients.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    Hepatic Insufficiency
                                 
                                 
                                    Studies of the effect of hepatic insufficiency on M1 pharmacokinetics have not been done. Given the need to metabolize leflunomide into the active species, the role of the liver in drug elimination/recycling, and the possible risk of increased hepatic toxicity, the use of leflunomide in patients with hepatic insufficiency is not recommended.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    Pediatrics
                                 
                                 
                                    The pharmacokinetics of M1 following oral administration of leflunomide have been investigated in 73 pediatric patients with polyarticular course Juvenile Rheumatoid Arthritis (JRA) who ranged in age from 3 to 17 years. The results of a population pharmacokinetic analysis of these trials have demonstrated that pediatric patients with body weights ≤40 kg have a reduced clearance of M1 (see Table 2) relative to adult rheumatoid arthritis patients. 
                                    


                                 



                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Drug Interactions
                           
                           
                              
                                 In vivo drug interaction studies have demonstrated a lack of a significant drug interaction between leflunomide and tri-phasic oral contraceptives, and cimetidine.
                              
                                 In vitro studies of protein binding indicated that warfarin did not affect M1 protein binding. At the same time M1 was shown to cause increases ranging from 13 to 50% in the free fraction of diclofenac, ibuprofen and tolbutamide at concentrations in the clinical range. In vitro studies of drug metabolism indicate that M1 inhibits CYP 450 2C9, which is responsible for the metabolism of phenytoin, tolbutamide, warfarin and many NSAIDs. M1 has been shown to inhibit the formation of 4′-hydroxydiclofenac from diclofenac in vitro. The clinical significance of these findings with regard to phenytoin and tolbutamide is unknown; however, there was extensive concomitant use of NSAIDs in the clinical studies and no differential effect was observed (see 
                                    PRECAUTIONS,  Drug Interactions
                                 ).
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    Methotrexate
                                 
                                 
                                    Coadministration, in 30 patients, of leflunomide (100 mg/day x 2 days followed by 10 to 20 mg/day) with methotrexate (10 to 25 mg/week, with folate) demonstrated no pharmacokinetic interaction between the two drugs. However, co-administration increased risk of hepatotoxicity (see 
                                          PRECAUTIONS, Drug Interactions, 
                                       
                                       
                                          Hepatotoxic Drugs
                                       
                                       ). 
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    Rifampin
                                 
                                 
                                    Following concomitant administration of a single dose of leflunomide to subjects receiving multiple doses of rifampin, M1 peak levels were increased (~40%) over those seen when leflunomide was given alone. Because of the potential for leflunomide levels to continue to increase with multiple dosing, caution should be used if patients are to receive both leflunomide and rifampin.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         