
                     
                     
                     Other
                     
                        Haloperidol decanoate injection, 50 mg/mL and haloperidol decanoate injection, 100 mg/mL should be administered cautiously to patients: 
                        
                           with severe cardiovascular disorders, because of the possibility of transient hypotension and/or precipitation of anginal pain. Should hypotension occur and a vasopressor be required, epinephrine should not be used since haloperidol may block its vasopressor activity, and paradoxical further lowering of the blood pressure may occur. Instead, metaraminol, phenylephrine or norepinephrine should be used. 
                           receiving anticonvulsant medications, with a history of seizures, or with EEG abnormalities, because haloperidol may lower the convulsive threshold. If indicated, adequate anticonvulsant therapy should be concomitantly maintained.
                           with known allergies, or with a history of allergic reactions to drugs. 
                           receiving anticoagulants, since an isolated instance of interference occurred with the effects of one anticoagulant (phenindione).
                        
                        If concomitant antiparkinson medication is required, it may have to be continued after haloperidol decanoate injection, 50 mg/mL or haloperidol decanoate injection, 100 mg/mL is discontinued because of the prolonged action of haloperidol decanoate. If both drugs are discontinued simultaneously, extrapyramidal symptoms may occur. The physician should keep in mind the possible increase in intraocular pressure when anticholinergic drugs, including antiparkinson agents, are administered concomitantly with haloperidol decanoate. 
                        When haloperidol decanoate is used to control mania in cyclic disorders, there may be a rapid mood swing to depression.
                         Severe neurotoxicity (rigidity, inability to walk or talk) may occur in patients with thyrotoxicosis who are also receiving antipsychotic medication, including haloperidol.
                     
                     
                  
               