
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Timolol maleate is a beta1 and beta2 (non-selective) adrenergic receptor blocking agent that does not have significant intrinsic sympathomimetic, direct myocardial depressant, or local anesthetic (membrane-stabilizing) activity.
                        Timolol Maleate Ophthalmic Gel Forming Solution, when applied topically on the eye, has the action of reducing elevated, as well as normal intraocular pressure, whether or not accompanied by glaucoma. Elevated intraocular pressure is a major risk factor in the pathogenesis of glaucomatous visual field loss and optic nerve damage.
                        The precise mechanism of the ocular hypotensive action of Timolol Maleate Ophthalmic Gel Forming Solution is not clearly established at this time. Tonography and fluorophotometry studies of timolol maleate ophthalmic solution in man suggest that its predominant action may be related to reduced aqueous formation. However, in some studies, a slight increase in outflow facility was also observed.
                        Beta-adrenergic receptor blockade reduces cardiac output in both healthy subjects and patients with heart disease. In patients with severe impairment of myocardial function, beta-adrenergic receptor blockade may inhibit the stimulatory effect of the sympathetic nervous system necessary to maintain adequate cardiac function.
                        Beta-adrenergic receptor blockade in the bronchi and bronchioles results in increased airway resistance from unopposed parasympathetic activity. Such an effect in patients with asthma or other bronchospastic conditions is potentially dangerous.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        In a study of plasma drug concentration in six subjects, the systemic exposure to timolol was determined following once daily administration of Timolol Maleate Ophthalmic Gel Forming Solution 0.5% in the morning. The mean peak plasma concentration following this morning dose was 0.28 ng/mL.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         