
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
                  No formal drug-drug interaction studies have been conducted for Angeliq.
               
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              •Inducers and inhibitors of CYP3A4 may affect estrogen drug metabolism and decrease or increase the estrogen plasma concentration (7.1)
                           
                              •Serum potassium concentration may increase in women taking drospirenone with other drugs that have the potential to increase potassium (7.1)
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 Metabolic Interactions
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Effect of Drospirenone on Other Drugs
                           
                              The potential effect of DRSP on CYP2C19 activity was investigated in a clinical pharmacokinetic study using omeprazole as a marker substrate. No significant effect of DRSP on the systemic clearance of the CYP3A4 product omeprazole sulfone was found. These results demonstrated that DRSP did not inhibit CYP2C19 and CYP3A4 in vivo. Two further clinical drug-drug interaction studies using simvastatin and midazolam as marker substrates for CYP3A4, respectively, were performed and the results of these studies demonstrated that pharmacokinetics of the CYP3A4 substrates were not influenced by steady-state DRSP concentrations.
                              Co-administration of DRSP and drugs that may increase serum potassium: There is a potential for an increase in serum potassium in women taking DRSP with other drugs that may affect electrolytes, such as ACE inhibitors, angiotensin receptor blockers, or NSAIDs, more pronounced in diabetic women [see Warnings and Precautions (5.2), and Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)]. 
                              Electrolytes were studied in postmenopausal women with hypertension and/or diabetes mellitus requiring an ACE inhibitor or angiotensin receptor blocker. After 28 days of exposure to 1 mg E2 and 3 mg DRSP (n=112) or placebo (n=118). The mean change from baseline in serum potassium was 0.11 mEq/L for the E2/DRSP group and 0.08 mEq/L for the placebo group. None of the subjects with serum potassium concentrations ≥5.5 mEq/L had cardiovascular adverse events. 
                              A drug-drug interaction study of DRSP 3 mg/E2 1 mg versus placebo was performed in mildly hypertensive postmenopausal women taking enalapril maleate 10 mg twice daily. Potassium concentrations were obtained every other day for a total of 2 weeks in all subjects. Mean serum potassium concentrations in the DRSP/E2 treatment group relative to baseline were 0.22 mEq/L higher than those in the placebo group. On Day 14, the ratios for serum potassium Cmax and AUC in the DRSP/E2 group to those in the placebo group were 0.955 (90% CI: 0.914, 0.999) and 1.01 (90% CI: 0.944, 1.08), respectively. No patient in either treatment group developed hyperkalemia (serum potassium concentrations >5.5 mEq/L). 
                              Of note, occasional or chronic use of NSAID medication was not restricted in any of the Angeliq clinical trials.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Effect of Other Drugs on Estrogens and Progestins
                           
                              
                                 In vitro and in vivo studies have shown that estrogens and progestins are metabolized partially by cytochrome P450 3A4 (CYP3A4). Therefore, inducers or inhibitors of CYP3A4 may affect estrogen drug metabolism. In a clinical drug-drug interaction study conducted in premenopausal women, once daily co-administration of DRSP 3 mg/E2 1.5 mg containing tablets with strong CYP3A4 inhibitor, ketoconazole 200 mg twice daily for 10 days resulted in a moderate increase of exposure and a mild increase of peak concentration for DRSP. The E2 exposure and peak concentration were unaffected by ketoconazole, although the exposure and peak concentration of estrone (E1) increased. Although no clinically relevant effects on any safety or laboratory parameters including serum potassium were observed, this study only assessed subjects for 10 days. The clinical impact for a woman taking a DRSP-containing combination hormone and chronic use of a CYP3A4/5 inhibitor is unknown.
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Substances decreasing the exposure and possibly diminishing the efficacy of estrogens and progestins (enzyme inducers)  
                                 
                                    Inducers of CYP3A4 such as St. John's wort (Hypericum perforatum), phenobarbital, carbamazepine, and rifampin may reduce plasma concentrations of estrogens and progestins, possibly resulting in a decrease in therapeutic effects and/or changes in the uterine bleeding profile.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Substances increasing the exposure of estrogens and progestins (enzyme inhibitors)  
                                 
                                    Concomitant administration of moderate or strong CYP3A4 inhibitors such as azole antifungals (for example, ketoconazole, itraconazole, voriconazole, fluconazole), verapamil, macrolides (for example, clarithromycin, erythromycin), diltiazem, and grapefruit juice did increase the plasma concentrations of the estrogen or the progestin or both [see Warnings and Precautions (5.2) and Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                                    
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 HIV/HCV protease inhibitors and non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors  
                                 
                                    Significant changes (increase or decrease) in the plasma concentrations of estrogen and progestin have been noted in some cases of co-administration with HIV/HCV protease inhibitors or with non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors. 
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 Interaction with Alcohol
                     
                        Acute alcohol ingestion during use of hormone therapy may lead to elevations of circulating E2 concentrations.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         