
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  EstroGel provides systemic estrogen therapy by releasing estradiol, the major estrogenic hormone secreted by the human ovary.
               
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Endogenous estrogens are largely responsible for the development and maintenance of the female reproductive system and secondary sexual characteristics. Although circulating estrogens exist in a dynamic equilibrium of metabolic interconversions, estradiol is the principal intracellular human estrogen and is substantially more potent than its metabolites, estrone and estriol, at the receptor level. 
                        The primary source of estrogen in normally cycling adult women is the ovarian follicle, which secretes 70 to 500 mcg of estradiol daily, depending on the phase of the menstrual cycle. After menopause, most endogenous estrogen is produced by conversion of androstenedione, secreted by the adrenal cortex, to estrone in the peripheral tissues. Thus, estrone and the sulfate‑conjugated form, estrone sulfate, are the most abundant circulating estrogens in postmenopausal women.
                        Estrogens act through binding to nuclear receptors in estrogen-responsive tissues. To date, two estrogen receptors have been identified.  These vary in proportion from tissue to tissue.
                        Circulating estrogens modulate the pituitary secretion of the gonadotropins, luteinizing hormone (LH) and FSH through a negative feedback mechanism. Estrogens act to reduce the elevated levels of these hormones seen in postmenopausal women.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        There are no pharmacodynamic data for EstroGel.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        
                           Absorption
                        
                        Estradiol is transported across intact skin and into the systemic circulation by a passive diffusion process. The rate of diffusion across the stratum corneum is the rate-limiting factor. When EstroGel is applied to the skin, it dries in 2 to 5 minutes.
                        EstroGel 1.25 g (containing 0.75 mg of estradiol) was administered to 24 postmenopausal women once daily on the posterior surface of 1 arm from wrist to shoulder for 14 consecutive days. Mean maximal serum concentrations of estradiol and estrone on Day 14 were 46.4 pg/mL and 64.2 pg/mL, respectively. The time‑averaged serum estradiol and estrone concentrations over the 24-hour dose interval after administration of 1.25 g EstroGel on Day 14 are 28.3 pg/mL and 48.6 pg/mL, respectively. Mean concentration-time profiles for unadjusted estradiol and estrone on Day 14 are shown in Figure 1.
                        
                           Figure 1 Mean Serum Concentration-time Profiles for Unadjusted Estradiol and Estrone After Multiple-dose Applications of 1.25 g EstroGel 0.06% for 14 Days 
                        
                        The serum concentrations of estradiol following 2.5 g EstroGel applications (1.25 g on each arm from wrist to shoulder) appeared to reach steady state after the third daily application.

                           

                           Distribution
                        
                        The distribution of exogenous estrogens is similar to that of endogenous estrogens. Estrogens are widely distributed in the body and are generally found in higher concentrations in the sex hormone target organs. Estrogens circulate in blood largely bound to SHBG and albumin.

                           

                           Metabolism
                        
                        Exogenous estrogens are metabolized in the same manner as endogenous estrogens. Circulating estrogens exist in a dynamic equilibrium of metabolic interconversions. These transformations take place mainly in the liver. Estradiol is converted reversibly to estrone, and both can be converted to estriol, which is a major urinary metabolite. Estrogens also undergo enterohepatic recirculation via sulfate and glucuronide conjugation in the liver, biliary secretion of conjugates into the intestine, and hydrolysis in the intestine followed by reabsorption. In postmenopausal women, a significant proportion of the circulating estrogens exist as sulfate conjugates, especially estrone sulfate, which serves as a circulating reservoir for the formation of more active estrogens. Although the clinical significance has not been determined, estradiol from EstroGel does not go through first‑pass liver metabolism.  

                           

                           Excretion
                        
                        Estradiol, estrone, and estriol are excreted in the urine along with glucuronide and sulfate conjugates.
                        The apparent terminal exponential half-life for estradiol was about 36 hours following administration of 1.25 g EstroGel.

                           

                           Use in Specific Populations
                        
                        No pharmacokinetic studies were conducted in special populations, including patients with renal or hepatic impairment.

                           

                           Effect of Application Site Washing
                        
                        The effect of application site washing on the serum concentrations of estradiol was determined in 24 healthy postmenopausal women who applied 1.25 g of EstroGel once daily for 14 consecutive days. Site washing 1 hour after the application resulted in a 22 percent mean decrease in average 24-hour serum concentrations of estradiol.

                           

                           Potential for Estradiol Transfer
                        
                        The effect of estradiol transfer was evaluated in 24 healthy postmenopausal women who topically applied 1.25 g of EstroGel once daily on the posterior surface of 1 arm from wrist to shoulder for a period of 14 consecutive days. On each day, 1 hour after gel application, a cohort of 24 non-dosed healthy postmenopausal females directly contacted the dosed cohort at the site of gel application for 15 minutes.  No change in endogenous mean serum concentrations of estradiol was observed in the non-dosed cohort after direct skin-to-skin contact with subjects administered EstroGel.

                           

                           Effect of Moisturizer Lotion/Sunscreen on Estradiol Absorption
                        
                        The effect of sunscreen and moisturizer lotion on estradiol absorption from 0.06% estradiol topical gel was evaluated in a randomized, open-label, three-period crossover study in 42 healthy postmenopausal women. The study results showed that repeated daily application of sunscreen for 7 days at 1 hour after the administration of 0.06% estradiol topical gel decreased the mean AUC0-24h and Cmax of estradiol by 16%. Repeated daily application of moisturizer lotion for 7 days at 1 hour after the administration of 0.06% estradiol topical gel increased the mean AUC0-24h and Cmax of estradiol by 38% and 73%, respectively.
                        The effect of daily application of sunscreen/moisturizer lotion on estradiol absorption, when sunscreen/moisturizer lotion is applied before administration of 0.06% estradiol topical gel, was not studied.
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           Figure 1 Mean Serum Concentration-time Profiles for Unadjusted Estradiol and Estrone After Multiple-dose Applications of 1.25 g EstroGel 0.06% for 14 Days
                           
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         