
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  
               
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Fludeoxyglucose F 18 is a glucose analog that
concentrates in cells that rely upon glucose as an energy source, or in cells
whose dependence on glucose increases under pathophysiological conditions.
Fludeoxyglucose F 18 is transported through the cell membrane by facilitative
glucose transporter proteins and is phosphorylated within the cell to [18F] FDG-6-phosphate by the enzyme hexokinase. Once
phosphorylated it cannot exit until it is dephosphorylated by
glucose-6-phosphatase. Therefore, within a given tissue or pathophysiological
process, the retention and clearance of Fludeoxyglucose F 18 reflect a balance
involving glucose transporter, hexokinase and glucose-6-phosphatase activities.
When allowance is made for the kinetic differences between glucose and
Fludeoxyglucose F 18 transport and phosphorylation (expressed as the ''lumped
constant'' ratio), Fludeoxyglucose F 18 is used to assess glucose metabolism.
                        
                        In comparison to background activity of the
specific organ or tissue type, regions of decreased or absent uptake of
Fludeoxyglucose F 18 reflect the decrease or absence of glucose metabolism.
Regions of increased uptake of Fludeoxyglucose F 18 reflect greater than normal
rates of glucose metabolism.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        Fludeoxyglucose F 18 Injection is rapidly
distributed to all organs of the body after intravenous administration. After
background clearance of Fludeoxyglucose F 18 Injection, optimal PET imaging is
generally achieved between 30 to 40 minutes after administration.
                        In cancer, the cells are generally characterized
by enhanced glucose metabolism partially due to (1) an increase in activity of
glucose transporters, (2) an increased rate of phosphorylation activity, (3) a
reduction of phosphatase activity or, (4) a dynamic alteration in the balance
among all these processes. However, glucose metabolism of cancer as reflected
by Fludeoxyglucose F 18 accumulation shows considerable variability. Depending
on tumor type, stage, and location, Fludeoxyglucose F 18 accumulation may be
increased, normal, or decreased. Also, inflammatory cells can have the same
variability of uptake of Fludeoxyglucose F 18.
                        
                        In the heart, under normal aerobic conditions,
the myocardium meets the bulk of its energy requirements by oxidizing free
fatty acids. Most of the exogenous glucose taken up by the myocyte is converted
into glycogen. However, under ischemic conditions, the oxidation of free fatty
acids decreases, exogenous glucose becomes the preferred myocardial substrate,
glycolysis is stimulated, and glucose taken up by the myocyte is metabolized
immediately instead of being converted into glycogen. Under these conditions,
phosphorylated Fludeoxyglucose F 18 accumulates in the myocyte and can be
detected with PET imaging.
                        
                        In the brain, cells normally rely on aerobic
metabolism. In epilepsy, the glucose metabolism varies. Generally, during a
seizure, glucose metabolism increases. Interictally, the seizure focus tends to
be hypometabolic.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        
                           
                              Distribution:
                              
                            In four healthy male volunteers, receiving an
intravenous administration of 30 seconds in duration, the arterial blood level
profile for Fludeoxyglucose F 18 decayed triexponentially. The effective
half-life ranges of the three phases were 0.2-0.3 minutes, 10-13 minutes with a
mean and standard deviation (STD) of 11.6 (±) 1.1 min, and 80-95 minutes with a
mean and STD of 88 (±) 4 min.
                        Plasma protein binding of Fludeoxyglucose F 18
has not been studied.
                        
                        
                           
                              Metabolism:
                              
                            Fludeoxyglucose
F 18 is transported into cells and phosphorylated to [18F]-FDG-6-
phosphate at a rate proportional to the rate of glucose utilization within that
tissue. [F 18]-FDG-6-phosphate presumably is metabolized to 2-deoxy-2-[F
18]fluoro-6-phospho-D-mannose([F 18]FDM-6-phosphate).
                        
                        Fludeoxyglucose F 18 Injection may contain
several impurities (e.g., 2-deoxy-2-chloro-D-glucose (ClDG)). Biodistribution and
metabolism of ClDG are presumed to be similar to Fludeoxyglucose F 18 and would
be expected to result in intracellular formation of
2-deoxy-2-chloro-6-phospho-D-glucose (ClDG-6-phosphate) and
2-deoxy-2-chloro-6-phospho-D-mannose (ClDM-6-phosphate). The phosphorylated
deoxyglucose compounds are dephosphorylated and the resulting compounds (FDG,
FDM, ClDG, and ClDM) presumably leave cells by passive diffusion.
Fludeoxyglucose F 18 and related compounds are cleared from non-cardiac tissues
within 3 to 24 hours after administration. Clearance from the cardiac tissue
may require more than 96 hours. Fludeoxyglucose F 18 that is not involved in
glucose metabolism in any tissue is then excreted in the urine.
                        
                        
                           
                              Elimination:
                              
                            Fludeoxyglucose
F 18 is cleared from most tissues within 24 hours and can be eliminated from
the body unchanged in the urine. Three elimination phases have been identified
in the reviewed literature. Within 33 minutes, a mean of 3.9% of the
administrated radioactive dose was measured in the urine. The amount of
radiation exposure of the urinary bladder at two hours post-administration
suggests that 20.6% (mean) of the radioactive dose was present in the bladder.
                        
                           
                              Special Populations:
                            The pharmacokinetics of Fludeoxyglucose F 18
Injection have not been studied in renally-impaired, hepatically impaired or
pediatric patients. Fludeoxyglucose F 18 is eliminated through the renal
system. Avoid excessive radiation exposure to this organ system and adjacent
tissues.
                        
                        The effects of fasting, varying blood sugar
levels, conditions of glucose intolerance, and diabetes mellitus on
Fludeoxyglucose F 18 distribution in humans have not been ascertained [ see Warnings and Precautions (5.2)].
                     
                  
               
            
         