
                     
                     
                     Drug Interactions
                     
                        The risk of myopathy during treatment with HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors is increased with concurrent administration of fibric acid derivatives, lipid-modifying doses of niacin or cytochrome P450 3A4 inhibitors (e.g. cyclosporine, erythromycin, clarithromycin, and azole antifungals) (see WARNINGS, Skeletal Muscle).
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Inhibitors of cytochrome P450 3A4
                           
                              Atorvastatin is metabolized by cytochrome P450 3A4.  Concomitant administration of atorvastatin with inhibitors of cytochrome P450 3A4 can lead to increases in plasma concentrations of atorvastatin.  The extent of interaction and potentiation of effects depends on the variability of effect on cytochrome P450 3A4.
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Clarithromycin
                                 
                                    Concomitant administration of atorvastatin 80 mg with clarithromycin (500 mg twice daily) resulted in a 4.4-fold increase in atorvastatin AUC (see WARNINGS, Skeletal Muscle, and DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION).
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Erythromycin
                                 
                                    In healthy individuals, plasma concentrations of atorvastatin increased approximately 40% with co-administration of atorvastatin and erythromycin, a known inhibitor of cytochrome P450 3A4 (see WARNINGS, Skeletal Muscle).
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Combination of Protease Inhibitors
                                 
                                    Concomitant administration of atorvastatin 40 mg with ritonavir plus saquinavir (400 mg twice daily) resulted in a 3-fold increase in atorvastatin AUC. Concomitant administration of atorvastatin 20 mg with lopinavir plus ritonavir (400 mg+100 mg twice daily) resulted in a 5.9-fold increase in atorvastatin AUC (see WARNINGS, Skeletal Muscle, and DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION).
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Itraconazole
                                 
                                    Concomitant administration of atorvastatin (20 to 40 mg) and itraconazole (200 mg) was associated with a 2.5–3.3-fold increase in atorvastatin AUC.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Diltiazem hydrochloride
                                 
                                    Co-administration of atorvastatin (40 mg) with diltiazem (240 mg) was associated with higher plasma concentrations of atorvastatin.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Cimetidine
                                 
                                    Atorvastatin plasma concentrations and LDL-C reduction were not altered by co-administration of cimetidine.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Grapefruit juice
                                 
                                    Contains one or more components that inhibit CYP 3A4 and can      increase plasma concentrations of atorvastatin, especially with excessive grapefruit juice consumption (>1.2 liters per day).
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Cyclosporine
                                 
                                    Atorvastatin and atorvastatin-metabolites are substrates of the OATP1B1 transporter.  Inhibitors of the OATP1B1 (e.g. cyclosporine) can increase the bioavailability of atorvastatin. Concomitant administration of atorvastatin 10 mg and cyclosporine 5.2 mg/kg/day resulted in an 8.7-fold increase in atorvastatin AUC. In cases where co-administration of atorvastatin with cyclosporine is necessary, the dose of atorvastatin should not exceed 10 mg (see WARNINGS, Skeletal Muscle). 
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Inducers of cytochrome P450 3A4
                           
                              Concomitant administration of atorvastatin with inducers of cytochrome P450 3A4 (eg efavirenz, rifampin) can lead to variable reductions in plasma concentrations of atorvastatin. Due to the dual interaction mechanism of rifampin, simultaneous co-administration of atorvastatin with rifampin is recommended, as delayed administration of atorvastatin after administration of rifampin has been associated with a significant reduction in atorvastatin plasma concentrations.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Antacid
                           
                              When atorvastatin and Maalox® TC suspension were coadministered, plasma concentrations of atorvastatin decreased approximately 35%. However, LDL-C reduction was not altered.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Antipyrine
                           
                              Because atorvastatin does not affect the pharmacokinetics of antipyrine, interactions with other drugs metabolized via the same cytochrome isozymes are not expected.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Colestipol
                           
                              Plasma concentrations of atorvastatin decreased approximately 25% when colestipol and atorvastatin were coadministered. However, LDL-C reduction was greater when atorvastatin and colestipol were coadministered than when either drug was given alone.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Digoxin
                           
                              When multiple doses of atorvastatin and digoxin were coadministered, steady-state plasma digoxin concentrations increased by approximately 20%. Patients taking digoxin should be monitored appropriately.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Oral Contraceptives
                           
                              Coadministration of atorvastatin and an oral contraceptive increased AUC values for norethindrone and ethinyl estradiol by approximately 30% and 20%. These increases should be considered when selecting an oral contraceptive for a woman taking atorvastatin.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Warfarin
                           
                              Atorvastatin had no clinically significant effect on prothrombin time when administered to patients receiving chronic warfarin treatment.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Amlodipine
                           
                              In a drug-drug interaction study in healthy subjects, co-administration of atorvastatin 80 mg and amlodipine 10 mg resulted in an 18% increase in exposure to atorvastatin which was not clinically meaningful.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               