
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
               
                  
                     
                        Drugs that Affect Glucose Metabolism: Adjustment of insulin dosage may be needed. (7.1, 7.2, 7.3)
                        Anti-Adrenergic Drugs (e.g., beta-blockers, clonidine, guanethidine, and reserpine): Signs and symptoms of hypoglycemia may be reduced or absent. (7.3, 7.4)
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 Drugs That May Increase the Risk of Hypoglycemia
                     
                        The risk of hypoglycemia associated with AFREZZA use may be increased with antidiabetic agents, ACE inhibitors, angiotensin II receptor blocking agents, disopyramide, fibrates, fluoxetine, monoamine oxidase inhibitors, pentoxifylline, pramlintide, propoxyphene, salicylates, somatostatin analogs (e.g., octreotide), and sulfonamide antibiotics.  Dose adjustment and increased frequency of glucose monitoring may be required when AFREZZA is co-administered with these drugs.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 Drugs That May Decrease the Blood Glucose Lowering Effect of AFREZZA
                     
                        The glucose lowering effect of AFREZZA may be decreased when co-administered with  atypical antipsychotics (e.g., olanzapine and clozapine), corticosteroids, danazol, diuretics, estrogens, glucagon, isoniazid, niacin, oral contraceptives, phenothiazines, progestogens (e.g., in oral contraceptives), protease inhibitors, somatropin, sympathomimetic agents (e.g., albuterol, epinephrine, terbutaline) and thyroid hormones. Dose adjustment and increased frequency of glucose monitoring may be required when AFREZZA is co-administered with these drugs.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3 Drugs That May Increase or Decrease the Blood Glucose Lowering Effect of AFREZZA
                     
                        The glucose lowering effect of AFREZZA may be increased or decreased when co-administered with alcohol, beta-blockers, clonidine, and lithium salts. Pentamidine may cause hypoglycemia, which may sometimes be followed by hyperglycemia. Dose adjustment and increased frequency of glucose monitoring may be required when AFREZZA is co-administered with these drugs.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4 Drugs That May Affect Hypoglycemia Signs and Symptoms
                     
                        The signs and symptoms of hypoglycemia may be blunted when beta-blockers, clonidine, guanethidine, and reserpine are co-administered with AFREZZA.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         