
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Insulin lowers blood glucose levels by stimulating peripheral glucose uptake by skeletal muscle and fat, and by inhibiting hepatic glucose production. Insulin inhibits lipolysis in adipocytes, inhibits proteolysis, and enhances protein synthesis.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        The pharmacodynamic profile for orally inhaled AFREZZA 8 units relative to subcutaneously administered insulin lispro 8 units from a study in 12 patients with type 1 diabetes is shown in Figure 3(A). The median time to maximum effect of AFREZZA (measured by the peak rate of glucose infusion) was approximately 53 minutes (standard deviation of 74 minutes) and the effect then declined to near baseline levels by about 160 minutes.
                        


                        


In a study of 32 healthy subjects, the pharmacodynamic effect of AFREZZA, measured as area under the glucose infusion rate - time curve (AUC-GIR) from an euglycemic clamp, increased in a less than dose-proportional manner. This effect has been observed for subcutaneously administered insulins, but it is unknown if the diminishing pharmacodynamic benefit at higher dosage of AFREZZA parallels that which is seen with subcutaneously administered insulin.
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           Figure 3
                           
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        The insulin contained in AFREZZA is regular human insulin.  Following pulmonary absorption into systemic circulation, the metabolism and elimination are comparable to regular human insulin.
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Absorption: The pharmacokinetic profiles for orally inhaled AFREZZA 8 units relative to subcutaneously administered insulin lispro 8 units from a study in 12 patients with type 1 diabetes are shown in Figure 3(B).  The maximum serum insulin concentration was reached by 12–15 minutes after inhalation of AFREZZA 8 units and serum insulin concentrations declined to baseline by approximately 180 minutes.  However, the faster absorption of insulin from Afrezza [see Figure 3(B)] did not result in a faster onset of activity compared to insulin lispro [see Figure 3(A)]. 
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Disposition:  Systemic insulin disposition (median terminal half-life) following oral inhalation of AFREZZA 4 and 32 units was 28–39 minutes, and 145 minutes for subcutaneous regular human insulin 15 units.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Carrier Particles 
                              
                              Clinical pharmacology studies showed that carrier particles [see Description (11)] are not metabolized and are eliminated unchanged in the urine following the lung absorption.  Following oral inhalation of AFREZZA, a mean of 39% of the inhaled dose of carrier particles was distributed to the lungs and a mean of 7% of the dose was swallowed.  The swallowed fraction was not absorbed from the GI tract and was eliminated unchanged in the feces. 
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Drug Interaction:  Bronchodilators and Inhaled Steroids
                              
                              Albuterol increased the AUC insulin administered by AFREZZA by 25% in patients with asthma.  Effect of fluticasone on insulin exposures following AFREZZA administration has not been evaluated in patients with asthma; however, no significant change in insulin exposure was observed in a study in healthy volunteers.  Frequent glucose monitoring and dose reduction may be necessary for AFREZZA if it is co-administered with albuterol.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         