
                     
                     
                     Drug interactions
                     
                        All of the individual drugs cited below are well substantiated to interact with cyclosporine. In addition, concomitant nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, particularly in the setting of dehydration, may potentiate renal dysfunction.
                        Drugs That May Potentiate Renal Dysfunction
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Antibiotics: ciprofoxacin, gentamicin, tobramycin, vancomycin, tremethoprim with sulfamethoxazole
                              Antineoplastic: melphalan
                              Antifungals:amphotericin B, ketoconazole
                              Anti-Inflammatory Drugs: azapropazon, colchicine, diclofenac, naproxen, sulindac
                              Gastrointestinal Agents: cimetidine, ranitidine
                              Immunosuppressives: tacrolimus
                              Other Drugs: fibric acid derivatives (e.g., bezafibrate, fenofibrate)
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Drugs That Alter Cyclosporine Concentrations 
                           
                              Compounds that decrease cyclosporine absorption such as orlistat should be avoided. Cyclosporine is extensively metabolized by cytochrome P-450 3A. Substances that inhibit this enzyme could decrease metabolism and increase cyclosporine concentrations. Substances that are inducers of cytochrome P-450 activity could increase metabolism and decrease cyclosporine concentrations. Monitoring of circulating cyclosporine concentrations and appropriate cyclosporine dosage adjustment are essential when these drugs are used concomitantly. (See Blood Level Monitoring.)
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Drugs That Increase Cyclosporine Concentrations
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    Calcium Channel Blockers: diltiazem, nicardipine,verapamil
                                    Antifungals: fluconazole, intraconazole, ketoconazole
                                    Antibiotics: azithromycin, clarithromycin, erythromycin, quinupristin/dalfopristin
                                    Glucocorticoids: methylprednisolone
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Other Drugs:
                           
                              Allopurinol, amiodarone, bromcriptine, colchicine, danazol, imatinib, metclopramide oral contraceptives.
                              The HIV protease inhibitors (e.g., indinavir, nelfinavir, ritonavir, and saquinavir) are known to inhibit cytochrome P-450 3A and thus could potentially increase the concentrations of cyclosporine, however no formal studies of the interaction are available. Care should be exercised when these drugs are administered concomitantly.
                              Grapefruit and grapefruit juice affect metabolism, increasing blood concentrations of cyclosporine, thus should be avoided.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Drugs/Dietary Supplements That Decrease Cyclosporine Concentrations
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    Antibiotics: nafcillin, rifampin
                                    Anticonvulsants: carbamazepine, phenobarbital, phenytoin
                                    Other Drugs/Dietary Supplements: octreotide, orlistat, sulfinpyrazone, terbinafine,ticlopidine, St. John's Wort
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    There have been reports of a serious drug interaction between cyclosporine and the herbal dietary supplement, St. John’s Wort. This interaction has been reported to produce a marked reduction in the blood concentrations of cyclosporine, resulting in subtherapeuticlevels, rejection of transplanted organs, and graft loss. 
                                    Rifabutin is known to increase the metabolism of other drugs metabolized by the cytochrome P-450 system. The interaction between rifabutin and cyclosporine has not been studied. Care should be exercised when these two drugs are administered concomitantly.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Nonsteroidal Anti-inflammatory Drug (NSAID) Interactions 
                           
                              Clinical status and serum creatinine should be closely monitored when cyclosporine is used with nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory agents in rheumatoid arthritis patients. (See WARNINGS.)
                              Pharmacodynamic interactions have been reported to occur between cyclosporine and both naproxen and sulindac, in that concomitant use is associated with additive decreases in renal function, as determined by 99mTc-diethylenetriaminepentaacetic acid (DTPA) and (p-aminohippuric acid) PAH clearances. Although concomitant administration of diclofenac does not affect blood levels of cyclosporine, it has been associated with approximate doubling of diclofenac blood levels and occasional reports of reversible decreases in renal function. Consequently, the dose of diclofenac should be in the lower end of the therapeutic range.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Methotrexate Interaction
                           
                              Preliminary data indicate that when methotrexate and cyclosporine were coadministered to rheumatoid arthritis patients (N=20), methotrexate concentrations (AUCs) were increased approximately 30% and the concentrations (AUCs) of its metabolite, 7-hydroxy methotrexate, were decreased by approximately 80%. The clinical significance of this interaction is not known. Cyclosporine concentrations do not appear to have been altered (N=6).
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Other Drug Interactions
                           
                              Cyclosporine may reduce the clearance of digoxin, colchicine, prednisolone and HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors (statins). Severe digitalis toxicity has been seen within days of starting cyclosporine in several patients taking digoxin. There are also reports on the potential of cyclosporine to enhance the toxic effects of colchicine such as myopathy and neuropathy, especially in patients with renal dysfunction. If digoxin or colchicine are used concurrently with cyclosporine, close clinical observation is required in order to enable early detection of toxic manifestations of digoxin or colchicine, followed by reduction of dosage and its withdrawal.
                              Literature and postmarketing cases of myotoxicity, including muscle pain and weakness, myositis, and rhabdomyolysis, have been reported with concomitant administration of cyclosporine with lovastatin, simvastatin, atorvastatin, pravastatin, and rarely, fluvastatin. When concurrently administered with cyclosporine, the dosage of these statins should be reduced according to label recommendations. Statin therapy needs to be temporarily withheld or discontinued in patients with signs and symptoms of myopathy or those with risk factors predisposing to severe renal injury, including renal failure, secondary to rhabdomyolysis. Cyclosporine should not be used with potassium-sparing diuretics because hyperkalemia can occur. Caution is also required when cyclosporine is coadministered with potassium-sparing drugs (e.g., angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors, angiotensin II receptor antagonists), potassium-containing drugs as well as in patients on a potassium-rich diet. Control of potassium levels in these situations is advisable.
                              Elevations in serum creatinine were observed in studies using sirolimus in combination with full-dose cyclosporine. This effect is often reversible with cyclosporine dose reduction. Simultaneous coadministration of cyclosporine significantly increases blood levels of sirolimus. To minimize increases in sirolimus blood concentrations, it is recommended that sirolimus be given 4 hours after cyclosporine administration.
                              During treatment with cyclosporine, vaccination may be less effective. The use of live vaccines should be avoided. Frequent gingival hyperplasia with nifedipine, and convulsions with high-dose methylprednisolone have been reported.
                              Psoriasis patients receiving other immunosuppressive agents or radiation therapy (including PUVA and UVB) should not receive concurrent cyclosporine because of the possibility of excessive immunosuppression.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               