
               
               
               7     DRUG INTERACTIONS
					
               
                  Panobinostat is a CYP3A substrate and inhibits CYP2D6. Panobinostat is a P-glycoprotein (P-gp) transporter system substrate.
               
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           Strong CYP3A4 inhibitors: Reduce FARYDAK dose. (7.1)
                           Strong CYP3A4 inducers:  Avoid concomitant use with FARYDAK. (7.2)
                           Sensitive CYP2D6 substrates:  Avoid concomitant use with FARYDAK. (7.3)
                           Anti-arrhythmic drugs/QT-prolonging drugs: Avoid concomitant use. (7.4) 
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1     Agents that May Increase FARYDAK Blood Concentrations
							
                     
                        
                           CYP3A Inhibitors: Coadministration of FARYDAK with a strong CYP3A inhibitor increased the Cmax and AUC of panobinostat by 62% and 73% respectively, compared to when FARYDAK was given alone [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)]. 
                        Reduce dose to 10 mg when coadministered with strong CYP3A inhibitors (e.g., boceprevir, clarithromycin, conivaptan, indinavir, itraconazole, ketoconazole, lopinavir/ritonavir, nefazodone, nelfinavir, posaconazole, ritonavir, saquinavir, telaprevir, telithromycin, voriconazole) [see Dosage and Administration (2.5)]. Instruct patients to avoid star fruit, pomegranate or pomegranate juice, and grapefruit or grapefruit juice because these foods are known to inhibit CYP3A enzymes.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2     Agents that May Decrease FARYDAK Plasma Concentrations 
							
                     
                        
                           CYP3A Inducers: Coadministration of FARYDAK with strong CYP3A inducers was not evaluated in vitro or in a clinical trial however, a reduction in panobinostat exposure is likely. An approximately 70% decrease in the systemic exposure of panobinostat in the presence of strong inducers of CYP3A was observed in simulations using mechanistic models. Therefore, the concomitant use of strong CYP3A inducers should be avoided [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3     Agents whose Plasma Concentrations May be Increased by FARYDAK
							
                     
                        
                           CYP2D6 Substrates: FARYDAK increased the median Cmax and AUC of a sensitive substrate of CYP2D6 by approximately 80% and  60%, respectively; however this was highly variable [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)]. Avoid coadministrating FARYDAK with sensitive CYP2D6 substrates (i.e., atomoxetine, desipramine, dextromethorphan, metoprolol, nebivolol, perphenazine, tolterodine, and venlafaxine) or CYP2D6 substrates that have a narrow therapeutic index (i.e., thioridazine, pimozide). If concomitant use of CYP2D6 substrates is unavoidable, monitor patients frequently for adverse reactions.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4     Drugs that Prolong QT interval
							
                     
                        Concomitant use of anti-arrhythmic medicines (including, but not limited to amiodarone, disopyramide, procainamide, quinidine and sotalol) and other drugs that are known to prolong the QT interval (including, but not limited to chloroquine, halofantrine, clarithromycin, methadone, moxifloxacin, bepridil and pimozide) is not recommended. Anti-emetic drugs with known QT prolonging risk, such as dolasetron, ondansetron, and tropisetron can be used with frequent ECG monitoring [see Warnings and Precautions (5.2)].
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         