
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY

                  

                  PharmacodynamicsBupropion is a relatively weak inhibitor of the neuronal uptake 
of norepinephrine and dopamine, and does not inhibit monoamine oxidase or the 
re-uptake of serotonin. While the mechanism of action of bupropion, as with 
other antidepressants, is unknown, it is presumed that this action is mediated 
by noradrenergic and/or dopaminergic mechanisms.
                  PharmacokineticsBupropion is a racemic mixture. The pharmacologic activity and 
pharmacokinetics of the individual enantiomers have not been studied. The mean 
elimination half-life (±SD) of bupropion after chronic dosing is 21 (±9) hours, 
and steady-state plasma concentrations of bupropion are reached within 8 days.In a study comparing 14-day dosing with a bupropion hydrochloride 
extended-release tablet 300 mg once daily to the immediate-release formulation 
of bupropion at 100 mg 3 times daily, equivalence was demonstrated for peak 
plasma concentration and area under the curve for bupropion and the 3 
metabolites (hydroxybupropion, threohydrobupropion, and erythrohydrobupropion). 
Additionally, in a study comparing 14-day dosing with a bupropion hydrochloride 
extended-release tablet 300 mg once daily to the sustained-release formulation 
of bupropion at 150 mg 2 times daily, equivalence was demonstrated for peak 
plasma concentration and area under the curve for bupropion and the 3 
metabolites.

                  

                  AbsorptionFollowing oral administration of bupropion hydrochloride 
extended-release tablets (XL) to healthy volunteers, time to peak plasma 
concentrations for bupropion was approximately 5 hours and food did not affect 
the Cmax or AUC of bupropion.
                  Distribution

                     In vitro tests show that bupropion is 
84% bound to human plasma proteins at concentrations up to 200 mcg/mL. The 
extent of protein binding of the hydroxybupropion metabolite is similar to that 
for bupropion, whereas the extent of protein binding of the threohydrobupropion 
metabolite is about half that seen with bupropion.
                  MetabolismBupropion is extensively metabolized in humans. Three metabolites 
have been shown to be active: hydroxybupropion, which is formed via 
hydroxylation of the tert-butyl group of bupropion, 
and the amino-alcohol isomers threohydrobupropion and erythrohydrobupropion, 
which are formed via reduction of the carbonyl group. In 
vitro findings suggest that cytochrome P450IIB6 (CYP2B6) is the principal 
isoenzyme involved in the formation of hydroxybupropion, while cytochrome P450 
isoenzymes are not involved in the formation of threohydrobupropion. Oxidation 
of the bupropion side chain results in the formation of a glycine conjugate of 
metachlorobenzoic acid, which is then excreted as the major urinary metabolite. 
The potency and toxicity of the metabolites relative to bupropion have not been 
fully characterized. However, it has been demonstrated in an antidepressant 
screening test in mice that hydroxybupropion is one half as potent as bupropion, 
while threohydrobupropion and erythrohydrobupropion are 5-fold less potent than 
bupropion. This may be of clinical importance because the plasma concentrations 
of the metabolites are as high or higher than those of bupropion.Because bupropion is extensively metabolized, there is the potential for 
drug-drug interactions, particularly with those agents that are metabolized by 
the cytochrome P450IIB6 (CYP2B6) isoenzyme. Although bupropion is not 
metabolized by cytochrome P450IID6 (CYP2D6), there is the potential for 
drug-drug interactions when bupropion is coadministered with drugs metabolized 
by this isoenzyme (see PRECAUTIONS: Drug 
Interactions).

                  
In humans, peak plasma concentrations of hydroxybupropion occur approximately 7 
hours after administration of bupropion hydrochloride extended-release tablets 
(XL). Following administration of bupropion hydrochloride extended-release 
tablets (XL), peak plasma concentrations of hydroxybupropion are approximately 7 
times the peak level of the parent drug at steady state. The elimination 
half-life of hydroxybupropion is approximately 20 (±5) hours, and its AUC at 
steady state is about 13 times that of bupropion. The times to peak 
concentrations for the erythrohydrobupropion and threohydrobupropion metabolites 
are similar to that of the hydroxybupropion metabolite. However, their 
elimination half-lives are longer, approximately 33 (±10) and 37 (±13) hours, 
respectively, and steady-state AUCs are 1.4 and 7 times that of bupropion, 
respectively.

                  

                  Bupropion and its metabolites exhibit linear kinetics following chronic 
administration of 300 to 450 mg/day.
                  
                  
                  EliminationFollowing oral administration of 200 mg of 14C-bupropion in humans, 87% and 10% of the radioactive dose 
were recovered in the urine and feces, respectively. However, the fraction of 
the oral dose of bupropion excreted unchanged was only 0.5%, a finding 
consistent with the extensive metabolism of bupropion.
                  

                  Population SubgroupsFactors or conditions altering metabolic capacity (e.g., liver 
disease, congestive heart failure [CHF], age, concomitant medications, etc.) or 
elimination may be expected to influence the degree and extent of accumulation 
of the active metabolites of bupropion.
The elimination of the major metabolites 
of bupropion may be affected by reduced renal or hepatic function because they 
are moderately polar compounds and are likely to undergo further metabolism or 
conjugation in the liver prior to urinary excretion
                  HepaticThe effect of hepatic impairment on the pharmacokinetics of 
bupropion was characterized in 2 single-dose studies, one in patients with 
alcoholic liver disease and one in patients with mild to severe cirrhosis. The 
first study showed that the half-life of hydroxybupropion was significantly 
longer in 8 patients with alcoholic liver disease than in 8 healthy volunteers 
(32±14 hours versus 21±5 hours, respectively). Although not statistically 
significant, the AUCs for bupropion and hydroxybupropion were more variable and 
tended to be greater (by 53% to 57%) in patients with alcoholic liver disease. 
The differences in half-life for bupropion and the other metabolites in the 2 
patient groups were minimal.The second study showed no statistically significant differences in the 
pharmacokinetics of bupropion and its active metabolites in 9 patients with mild 
to moderate hepatic cirrhosis compared to 8 healthy volunteers. However, more 
variability was observed in some of the pharmacokinetic parameters for bupropion 
(AUC, Cmax, and Tmax) and its 
active metabolites (t½) in patients with mild to moderate hepatic cirrhosis. In 
addition, in patients with severe hepatic cirrhosis, the bupropion Cmax and AUC were substantially increased (mean difference: by 
approximately 70% and 3-fold, respectively) and more variable when compared to 
values in healthy volunteers; the mean bupropion half-life was also longer (29 
hours in patients with severe hepatic cirrhosis vs 19 hours in healthy 
subjects). For the metabolite hydroxybupropion, the mean Cmax was approximately 69% lower. For the combined amino-alcohol 
isomers threohydrobupropion and erythrohydrobupropion, the mean Cmax was approximately 31% lower. The mean AUC increased by 
about 1½-fold for hydroxybupropion and about 2½-fold for 
threo/erythrohydrobupropion. The median Tmax was observed 
19 hours later for hydroxybupropion and 31 hours later for 
threo/erythrohydrobupropion. The mean half-lives for hydroxybupropion and 
threo/erythrohydrobupropion were increased 5- and 2-fold, respectively, in 
patients with severe hepatic cirrhosis compared to healthy volunteers (see WARNINGS, PRECAUTIONS, and DOSAGE AND 
ADMINISTRATION).

                  

                  RenalThere is limited information on the pharmacokinetics of bupropion 
in patients with renal impairment. An inter-study comparison between normal 
subjects and patients with end-stage renal failure demonstrated that the parent 
drug Cmax and AUC values were comparable in the 2 groups, 
whereas the hydroxybupropion and threohydrobupropion metabolites had a 2.3- and 
2.8-fold increase, respectively, in AUC for patients with end-stage renal 
failure. A second study, comparing normal subjects and patients with 
moderate-to-severe renal impairment (GFR 30.9 ± 10.8 mL/min) showed that 
exposure to a single 150 mg dose of sustained-release bupropion was 
approximately 2-fold higher in patients with impaired renal function while 
levels of the hydroxybupropion and threo/erythrohydrobupropion (combined) 
metabolites were similar in the 2 groups. The elimination of bupropion and/or 
the major metabolites of bupropion may be reduced by impaired renal function 
(see PRECAUTIONS: Renal 
Impairment).
                  Left Ventricular Dysfunction
During a chronic dosing study with bupropion in 14 depressed 
patients with left ventricular dysfunction (history of CHF or an enlarged heart 
on x-ray), no apparent effect on the pharmacokinetics of bupropion or its 
metabolites was revealed, compared to healthy volunteers.
                  AgeThe effects of age on the pharmacokinetics of bupropion and its 
metabolites have not been fully characterized, but an exploration of 
steady-state bupropion concentrations from several depression efficacy studies 
involving patients dosed in a range of 300 to 750 mg/day, on a 3 times daily 
schedule, revealed no relationship between age (18 to 83 years) and plasma 
concentration of bupropion. A single-dose pharmacokinetic study demonstrated 
that the disposition of bupropion and its metabolites in elderly subjects was 
similar to that of younger subjects. These data suggest there is no prominent 
effect of age on bupropion concentration; however, another pharmacokinetic 
study, single and multiple dose, has suggested that the elderly are at increased 
risk for accumulation of bupropion and its metabolites (see PRECAUTIONS: Geriatric 
Use).
                  GenderA single-dose study involving 12 healthy male and 12 healthy 
female volunteers revealed no sex-related differences in the pharmacokinetic 
parameters of bupropion.
                  
                  
                  SmokersThe effects of cigarette smoking on the pharmacokinetics of 
bupropion were studied in 34 healthy male and female volunteers; 17 were chronic 
cigarette smokers and 17 were nonsmokers. Following oral administration of a 
single 150 mg dose of bupropion, there was no statistically significant 
difference in Cmax, half-life, Tmax, AUC, or clearance of bupropion or its active metabolites 
between smokers and nonsmokers.CLINICAL TRIALS

                  

                  Major Depressive Disorder: The efficacy of bupropion as 
a treatment for major depressive disorder was established with the 
immediate-release formulation of bupropion in two 4-week, placebo-controlled 
trials in adult inpatients and in one 6-week, placebo-controlled trial in adult 
outpatients. In the first study, patients were titrated in a bupropion dose 
range of 300 to 600 mg/day of the immediate-release formulation on a 3 times 
daily schedule; 78% of patients received maximum doses of 450 mg/day or less. 
This trial demonstrated the effectiveness of bupropion on the Hamilton 
Depression Rating Scale (HDRS) total score, the depressed mood item (item 1) 
from that scale, and the Clinical Global Impressions (CGI) severity score. A 
second study included 2 fixed doses of the immediate-release formulation of 
bupropion (300 and 450 mg/day) and placebo. This trial demonstrated the 
effectiveness of bupropion, but only at the 450 mg/day dose of the 
immediate-release formulation; the results were positive for the HDRS total 
score and the CGI severity score, but not for HDRS item 1. In the third study, 
outpatients received 300 mg/day of the immediate-release formulation of 
bupropion. This study demonstrated the effectiveness of bupropion on the HDRS 
total score, HDRS item 1, the Montgomery-Asberg Depression Rating Scale, the CGI 
severity score, and the CGI improvement score.

                  
In a longer-term study, outpatients meeting DSM-IV criteria for major depressive 
disorder, recurrent type, who had responded during an 8-week open trial on 
bupropion (150 mg twice daily of the sustained-release formulation) were 
randomized to continuation of their same dose of bupropion or placebo, for up to 
44 weeks of observation for relapse. Response during the open phase was defined 
as CGI Improvement score of 1 (very much improved) or 2 (much improved) for each 
of the final 3 weeks. Relapse during the double-blind phase was defined as the 
investigator’s judgment that drug treatment was needed for worsening depressive 
symptoms. Patients receiving continued bupropion treatment experienced 
significantly lower relapse rates over the subsequent 44 weeks compared to those 
receiving placebo.

                  
Although there are no independent trials demonstrating the antidepressant 
effectiveness of bupropion hydrochloride extended-release tablets (XL), studies 
have demonstrated similar bioavailability of bupropion hydrochloride 
extended-release tablets (XL) to both the immediate-release formulation and to 
the sustained-release formulation of bupropion under steady-state conditions, 
i.e., bupropion hydrochloride extended-release tablets (XL) 300 mg once daily 
was shown to have bioavailability that was similar to that of 100 mg 3 times 
daily of the immediate-release formulation of bupropion and to that of 150 mg 2 
times daily of the sustained-release formulation of bupropion, with regard to 
both peak plasma concentration and extent of absorption, for parent drug and 
metabolites.

                  

                  
                     Seasonal Affective Disorder: The efficacy of 
bupropion hydrochloride extended-release tablets (XL) for the prevention of 
seasonal major depressive episodes associated with seasonal affective disorder 
was established in 3 double-blind, placebo-controlled trials in adult 
outpatients with a history of major depressive disorder with an autumn-winter 
seasonal pattern (as defined by DSM-IV criteria). Treatment was initiated prior 
to the onset of symptoms in the autumn (September to November) and was 
discontinued following a 2 week taper that began the first week of spring 
(fourth week of March), resulting in a treatment duration of approximately 4 to 
6 months for the majority of patients. At the start of the study, patients were 
randomized to receive placebo or bupropion hydrochloride extended-release 
tablets (XL) 150 mg once daily for 1 week, followed by up-titration to 300 mg 
once daily. Patients who were deemed by the investigator to be unlikely or 
unable to tolerate 300 mg once daily were allowed to remain on, or had their 
dose reduced to, 150 mg once daily. The mean bupropion hydrochloride 
extended-release tablets (XL) doses in the 3 studies ranged from 257 to 280 
mg/day.
                  In these 3 trials, the percentage of patients who were depression-free at the 
end of treatment was significantly higher for bupropion hydrochloride 
extended-release tablets (XL) than for placebo: 81.4% vs 69.7%, 87.2% vs 78.7%, 
and 84.0% vs 69.0% for Study 1, 2 and 3, respectively; with a depression-free 
rate for the 3 studies combined of 84.3% vs 72.0%.
                  
                     

                  
                  

                  
                     

                  
               
               
            
         