
               
               
               
                  7     DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  Drug interaction trials have not been conducted with COSENTYX.
               
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              Live Vaccines: Live vaccines should not be given with COSENTYX. (5.6, 7.1)
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1     Live Vaccines
                     
                        Patients treated with COSENTYX may not receive live vaccinations [see Warnings and Precautions (5.6)].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2     Non-Live Vaccines
                     
                        Patients treated with COSENTYX may receive non-live vaccinations. Healthy individuals who received a single 150 mg dose of COSENTYX 2 weeks prior to vaccination with a non-U.S. approved group C meningococcal polysaccharide conjugate vaccine and a non-U.S. approved inactivated seasonal influenza vaccine had similar antibody responses compared to individuals who did not receive COSENTYX prior to vaccination. The clinical effectiveness of meningococcal and influenza vaccines has not been assessed in patients undergoing treatment with COSENTYX [see Warnings and Precautions (5.6)].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3     CYP450 Substrates
                     
                        A role for IL-17A in the regulation of CYP450 enzymes has not been reported. The formation of CYP450 enzymes can be altered by increased levels of certain cytokines (e.g., IL-1, IL-6, IL-10, TNFα, IFN) during chronic inflammation. Thus, COSENTYX, an antagonist of IL-17A, could normalize the formation of CYP450 enzymes. Upon initiation or discontinuation of COSENTYX in patients who are receiving concomitant CYP450 substrates, particularly those with a narrow therapeutic index, consider monitoring for therapeutic effect (e.g., for warfarin) or drug concentration (e.g., for cyclosporine) and consider dosage modification of the CYP450 substrate.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         