
                     
                     
                     Drug Interactions
                     
                        Therapeutic doses of ticlopidine caused a 30% increase in the plasma half-life of antipyrine and may cause analogous effects on similarly metabolized drugs. Therefore, the dose of drugs metabolized by hepatic microsomal enzymes with low therapeutic ratios or being given to patients with hepatic impairment may require adjustment to maintain optimal therapeutic blood levels when starting or stopping concomitant therapy with ticlopidine. Studies of specific drug interactions yielded the following results:
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Aspirin and other NSAIDs
                           
                              Ticlopidine potentiates the effect of aspirin or other NSAIDs on platelet aggregation. The safety of concomitant use of ticlopidine and NSAIDs has not been established. The safety of concomitant use of ticlopidine and aspirin beyond 30 days has not been established (see : ). Aspirin did not modify the ticlopidine-mediated inhibition of ADP-induced platelet aggregation, but ticlopidine potentiated the effect of aspirin on collagen-induced platelet aggregation. Caution should be exercised in patients who have lesions with a propensity to bleed, such as ulcers. Long-term concomitant use of aspirin and ticlopidine is not recommended (see : ).
                                            CLINICAL TRIALS
                                 Stent Patients
                                 PRECAUTIONS
                                 GI Bleeding
                              
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Antacids
                           
                              Administration of ticlopidine after antacids resulted in an 18% decrease in plasma levels of ticlopidine.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Cimetidine
                           
                              Chronic administration of cimetidine reduced the clearance of a single dose of ticlopidine by 50%.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Digoxin
                           
                              Coadministration of ticlopidine with digoxin resulted in a slight decrease (approximately 15%) in digoxin plasma levels. Little or no change in therapeutic efficacy of digoxin would be expected.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Theophylline
                           
                              In normal volunteers, concomitant administration of ticlopidine resulted in a significant increase in the theophylline elimination half-life from 8.6 to 12.2 hours and a comparable reduction in total plasma clearance of theophylline.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Phenobarbital
                           
                              In 6 normal volunteers, the inhibitory effects of ticlopidine on platelet aggregation were not altered by chronic administration of phenobarbital.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Phenytoin
                           
                              studies demonstrated that ticlopidine does not alter the plasma protein binding of phenytoin. However, the protein binding interactions of ticlopidine and its metabolites have not been studied . Several cases of elevated phenytoin plasma levels with associated somnolence and lethargy have been reported following coadministration with ticlopidine. Caution should be exercised in coadministering this drug with ticlopidine, and it may be useful to remeasure phenytoin blood concentrations.
                                            In vitro
                                 in vivo
                              
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Propranolol
                           
                              studies demonstrated that ticlopidine does not alter the plasma protein binding of propranolol. However, the protein binding interactions of ticlopidine and its metabolites have not been studied . Caution should be exercised in coadministering this drug with ticlopidine.
                                            In vitro
                                 in vivo
                              
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Other Concomitant Therapy
                           
                              Although specific interaction studies were not performed, in clinical studies ticlopidine was used concomitantly with beta blockers, calcium channel blockers and diuretics without evidence of clinically significant adverse interactions (see ).
                                            PRECAUTIONS
                              
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               