
               
               
               
                  7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           Monitor patients receiving fentanyl transdermal system and any CYP3A4 inhibitor for an extended period of time and adjust dosage, if necessary. (7.1)
                           Use CNS Depressants with caution and in reduced dosage in patients who are receiving fentanyl transdermal system. (7.2)
                           Avoid fentanyl transdermal system in patients taking a monoamine oxidase (MAO) inhibitor or within 14 days of stopping such treatment. (7.3) 
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        7.1 Agents Affecting Cytochrome P450 3A4 Isoenzyme System
                     
                     
                        Fentanyl is metabolized mainly via the human cytochrome P450 3A4 isoenzyme system (CYP3A4). Coadministration with agents that induce CYP3A4 activity may reduce the efficacy of fentanyl transdermal system. The concomitant use of fentanyl transdermal system with a CYP3A4 inhibitor (such as ritonavir, ketoconazole, itraconazole, troleandomycin, clarithromycin, nelfanivir, nefazadone, amiodarone, amprenavir, aprepitant, diltiazem, erythromycin, fluconazole, fosamprenavir, verapamil, or grapefruit juice) may result in an increase in fentanyl plasma concentrations, which could increase or prolong adverse drug effects and may cause fatal respiratory depression. Closely monitor patients receiving fentanyl transdermal system and any CYP3A4 inhibitor and reduce the dosage of fentanyl transdermal system if warranted [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)]. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        7.2 Central Nervous System Depressants
                     
                     
                        The concomitant use of fentanyl transdermal system with other central nervous system depressants, including but not limited to other opioids, sedatives, hypnotics, tranquilizers (e.g., benzodiazepines), general anesthetics, phenothiazines, skeletal muscle relaxants, and alcohol, may cause respiratory depression, hypotension, and profound sedation, or potentially result in coma or death. Monitor patients closely when central nervous system depressants are used concomitantly with fentanyl transdermal system and reduce the dose of one or both agents. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        7.3 MAO Inhibitors
                     
                     
                        Avoid use of fentanyl transdermal system in the patient who would require the concomitant administration of a monoamine oxidase (MAO) inhibitor, or within 14 days of stopping such treatment because severe and unpredictable potentiation by MAO inhibitors has been reported with opioid analgesics. 
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         