
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        COCs lower the risk of becoming pregnant primarily by suppressing ovulation. Other possible mechanisms may include cervical mucus changes that inhibit sperm penetration and endometrial changes that reduce the likelihood of implantation.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        No specific pharmacodynamic studies were conducted with Lo Minastrin Fe. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        
                           Absorption
                        
                        In a single-dose, three-way, crossover clinical study conducted in 38 healthy non-smoking premenopausal women under fasting condition, norethindrone acetate and ethinyl estradiol chewable tablet chewed and swallowed was bioequivalent to norethindrone acetate 1 mg/ethinyl estradiol 10 mcg tablets (28-day regimen tablets) swallowed whole based on the exposure (AUC) and peak concentration (Cmax) of norethindrone and ethinyl estradiol.
                        Norethindrone acetate is deacetylated to norethindrone after oral administration, and the disposition of norethindrone acetate is indistinguishable from that of orally administered norethindrone. Norethindrone acetate and ethinyl estradiol are absorbed from norethindrone acetate and ethinyl estradiol chewable tablets (chewed and swallowed), with maximum plasma concentrations of norethindrone and ethinyl estradiol generally occurring at 1.5 hr (range: 0.5 to 6 hrs) and 1.5 hr (range: 1 to 2.5 hrs) post-dose, respectively. Both are subject to first-pass metabolism after oral dosing, resulting in an absolute bioavailability of approximately 64% for norethindrone and 43% for ethinyl estradiol. 
                        The plasma norethindrone and ethinyl estradiol pharmacokinetic profiles and serum sex hormone binding globulin (SHBG) concentrations following multiple-dose administration of norethindrone acetate and ethinyl estradiol combination tablets and ethinyl estradiol alone tablets were characterized in 15 healthy female volunteers. The mean plasma concentrations are shown below (Figures 1 and 2), and pharmacokinetic parameters are found in Table 1.
                        Ethinyl estradiol and norethindrone Cmax values increase by a factor of 1.4 and 1.9, respectively, following 24 days administration of norethindrone acetate and ethinyl estradiol combination tablets as compared to single-dose administration. Ethinyl estradiol and norethindrone AUC0–24h values increase by a factor of 1.6 and 2.5, respectively, following 24 days administration of norethindrone acetate and ethinyl estradiol combination tablets as compared to single-dose administration. Norethindrone concentrations more than double by Day 24 due to both accumulation and increased SHBG concentration. Steady state with respect to ethinyl estradiol and norethindrone is reached by Day 5 and Day 13, respectively.
                        
                           Figure 1. Mean (± SD) plasma ethinyl estradiol concentration versus time profiles following single- and multiple-dose oral administration of norethindrone acetate and ethinyl estradiol combination tablets and ethinyl estradiol alone tablets to healthy female volunteers (n = 15)
                        
                        
                        
                           Figure 2. Mean (± SD) plasma norethindrone concentration versus time profiles following single- and multiple-dose oral administration of norethindrone acetate and ethinyl estradiol combination tablets to healthy female volunteers (n = 15)
                        
                           
                        
                         
                          
                        


                        



                           Food Effect:  
                        
                        Lo Minastrin Fe may be administered without regard to meals. 
                        Administration of food with a single-dose of norethindrone acetate and ethinyl estradiol combination tablets decreased the maximum concentration of norethindrone by 46% and did not affect the extent of absorption; it decreased the maximum concentration of ethinyl estradiol by 41% and did not affect the extent of absorption. 
                        Administration of food with a single-dose of ethinyl estradiol alone tablets decreased the maximum concentration of ethinyl estradiol by 31% and did not affect the extent of absorption.
                        
                           Distribution
                        
                        Volume of distribution of norethindrone and ethinyl estradiol ranges from 2 to 4 L/kg. Plasma protein binding of both steroids is extensive (greater than 95%); norethindrone binds to both albumin and SHBG, whereas ethinyl estradiol binds only to albumin. Although ethinyl estradiol does not bind to SHBG, it induces SHBG synthesis.
                        
                           Metabolism
                        
                        Norethindrone undergoes extensive biotransformation, primarily via reduction, followed by sulfate and glucuronide conjugation. The majority of metabolites in the circulation are sulfates, with glucuronides accounting for most of the urinary metabolites. A small amount of norethindrone acetate is metabolically converted to ethinyl estradiol. 
                        Ethinyl estradiol is also extensively metabolized, both by oxidation and by conjugation with sulfate and glucuronide. Sulfates are the major circulating conjugates of ethinyl estradiol and glucuronides predominate in urine. The primary oxidative metabolite is 2-hydroxy ethinyl estradiol, formed by the CYP3A4 isoform of cytochrome P450. Part of the first-pass metabolism of ethinyl estradiol is believed to occur in gastrointestinal mucosa. Ethinyl estradiol may undergo enterohepatic circulation.
                        
                           Excretion
                        
                        Norethindrone and ethinyl estradiol are excreted in both urine and feces, primarily as metabolites. Plasma clearance values for norethindrone and ethinyl estradiol are similar (approximately 0.4 L/hr/kg). Elimination half-lives of norethindrone and ethinyl estradiol following administration of tablets containing the combination of 1 mg norethindrone acetate and 10 mcg ethinyl estradiol are approximately 10 hours and 16 hours, respectively.
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           Figure 1 Mean plasma ethinyl estradiol concentration-time profiles 
                           
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           Figure 2 Mean plasma norethindrone concentration-time profiles 
                           
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         