
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
                  Consult the labeling of the concurrently-used drug to obtain further information about interactions with COCs or the potential for enzyme alterations.
                  No drug-drug interaction studies were conducted with Lo Minastrin Fe. 
               
               
               
                  
                     
                        Drugs or herbal products that induce certain enzymes, including CYP3A4, may decrease the effectiveness of COCs or increase breakthrough bleeding. Counsel patients to use a back-up method or alternative method of contraception when enzyme inducers are used with COCs (7.1)
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 Effects of Other Drugs on Combined Oral Contraceptives 
                     
                        
                           
                              Substances decreasing the plasma concentrations of COCs and potentially diminishing the efficacy of COCs:
                           
                        
                        Drugs or herbal products that induce certain enzymes, including cytochrome P450 3A4 (CYP3A4), may decrease the plasma concentrations of COCs and potentially diminish the effectiveness of COCs or increase breakthrough bleeding. Some drugs or herbal products that may decrease the effectiveness of hormonal contraceptives include phenytoin, barbiturates, carbamazepine, bosentan, felbamate, griseofulvin, oxcarbazepine, rifampicin, topiramate, rifabutin, rufinamide, aprepitant and products containing St. John’s wort. Interactions between oral contraceptives and other drugs may lead to breakthrough bleeding and/or contraceptive failure. Counsel women to use an alternative method of contraception or a back-up method when enzyme inducers are used with COCs, and to continue back-up contraception for 28 days after discontinuing the enzyme inducer to ensure contraceptive reliability.
                        Colesevelam: Colesevelam, a bile acid sequestrant, given together with a combination oral hormonal contraceptive, has been shown to significantly decrease the AUC of ethinyl estradiol. A drug interaction between the contraceptive and colesevelam was decreased when the two drug products were given 4 hours apart.
                        
                           
                              Substances increasing the plasma concentrations of COCs: 
                           
                        
                        Co-administration of atorvastatin and certain COCs containing ethinyl estradiol increase AUC values for ethinyl estradiol by approximately 20-25%. Ascorbic acid and acetaminophen may increase plasma ethinyl estradiol concentrations, possibly by inhibition of conjugation. CYP3A4 inhibitors such as itraconazole, voriconazole, fluconazole, grapefruit juice, or ketoconazole may increase plasma hormone concentrations.
                        
                           
                              Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)/ Hepatitis C Virus (HCV) protease inhibitors and non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors: 
                           
                        
                        Significant changes in the plasma concentrations of the estrogen and/or progestin have been noted in some cases of co-administration with HIV protease inhibitors (decrease [for example, nelfinavir, ritonavir, darunavir/ritonavir, (fos)amprenavir/ritonavir, lopinavir/ritonavir, and tipranavir/ritonavir] or increase [for example, indinavir and atazanavir/ritonavir])/HCV protease inhibitors (decrease [for example, boceprevir and telaprevir]) or with non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors (decrease [for example, nevirapine] or increase [for example, etravirine]). 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 Effects of Combined Oral Contraceptives on Other Drugs
                     
                        COCs containing ethinyl estradiol may inhibit the metabolism of other compounds (for example, cyclosporine, prednisolone, theophylline, tizanidine, and voriconazole) and increase their plasma concentrations. COCs have been shown to decrease plasma concentrations of acetaminophen, clofibric acid, morphine, salicylic acid and temazepam. A significant decrease in the plasma concentration of lamotrigine has been shown, likely due to induction of lamotrigine glucuronidation. This may reduce seizure control; therefore, dosage adjustments of lamotrigine may be necessary.  
                        Women on thyroid hormone replacement therapy may need increased doses of thyroid hormone because serum concentration of thyroid-binding globulin increases with use of COCs [see 
                           
                              Warnings and Precautions (5.11)
                           
                           ].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3 Interference with Laboratory Tests
                     
                        The use of contraceptive steroids may influence the results of certain laboratory tests, such as coagulation factors, lipids, glucose tolerance, and binding proteins.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         