
               
               
               
                  7  DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  No drug interaction studies have been conducted with Exforge HCT and other drugs, although studies have been conducted with the individual components. A pharmacokinetic drug-drug interaction study has been conducted to address the potential for pharmacokinetic interaction between the triple combination, Exforge HCT, and the corresponding three double combinations. No clinically relevant interaction was observed.
                  
                     Amlodipine
                  
                  In clinical trials, amlodipine has been safely administered with thiazide diuretics, beta-blockers, angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors, long-acting nitrates, sublingual nitroglycerin, digoxin, warfarin, non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, antibiotics, and oral hypoglycemic drugs.
                  Cimetidine: Co-administration of amlodipine with cimetidine did not alter the pharmacokinetics of amlodipine.
                  Grapefruit juice: Co-administration of 240 mL of grapefruit juice with a single oral dose of amlodipine 10 mg in 20 healthy volunteers had no significant effect on the pharmacokinetics of amlodipine.
                  Magnesium and aluminum hydroxide (antacid): Co-administration of the magnesium and aluminum hydroxide antacid with a single dose of amlodipine had no significant effect on the pharmacokinetics of amlodipine.
                  Sildenafil: A single 100 mg dose of sildenafil in subjects with essential hypertension had no effect on the pharmacokinetic parameters of amlodipine. When amlodipine and sildenafil were used in combination, each agent independently exerted its own blood pressure lowering effect.
                  Atorvastatin: Co-administration of multiple 10 mg doses of amlodipine with 80 mg of atorvastatin resulted in no significant change in the steady state pharmacokinetic parameters of atorvastatin.
                  Digoxin: Co-administration of amlodipine with digoxin did not change serum digoxin levels or digoxin renal clearance in normal volunteers.
                  Warfarin: Co-administration of amlodipine with warfarin did not change the warfarin prothrombin response time.
                  Simvastatin: Co-administration of multiple doses of 10 mg of amlodipine with 80 mg simvastatin resulted in a 77% increase in exposure to simvastatin compared to simvastatin alone.  Limit the dose of simvastatin in patients on amlodipine to 20 mg daily.
                  
                     Valsartan
                  
                  No clinically significant pharmacokinetic interactions were observed when valsartan was co-administered with amlodipine, atenolol, cimetidine, digoxin, furosemide, glyburide, hydrochlorothiazide, or indomethacin. The valsartan-atenolol combination was more antihypertensive than either component, but it did not lower the heart rate more than atenolol alone.
                  In vitro metabolism studies have indicated that CYP450 mediated drug interaction between valsartan and co-administered drugs are unlikely because of the low extent of metabolism [see Pharmacokinetics 
                     –
                      Valsartan
                     ,
                      (12.3)].
                  Co-administration of valsartan and warfarin did not change the pharmacokinetics of valsartan or the time-course of the anticoagulant properties of warfarin.
                  As with other drugs that block angiotensin II or its effects, concomitant use of potassium sparing diuretics (e.g., spironolactone, triamterene, amiloride), potassium supplements, or salt substitutes containing potassium may lead to increases in serum potassium and in heart failure patients to increases in serum creatinine.
                  
                     Hydrochlorothiazide
                  
                  When administered concurrently the following drugs may interact with thiazide diuretics:
                  
                     Alcohol, barbiturates, or narcotics: Potentiation of orthostatic hypotension may occur.
                  
                     Antidiabetic drugs (oral agents and insulin): Dosage adjustment of the antidiabetic drug may be required.
                  
                     Other antihype
                     rtensive drugs: Additive effect or potentiation.
                  
                     Cholestyramine and colestipol resins: Absorption of hydrochlorothiazide is impaired in the presence of anionic exchange resins. Single doses of either cholestyramine or colestipol resins bind the hydrochlorothiazide and reduce its absorption from the gastrointestinal tract by up to 85% and 43% respectively.
                  
                     Corticosteroids, ACTH: Intensified electrolyte depletion, particularly hypokalemia.
                  
                     Pressor amines (e.g., norepinephrine): Possible decreased response to pressor amines but not sufficient to preclude their use.
                  
                     Skeletal muscle relaxants, nondepolarizing (e.g., tubocurarine): Possible increased responsiveness to the muscle relaxant.
                  
                     Lithium: Should not generally be given with diuretics. Diuretic agents reduce the renal clearance of lithium and add a high risk of lithium toxicity. Refer to the package insert for lithium preparations before use of such preparations with Exforge HCT.
                  
                     Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs: In some patients, the administration of a non-steroidal anti-inflammatory agent can reduce the diuretic, natriuretic, and antihypertensive effects of loop, potassium-sparing and thiazide diuretics.
                  
                     Carbamazepine: May lead to symptomatic hyponatremia.
               
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           Amlodipine: 
                        
                        
                           If simvastatin is co-administered with amlodipine, do not exceed doses greater than 20 mg daily of simvastatin (7)
                        
                        
                           Hydrochlorothiazide (7): 
                        
                           Alcohol, barbiturates, narcotics: Potentiation of orthostatic hypotension

                           
                           Antidiabetic drugs: Dosage adjustment of antidiabetic may be required

                           
                           Cholestyramine and colestipol: Reduced absorption of thiazides 

                           
                           Corticosteroids, ACTH: Hypokalemia, electrolyte depletion

                           
                           Lithium: Reduced renal clearance and high risk of lithium toxicity when used with diuretics. Should not be given with diuretics.

                           
                           NSAIDs: Can reduce diuretic, natriuretic and antihypertensive effects of diuretics.
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        7.1 Clinical Laboratory Test Findings
                     
                     
                        Clinical laboratory test findings for Exforge HCT were obtained in a controlled trial of Exforge HCT administered at the maximal dose of 10/320/25 mg compared to maximal doses of dual therapies, i.e. valsartan/HCTZ 320/25 mg, amlodipine/valsartan 10/320 mg, and HCTZ/amlodipine 25/10 mg. Findings for the components of Exforge HCT were obtained from other trials.
                        
                           Creatinine
                           : In hypertensive patients, greater than 50% increases in creatinine occurred in 2.1% of Exforge HCT patients compared to 2.4% of valsartan/HCTZ patients, 0.7% of amlodipine/valsartan patients, and 1.8% of HCTZ/amlodipine patients.
                        In heart failure patients, greater than 50% increases in creatinine were observed in 3.9% of valsartan-treated patients compared to 0.9% of placebo-treated patients. In post-myocardial infarction patients, doubling of serum creatinine was observed in 4.2% of valsartan-treated patients and 3.4% of captopril-treated patients.
                        
                           Liver Function Tests
                           : Occasional elevations (greater than 150%) of liver chemistries occurred in Exforge HCT-treated patients.
                        
                           Blood Urea Nitrogen (BUN)
                           : In hypertensive patients, greater than 50% increases in BUN were observed in 30% of Exforge HCT-treated patients compared to 29% of valsartan/HCTZ patients, 15.8% of amlodipine/valsartan patients, and 18.5% of HCTZ/amlodipine patients. The majority of BUN values remained within normal limits.
                        In heart failure patients, greater than 50% increases in BUN were observed in 17% of valsartan-treated patients compared to 6% of placebo-treated patients.
                        
                           Serum Electrolytes (Potassium)
                           : In hypertensive patients, greater than 20% decreases in serum potassium were observed in 6.5% of Exforge HCT-treated patients compared to 3.3% of valsartan/HCTZ patients, 0.4% of amlodipine/valsartan patients, and 19.3% of HCTZ/amlodipine patients. Greater than 20% increases in potassium were observed in 3.5% of Exforge HCT-treated patients compared to 2.4% of valsartan/HCTZ patients, 6.2% of amlodipine/valsartan patients, and 2.2% of HCTZ/amlodipine patients.
                        In heart failure patients, greater than 20% increases in serum potassium were observed in 10% of valsartan-treated patients compared to 5.1% of placebo-treated patients [see Warnings and Precautions, Electrolytes and Metabolic Imbalances (5.10)].
                        
                           Neutropenia
                           : Neutropenia (<1500/L) was observed in 1.9% of patients treated with valsartan and 0.8% of patients treated with placebo.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        7.3 Drug/Food Interactions
                     
                     
                        The bioavailability of amlodipine, valsartan, and HCTZ were not altered when Exforge HCT was administered with food.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         