
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  
Peak blood levels for the individual components occur 1 to 4 hours after oral administration. The mean serum half-lives of sulfamethoxazole and trimethoprim are 10 and 8 to 10 hours, respectively. However, patients with severely impaired renal function exhibit an increase in the half-lives of both components, requiring dosage regimen adjustment (seeDOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATIONsection). Detectable amounts of sulfamethoxazole and trimethoprim are present in the blood 24 hours after drug administration. During administration of 800 mg sulfamethoxazole and 160 mg trimethoprim b.i.d., the mean steady-state plasma concentration of trimethoprim was 1.72 mcg/mL. The steady-state mean plasma levels of free and total sulfamethoxazole were 57.4 mcg/mL and 68.0 mcg/mL, respectively. These steady-state levels were achieved after three days of drug administration.1 Excretion of sulfamethoxazole and trimethoprim is primarily by the kidneys through both glomerular filtration and tubular secretion. Urine concentrations of both sulfamethoxazole and trimethoprim are considerably higher than are the concentrations in the blood. The average percentage of the dose recovered in urine from 0 to 72 hours after a single oral dose of sulfamethoxazole and trimethoprim is 84.5% for total sulfonamide and 66.8% for free trimethoprim. Thirty percent of the total sulfonamide is excreted as free sulfamethoxazole, with the remaining as N4-acetylated metabolite.2 When administered together as sulfamethoxazole and trimethoprim, neither sulfamethoxazole nor trimethoprim affects the urinary excretion pattern of the other.

                  

                  
                     

                  
                  

                  Geriatric Pharmacokinetics:

                  The pharmacokinetics of sulfamethoxazole 800 mg and trimethoprim 160 mg were studied in 6 geriatric subjects (mean age: 78.6 years) and 6 young healthy subjects (mean age: 29.3 years) using a non-US approved formulation. Pharmacokinetic values for sulfamethoxazole in geriatric subjects were similar to those observed in young adult subjects. The mean renal clearance of trimethoprim was significantly lower in geriatric subjects compared with young adult subjects (19 mL/h/kg vs. 55 mL/h/kg). However, after normalizing by body weight, the apparent total body clearance of trimethoprim was on average 19% lower in geriatric subjects compared with young adult subjects.3

                  

                  Microbiology

                  Sulfamethoxazole inhibits bacterial synthesis of dihydrofolic acid by competing with para-aminobenzoic acid (PABA). Trimethoprim blocks the production of tetrahydrofolic acid from dihydrofolic acid by binding to and reversibly inhibiting the required enzyme, dihydrofolate reductase. Thus, sulfamethoxazole and trimethoprim blocks two consecutive steps in the biosynthesis of nucleic acids and proteins essential to many bacteria.
In vitro studies have shown that bacterial resistance develops more slowly with both sulfamethoxazole and trimethoprim in combination than with either sulfamethoxazole or trimethoprim alone.
Sulfamethoxazole and trimethoprim have been shown to be active against most strains of the following microorganisms, both in vitro and in clinical infections as described in theINDICATIONS AND USAGEsection.

                  

                  Aerobic gram-positive microorganisms:

                  Streptococcus pneumoniae

                  

                  Aerobic gram-negative microorganisms:

                  Escherichia coli (including susceptible enterotoxigenic strains implicated in traveler's diarrhea)
Klebsiella species
Enterobacter species
Haemophilus influenzae
Morganella morganii
Proteus mirabilis
Proteus vulgaris
Shigella flexneri
Shigella sonnei

                  

                  Other Organisms:

                  Pneumocystis carinii

                  

                  Susceptibility Testing Methods:

                  
                  

                  Dilution Techniques:

                  Quantitative methods are used to determine antimicrobial minimum inhibitory concentrations (MICs). These MICs provide estimates of the susceptibility of bacteria to antimicrobial compounds. The MICs should be determined using a standardized procedure. Standardized procedures are based on a dilution method4 (broth or agar) or equivalent with standardized inoculum concentrations and standardized concentrations of sulfamethoxazole/trimethoprim powder. The MIC values should be interpreted according to the following criteria:
For testing Enterobacteriaceae:MIC (mcg/mL)InterpretationSusceptible (S)Resistant (R)
When testing either Haemophilus influenzae*or Streptococcus pneumoniae:MIC (mcg/mL)Interpretation*These interpretative standards are applicable only to broth microdilution susceptibility tests with Haemophilus influenzae using Haemophilus Test Medium (HTM).4These interpretative standards are applicable only to broth microdilution susceptibility tests using cation-adjusted Mueller-Hinton broth with 2% to 5% lysed horse blood.4Susceptible (S)1/192/38Intermediate (I)Resistant (R)

                  

                  Quality Control

                  Standardized susceptibility test procedures require the use of laboratory control microorganisms to control the technical aspects of the laboratory procedures. Standard sulfamethoxazole/trimethoprim powder should provide the following range of values:
MicroorganismMIC (mcg/mL)*This quality control range is applicable only to Haemophilus influenzae ATCC 49247 tested by broth microdilution procedure using Haemophilus Test Medium (HTM).4This quality control range is applicable to tests performed by the broth microdilution method only using cation-adjusted Mueller-Hinton broth with 2% to 5% lysed horse blood.4Escherichia coliATCC 25922Haemophilus influenzae*ATCC 492470.03/0.590.25/4.75Streptococcus pneumoniaeATCC 496190.12/2.41/19

                  Diffusion Techniques:

                  Quantitative methods that require measurement of zone diameters also provide reproducible estimates of the susceptibility of bacteria to antimicrobial compounds. One such standardized procedure5 requires the use of standardized inoculum concentrations. This procedure uses paper disks impregnated with 1.25/23.75 mcg of sulfamethoxazole/trimethoprim to test the susceptibility of microorganisms to sulfamethoxazole/trimethoprim.
Reports from the laboratory providing results of the standard single-disk susceptibility test with a 1.25/23.75 mcg of sulfamethoxazole/trimethoprim disk should be interpreted according to the following criteria:
For testing Enterobacteriaceae or Haemophilus influenzae:*Zone Diameter (mm)Interpretation*These zone diameter standards are applicable only for disk diffusion testing with Haemophilus influenzae and Haemophilus Test Medium (HTM).5Susceptible (S)1115Intermediate (I)Resistant (R)
When testing Streptococcus pneumoniae:*Zone Diameter (mm)Interpretation*These zone diameter interpretative standards are applicable only to tests performed using Mueller-Hinton agar supplemented with 5% defibrinated sheep blood when incubated in 5% CO2.5Susceptible (S)1618Intermediate (I)Resistant (R)Interpretation should be as stated above for results using dilution techniques. Interpretation involves correlation of the diameter obtained in the disk test with the MIC for sulfamethoxazole/trimethoprim.

                  

                  Quality Control

                  As with standardized dilution techniques, diffusion methods require the use of laboratory control microorganisms that are used to control the technical aspects of the laboratory procedures. For the diffusion technique, the 1.25/23.75 mcg sulfamethoxazole/trimethoprim diska should provide the following zone diameters in these laboratory test quality control strains:
MicroorganismZone Diameter Ranges (mm)*This quality control range is applicable only to Haemophilus influenzae ATCC 49247 tested by a disk diffusion procedure using Haemophilus Test Medium (HTM).5This quality control range is applicable only to tests performed by disk diffusion using Mueller-Hinton agar supplemented with 5% difibrinated sheep blood when incubated in 5% CO2.5Escherichia coliATCC 259222329Haemophilus influenzae*ATCC 492472432Streptococcus pneumoniaeATCC 496192028a.Mueller-Hinton agar should be checked for excessive levels of thymidine or thymine. To determine whether Mueller-Hinton medium has sufficiently low levels of thymidine and thymine, an Enterococcus faecalis (ATCC 29212 or ATCC 33186) may be tested with sulfamethoxazole/trimethoprim disks. A zone of inhibitionmm that is essentially free of fine colonies indicates a sufficiently low level of thymidine and thymine.

                  

               
               
            
         