
               
               
               
                  12     CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1     Mechanism of Action
                     
                     
                        Coartem Tablets, a fixed dose combination of artemether and lumefantrine in the ratio of 1:6, is an antimalarial agent [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.4)].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3     Pharmacokinetics
                     
                     
                        
                           Absorption
                        
                        Following administration of Coartem Tablets to healthy volunteers and patients with malaria, artemether is absorbed with peak plasma concentrations reached about 2 hours after dosing. Absorption of lumefantrine, a highly lipophilic compound, starts after a lag-time of up to 2 hours, with peak plasma concentrations about 6 to 8 hours after administration. The single dose (4 tablets) pharmacokinetic parameters for artemether, dihydroartemisinin (DHA), an active antimalarial metabolite of artemether, and lumefantrine in adult Caucasian healthy volunteers are given in Table 3. Multiple dose data after the 6-dose regimen of Coartem Tablets in adult malaria patients are given in Table 4.
                        


                        



                           aMean ± SD Cmax, AUClast, t½  and Median tmax
                        
                        Food enhances the absorption of both artemether and lumefantrine. In healthy volunteers, the relative bioavailability of artemether was increased between 2- to 3-fold, and that of lumefantrine 16-fold when Coartem Tablets were taken after a high-fat meal compared under fasted conditions. Patients should be encouraged to take Coartem Tablets with a meal as soon as food can be tolerated [see Dosage and Administration (2.1)].
                        
                           Distribution
                        
                        Artemether and lumefantrine are both highly bound to human serum proteins in vitro (95.4% and 99.7%, respectively). Dihydroartemisinin is also bound to human serum proteins (47% to 76%). Protein binding to human plasma proteins is linear.
                        
                           Biotransformation 
                        
                        In human liver microsomes and recombinant CYP450 enzymes, the metabolism of artemether was catalyzed predominantly by CYP3A4/5. Dihydroartemisinin (DHA) is an active metabolite of artemether. The metabolism of artemether was also catalyzed to a lesser extent by CYP2B6, CYP2C9 and CYP2C19. In vitro studies with artemether at therapeutic concentrations revealed no significant inhibition of the metabolic activities of CYP1A2, CYP2A6, CYP2C9, CYP2C19, CYP2D6, CYP2E1, CYP3A4/5, and CYP4A9/11. In vitro studies with artemether, DHA, and lumefantrine at therapeutic concentrations revealed no significant induction of the metabolic activities of CYP1A1, CYP1A2, CYP2B6, CYP2C8, CYP2C9, CYP2C19, CYP3A4, or CYP3A5.
                        During repeated administration of Coartem Tablets, systemic exposure of artemether decreased significantly, while concentrations of DHA increased, although not to a statistically significant degree. The artemether/DHA AUC ratio is 1.2 after a single dose and 0.3 after 6 doses given over 3 days. This suggests that there was induction of enzymes responsible for the metabolism of artemether. 
                        In human liver microsomes and in recombinant CYP450 enzymes, lumefantrine was metabolized mainly by CYP3A4 to desbutyl-lumefantrine. The systemic exposure to the metabolite desbutyl-lumefantrine was less than 1% of the exposure to the parent compound. In vitro, lumefantrine significantly inhibits the activity of CYP2D6 at therapeutic plasma concentrations.
                        Caution is recommended when combining Coartem Tablets with substrates, inhibitors, or inducers of CYP3A4, especially antiretroviral drugs and those that prolong the QT interval (e.g., macrolide antibiotics, pimozide) [see Contraindications (4), Warnings and Precautions (5.1, 5.2, 5.3), and Drug Interactions (7)].
                        Coadministration of Coartem Tablets with CYP2D6 substrates may result in increased plasma concentrations of the CYP2D6 substrate and increase the risk of adverse reactions. In addition, many of the drugs metabolized by CYP2D6 can prolong the QT interval and should not be administered with Coartem Tablets due to the potential additive effect on the QT interval (e.g., flecainide, imipramine, amitriptyline, clomipramine) [see Warnings and Precautions (5.1, 5.4) and Drug Interactions (7.6)].
                        
                           Elimination
                        
                        Artemether and DHA are cleared from plasma with an elimination half-life of about 2 hours. Lumefantrine is eliminated more slowly, with an elimination half-life of 3 to 6 days in healthy volunteers and in patients with falciparum malaria. Demographic characteristics such as sex and weight appear to have no clinically relevant effects on the pharmacokinetics of artemether and lumefantrine.
                        In 16 healthy volunteers, neither lumefantrine nor artemether was found in the urine after administration of Coartem Tablets, and urinary excretion of DHA amounted to less than 0.01% of the artemether dose. 
                        
                           Hepatic and Renal Impairment
                        
                        No specific pharmacokinetic studies have been performed in patients with either hepatic or renal impairment. There is no significant renal excretion of lumefantrine, artemether and DHA in healthy volunteers and while clinical experience in this population is limited, no dose adjustment in renal impairment is recommended [see Dosage and Administration (2.4)].
                        
                           Pediatric Patients
                        
                        The PK of artemether, DHA, and lumefantrine were obtained in 2 pediatric studies by sparse sampling using a population-based approach. PK estimates derived from a composite plasma concentration profile for artemether, DHA, and lumefantrine are provided in Table 4. 
                        Systemic exposure to artemether, DHA, and lumefantrine, when dosed on a mg/kg body weight basis in pediatric patients (≥5 to <35 kg body weight), is comparable to that of the recommended dosing regimen in adult patients.
                        


                        



                           Geriatric Patients
                        
                        No specific pharmacokinetic studies have been performed in patients older than 65 years of age.
                        
                           Drug Interactions
                        
                        
                           Rifampin (strong CYP3A4 inducer)
                        
                        Oral administration of rifampin (600 mg daily), a strong CYP3A4 inducer, with Coartem Tablets (6-dose regimen over 3 days) in 6 HIV-1 and tuberculosis co-infected adults without malaria resulted in significant decreases in exposure, in terms of AUC, to artemether, DHA and lumefantrine by 89%, 85% and 68%, respectively, when compared to exposure values after Coartem Tablets alone. Concomitant use of strong inducers of CYP3A4 such as rifampin, carbamazepine, phenytoin, and St. John’s wort is contraindicated with Coartem Tablets [see Contraindications (4)]. 
                        
                           Ketoconazole (potent CYP3A4 inhibitor)
                        
                        Concurrent oral administration of ketoconazole (400 mg on day 1 followed by 200 mg on days 2, 3, 4 and 5) with Coartem Tablets (single dose of 4 tablets of 20 mg artemether/120 mg lumefantrine per tablet) with a meal led to an increase in exposure, in terms of area under the curve (AUC), of artemether (2.3-fold), DHA (1.5-fold), and lumefantrine (1.6-fold) in 13 healthy subjects. The pharmacokinetics of ketoconazole was not evaluated. Based on this study, dose adjustment of Coartem Tablets is considered unnecessary when administered with ketoconazole or other CYP3A4 inhibitors. However, due to the potential for increased concentrations of lumefantrine which could lead to QT prolongation, Coartem Tablets should be used cautiously with other drugs that inhibit CYP3A4 (e.g., antiretroviral drugs, macrolide antibiotics, antidepressants, imidazole antifungal agents) [see Warnings and Precautions (5.1, 5.3)].
                        
                           Antimalarials
                        
                        The oral administration of mefloquine in 14 healthy volunteers administered as 3 doses of  500 mg, 250 mg and 250 mg, followed 12 hours later by Coartem Tablets (6 doses of 4 tablets of 20 mg artemether/120 mg lumefantrine per tablet), had no effect on plasma concentrations of artemether or the artemether/DHA ratio. In the same study, there was a 30% reduction in Cmax and 40% reduction in AUC of lumefantrine, possibly due to lower absorption secondary to a mefloquine-induced decrease in bile production. 
                        Intravenous administration of a single dose of quinine (10 mg/kg bodyweight) concurrent with the last dose of a 6-dose regimen of Coartem Tablets had no effect on systemic exposure of DHA, lumefantrine or quinine in 14 healthy volunteers. Mean AUC of artemether were 46% lower when administered with quinine compared to Coartem Tablets alone. This decrease in artemether exposure is not thought to be clinically significant. However, quinine should be used cautiously in patients following treatment with Coartem Tablets due to the long elimination half-life of lumefantrine and the potential for additive effects on the QT interval; ECG monitoring is advised if use of quinine is medically required [see Warnings and Precautions (5.2)].
                        
                           Antiretroviral Drugs
                        
                        The oral administration of lopinavir/ritonavir (400 mg/100 mg twice daily for 26 days) in 10 healthy volunteers coadministered with Coartem Tablets (6-dose regimen over 3 days), resulted in a decrease in systemic exposures, in terms of AUC, to artemether and DHA by approximately 40%, but an increase in exposure to lumefantrine by approximately 2.3-fold. The oral administration of efavirenz (600 mg once daily for 26 days) in 12 healthy volunteers coadministered with Coartem Tablets (6-dose regimen over 3 days), resulted in a decrease in exposures to artemether, DHA, and lumefantrine by approximately 50%, 45%, and 20%, respectively. Exposures to lopinavir/ritonavir and efavirenz were not significantly affected by concomitant use of Coartem Tablets. Coartem Tablets should be used cautiously in patients on antiretroviral drugs such as HIV protease inhibitors and non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors because decreased artemether, DHA, and/or lumefantrine concentrations may result in a decrease of antimalarial efficacy of Coartem Tablets, and increased lumefantrine concentrations may cause QT prolongation  [see Warnings and Precautions (5.3) and Drug Interactions (7.3)].
                        
                           Hormonal Contraceptives
                        
                        No clinical drug-drug interaction studies between Coartem Tablets and hormonal contraceptives have been performed. In vitro studies revealed that the metabolism of ethinyl estradiol and levonorgestrel was not induced by artemether, DHA or lumefantrine. However, artemether has been reported to weakly induce, in humans, the activity of CYP2C19, CYP2B6, and CYP3A. Therefore, coadministration of Coartem Tablets may potentially reduce the effectiveness of hormonal contraceptives [see Warnings and Precautions (5.3) and Drug Interactions (7.5)]. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.4     Microbiology
                     
                     
                        
                           Mechanism of Action 
                        
                        Coartem Tablets, a fixed ratio of 1:6 parts of artemether and lumefantrine, respectively, is an antimalarial agent. Artemether is rapidly metabolized into an active metabolite dihydroartemisinin (DHA). The antimalarial activity of artemether and DHA has been attributed to endoperoxide moiety. The exact mechanism by which lumefantrine exerts its antimalarial effect is not well defined. Available data suggest lumefantrine inhibits the formation of β-hematin by forming a complex with hemin. Both artemether and lumefantrine were shown to inhibit nucleic acid and protein synthesis. 
                        
                           Activity In Vitro and In Vivo
                        
                        Artemether and lumefantrine are active against the erythrocytic stages of Plasmodium falciparum. 
                        
                           Drug Resistance
                        
                        Strains of P. falciparum with a moderate decrease in susceptibility to artemether or lumefantrine alone can be selected in vitro or in vivo, but not maintained in the case of artemether. The clinical relevance of such an effect is not known.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.6     Effects on the Electrocardiogram
                     
                     
                        In a healthy adult volunteer parallel-group study including a placebo and moxifloxacin control-group (n=42 per group), the administration of the 6-dose regimen of Coartem Tablets was associated with prolongation of QTcF (Fridericia). Following administration of a 6-dose regimen of Coartem Tablets consisting of 4 tablets per dose (total of 4 tablets of 80 mg artemether/480 mg lumefantrine) taken with food, the maximum mean change from baseline and placebo adjusted QTcF was 7.5 msec (1-sided 95% Upper CI: 11 msec). There was a concentration-dependent increase in QTcF for lumefantrine.
                        In clinical trials conducted in children, no patient had QTcF >500 msec. Over 5% of patients had an increase in QTcF of over 60 msec.
                        In clinical trials conducted in adults, QTcF prolongation of >500 msec was reported in 3 (0.3%) patients. Over 6% of adults had a QTcF increase of over 60 msec from baseline.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         