
                           
                           
                           Drug Interactions
                           
                              
                                 In vitro drug metabolism studies indicate that nateglinide is predominantly metabolized by the cytochrome P450 isozyme CYP2C9 (70%) and to a lesser extent CYP3A4 (30%). Nateglinide is a potential inhibitor of the CYP2C9 isoenzyme in vivo as indicated by its ability to inhibit the in vitro metabolism of tolbutamide. Inhibition of CYP3A4 metabolic reactions was not detected in in vitro experiments.
                              
                                 
                                    Glyburide: In a randomized, multiple-dose crossover study, patients with Type 2 diabetes were administered 120 mg nateglinide three times a day before meals for 1 day in combination with glyburide 10 mg daily. There were no clinically relevant alterations in the pharmacokinetics of either agent.
                              
                                 
                                    Metformin: 
                                 When nateglinide 120 mg three times daily before meals was administered in combination with metformin 500 mg three times daily to patients with Type 2 diabetes, there were no clinically relevant changes in the pharmacokinetics of either agent.
                              
                                 
                                    Digoxin: 
                                 When nateglinide 120 mg before meals was administered in combination with a single 1 mg dose of digoxin to healthy volunteers, there were no clinically relevant changes in the pharmacokinetics of either agent.
                              
                                 
                                    Warfarin: 
                                 When healthy subjects were administered nateglinide 120 mg three times daily before meals for four days in combination with a single dose of warfarin 30 mg on day 2, there were no alterations in the pharmacokinetics of either agent. Prothrombin time was not affected.
                              
                                 
                                    Diclofenac: 
                                 Administration of morning and lunch doses of nateglinide 120 mg in combination with a single 75 mg dose of diclofenac in healthy volunteers resulted in no significant changes to the pharmacokinetics of either agent.
                           
                           
                        
                     