
                     
                     
                     Drug Interactions
                     
                        Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs should not be
administered prior to or concomitantly with the high doses of methotrexate,
such as used in the treatment of osteosarcoma. Concomitant administration
of some NSAIDs with high dose methotrexate therapy has been reported
to elevate and prolong serum methotrexate levels, resulting in deaths
from severe hematologic and gastrointestinal toxicity.
                        Caution should be used when NSAIDs and salicylates are
administered concomitantly with lower doses of methotrexate. These
drugs have been reported to reduce the tubular secretion of methotrexate
in an animal model and may enhance its toxicity.
                        Despite the potential interactions, studies of methotrexate in patients
with rheumatoid arthritis have usually included concurrent use of
constant dosage regimens of NSAIDs, without apparent problems. It
should be appreciated, however, that the doses used in rheumatoid
arthritis (7.5 to 15 mg/week) are somewhat lower than those used in
psoriasis and that larger doses could lead to unexpected toxicity.
                        Methotrexate is partially bound to serum albumin, and
toxicity may be increased because of displacement by certain drugs,
such as salicylates, phenylbutazone, phenytoin, and sulfonamides.
Renal tubular transport is also diminished by probenecid; use of methotrexate
with this drug should be carefully monitored.
                        In the treatment of patients with osteosarcoma, caution must be exercised
if high-dose methotrexate is administered in combination with a potentially
nephrotoxic chemotherapeutic agent (e.g., cisplatin).
                        Methotrexate increases the plasma levels of mercaptopurine. The combination
of methotrexate and mercaptopurine may therefore require dose adjustment.
                        Oral antibiotics such as tetracycline, chloramphenicol,
and nonabsorbable broad spectrum antibiotics, may decrease intestinal
absorption of methotrexate or interfere with the enterohepatic circulation
by inhibiting bowel flora and suppressing metabolism of the drug by
bacteria.
                        Penicillins may reduce the renal clearance
of methotrexate; increased serum concentrations of methotrexate with
concomitant hematologic and gastrointestinal toxicity have been observed
with high and low dose methotrexate. Use of methotrexate with penicillins
should be carefully monitored.
                        The potential
for increased hepatotoxicity when methotrexate is administered with
other hepatotoxic agents has not been evaluated. However, hepatotoxicity
has been reported in such cases. Therefore, patients receiving concomitant
therapy with methotrexate and other potential hepatotoxins (e.g.,
azathioprine, retinoids, sulfasalazine) should be closely monitored
for possible increased risk of hepatotoxicity.
                        Methotrexate may decrease the clearance of theophylline; theophylline
levels should be monitored when used concurrently with methotrexate.
                        Vitamin preparations containing folic acid or its derivatives
may decrease responses to systemically administered methotrexate.
Preliminary animal and human studies have shown that small quantities
of intravenously administered leucovorin enter the CSF primarily as
5-methyltetrahydrofolate and, in humans, remain 1 to 3 orders of magnitude
lower than the usual methotrexate concentrations following intrathecal
administration. However, high doses of leucovorin may reduce the efficacy
of intrathecally administered methotrexate.
                        Folate deficiency states may increase methotrexate toxicity. Trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole
has been reported rarely to increase bone marrow suppression in patients
receiving methotrexate, probably by decreased tubular secretion and/or
an additive antifolate effect.
                     
                     
                  
               