
               
               
               
                  Drug Interactions

                     
Hypotension:
Patients on Diuretic Therapy: Patients on diuretics and especially those in whom diuretic therapy was recently instituted, may occasionally experience an excessive reduction of blood pressure after initiation of therapy with Lisinopril Tablets. The possibility of hypotensive effects with Lisinopril Tablets can be minimized by either discontinuing the diuretic or increasing the salt intake prior to initiation of treatment with Lisinopril Tablets. If it is necessary to continue the diuretic, initiate therapy with Lisinopril Tablets at a dose of 5 mg daily, and provide close medical supervision after the initial dose until blood pressure has stabilized. (See WARNINGS and DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION.) When a diuretic is added to the therapy of a patient receiving Lisinopril Tablets, an additional antihypertensive effect is usually observed. Studies with ACE inhibitors in combination with diuretics indicate that the dose of the ACE inhibitor can be reduced when it is given with a diuretic. (See DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION.)

                     
Antidiabetics:
Epidemiological studies have suggested that concomitant administration of ACE inhibitors and antidiabetic medicines (insulins, oral hypoglycemic agents) may cause an increased blood-glucose lowering effect with risk of hypoglycemia. This phenomenon appeared to be more likely to occur during the first weeks of combined treatment and in patients with renal impairment. In diabetic patients treated with oral antidiabetic agents or insulin, glycemic control should be closely monitored for hypoglycemia, especially during the first month of treatment with an ACE inhibitor.

                     
Non-steroidal Anti-inflammatory Agents:
In some patients with compromised renal function who are being treated with non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, the coadministration of lisinopril may result in further deterioration of renal function. These effects are usually reversible. In a study in 36 patients with mild to moderate hypertension where the antihypertensive effects of Lisinopril Tablets alone were compared to Lisinopril Tablets given concomitantly with indomethacin, the use of indomethacin was associated with a reduced effect, although the difference between the two regimens was not significant.

                     
Other Agents:
Lisinopril Tablets have been used concomitantly with nitrates and/or digoxin without evidence of clinically significant adverse interactions. This included post myocardial infarction patients who were receiving intravenous or transdermal nitroglycerin. No clinically important pharmacokinetic interactions occurred when Lisinopril Tablets were used concomitantly with propranolol or hydrochlorothiazide. The presence of food in the stomach does not alter the bioavailability of Lisinopril Tablets.
                  Agents Increasing Serum Potassium:
Lisinopril Tablets attenuate potassium loss caused by thiazide-type diuretics. Use of Lisinopril Tablets with potassium-sparing diuretics (e.g., spironolactone, eplerenone, triamterene or amiloride), potassium supplements, or potassium-containing salt substitutes may lead to significant increases in serum potassium. Therefore, if concomitant use of these agents is indicated because of demonstrated hypokalemia, they should be used with caution and with frequent monitoring of serum potassium. Potassium-sparing agents should generally not be used in patients with heart failure who are receiving Lisinopril Tablets.

                     
Lithium:
Lithium toxicity has been reported in patients receiving lithium concomitantly with drugs which cause elimination of sodium, including ACE inhibitors. Lithium toxicity was usually reversible upon discontinuation of lithium and the ACE inhibitor. It is recommended that serum lithium levels be monitored frequently if Lisinopril Tablets are administered concomitantly with lithium.

                     
Gold:
Nitritoid reactions (symptoms include facial flushing, nausea, vomiting and hypotension) have been reported rarely in patients on therapy with injectable gold (sodium aurothiomalate) and concomitant ACE inhibitor therapy including Lisinopril Tablets.

                  
               
               
            
         