
               
               
               
                  12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                     
                        Histrelin acetate is a gonadotropin releasing hormone (GnRH) agonist that acts as a potent inhibitor of gonadotropin secretion when given continuously in therapeutic doses. Both animal and human studies indicate that following an initial stimulatory phase, chronic, subcutaneous administration of histrelin acetate desensitizes responsiveness of the pituitary gonadotropin which, in turn, causes a reduction in testicular steroidogenesis.
                        In humans, administration of histrelin acetate results in an initial increase in circulating levels of luteinizing hormone (LH) and follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH), leading to a transient increase in concentration of gonadal steroids (testosterone and dihydrotestosterone in males); however, continuous administration of histrelin acetate results in decreased levels of LH and FSH due to a reversible down-regulation of the GnRH receptors in the pituitary gland and desensitization of the pituitary gonadotropes. In males, testosterone is reduced to castration levels. These decreases occur within 2 to 4 weeks after initiation of treatment.
                        Histrelin acetate is not active when given orally.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                     
                        
                           
                              Absorption: 
                           Following subcutaneous insertion of one VANTAS implant in advanced prostate cancer patients (n = 17), peak serum concentrations of 1.10 ± 0.375 ng/mL (mean ± SD) occurred at a median of 12 hours. Continuous subcutaneous release was evident, as serum levels were sustained throughout the 52 week dosing period (see Figure 1). The mean serum histrelin concentration at the end of the 52 week treatment duration was 0.13 ± 0.065 ng/mL. When histrelin serum concentrations were measured following a second implant inserted after 52 weeks, the observed serum concentrations over 8 weeks following the second implant were comparable to the same period following the first implant. The average rate of subcutaneous drug release from 41 implants assayed for residual drug content was 56.7 ± 7.71 mcg/day, over the 52 week dosing period. The relative bioavailability for the VANTAS implant in prostate cancer patients with normal renal and hepatic function compared to a subcutaneous bolus dose in healthy male volunteers was 92%. Serum histrelin concentrations were proportional to dose after one, two or four 50 mg VANTAS implants (50, 100 or 200 mg as histrelin acetate) in 42 prostate cancer patients.
                        
                           
                              Figure 1: Mean Serum Histrelin Concentration versus Time Profile for 17 Patients Following Insertion of First and Second VANTAS Implants. (Note that only four patients underwent intensive pharmacokinetic sampling during the first 96 hours following the second implant.)
                        
                        
                        
                           
                              Distribution: 
                           The apparent volume of distribution of histrelin following a subcutaneous bolus dose (500 mcg) in healthy volunteers was 58.4 ± 7.86 L. The fraction of drug unbound in plasma measured in vitro was 29.5% ± 8.9% (mean ± SD).
                        
                           
                              Metabolism: 
                           An in vitro drug metabolism study using human hepatocytes identified a single histrelin metabolite resulting from C-terminal dealkylation. Peptide fragments resulting from hydrolysis are also likely metabolites. Following a subcutaneous bolus dose in healthy volunteers the apparent clearance of histrelin was 179 ± 37.8 mL/min (mean ± SD) and the terminal half-life was 3.92 ± 1.01 hr (mean ± SD). The apparent clearance following a 50 mg (as histrelin acetate) VANTAS implant in 17 prostate cancer patients was 174 ± 56.5 mL/min (mean ± SD).
                        
                           
                              Excretion: 
                           No drug excretion study was conducted with VANTAS implants. 
                        
                           
                              Special Populations:
Geriatrics: 
                           The majority (89.9%) of the 138 patients studied in the pivotal clinical trial were age 65 and over.
                        
                           
                              Pediatrics: 
                           VANTAS is not indicated for use in pediatric patients. [see Use in Specific Populations (8.4)].
                        
                           
                              Race: 
                           When serum histrelin concentrations were compared for 7 Hispanic, 30 Black and 77 Caucasian patients, average serum histrelin concentrations were similar.
                        
                           
                              Renal Insufficiency: 
                           When average serum histrelin concentrations were compared between 42 prostate cancer patients with mild to severe renal impairment (CLcr: 15-60 mL/min) and 92 patients with no renal or hepatic impairment, levels were approximately 50% higher in those patients with renal impairment (0.392 ng/mL versus 0.264 ng/mL). These changes in exposure as a result of renal impairment are not considered to be clinically relevant. Therefore, no changes in drug dosing are warranted for these patient subpopulations.
                        
                           
                              Hepatic insufficiency: 
                           The influence of hepatic insufficiency on histrelin pharmacokinetics has not been adequately studied.
                        
                           
                              Drug-Drug Interactions: 
                           No pharmacokinetic-based drug-drug interaction studies were conducted with VANTAS.
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           Figure 1: Mean Serum Histrelin Concentration versus Time Profile for 17 Patients Following Insertion of First and Second VANTAS Implants. (Note that only four patients underwent intensive pharmacokinetic sampling during the first 96 hours following the second implant.)
                           
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         