
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              •Concomitant use of topical medications with a strong drying effect can increase skin irritation. Use with caution. (7.1)
                           
                              •ZIANA Gel should not be used in combination with erythromycin-containing products because of its clindamycin component. (7.2)
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 Concomitant Topical Medication
                     
                        Concomitant topical medication, medicated or abrasive soaps and cleansers, soaps and cosmetics that have a strong drying effect, and products with high concentrations of alcohol, astringents, spices or lime should be used with caution. When used with ZIANA Gel, there may be increased skin irritation.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 Erythromycin
                     
                        ZIANA Gel should not be used in combination with erythromycin-containing products due to its clindamycin component. In vitro studies have shown antagonism between these two antimicrobials. The clinical significance of this in vitro antagonism is not known.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3 Neuromuscular Blocking Agents
                     
                        Clindamycin has been shown to have neuromuscular blocking properties that may enhance the action of other neuromuscular blocking agents. Therefore, ZIANA Gel should be used with caution in patients receiving such agents.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         