
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  Mechanism of ActionIpratropium bromide is an anticholinergic (parasympatholytic) 
agent which, based on animal studies, appears to inhibit vagally-mediated 
reflexes by antagonizing the action of acetylcholine, the transmitter agent 
released at the neuromuscular junctions in the lung. In humans, ipratropium 
bromide has antisecretory properties and, when applied locally, inhibits 
secretions from the serous and seromucous glands lining the nasal mucosa. 
Ipratropium bromide is a quaternary amine that minimally crosses the nasal and 
gastrointestinal membranes and the blood-brain barrier, resulting in a reduction 
of the systemic anticholinergic effects (e.g., neurologic, ophthalmic, 
cardiovascular, and gastrointestinal effects) that are seen with tertiary 
anticholinergic amines.
                  
                  
                  Pharmacokinetics 
                     Absorption: Ipratropium bromide is 
poorly absorbed into the systemic circulation following oral administration 
(2-3%). Less than 20% of an 84 mcg per nostril dose was absorbed from the nasal 
mucosa of normal volunteers, induced-cold patients, or perennial rhinitis adult 
patients.
                  
                     Distribution: Ipratropium bromide is minimally 
bound (0 to 9% in vitro) to plasma albumin and α1-acid glycoprotein. Its blood/plasma concentration ratio was 
estimated to be about 0.89. Studies in rats have shown that ipratropium bromide 
does not penetrate the blood-brain barrier.
                  
                     Metabolism: Ipratropium bromide is partially 
metabolized to ester hydrolysis products, tropic acid and tropane. These 
metabolites appear to be inactive based on in vitro 
receptor affinity studies using rat brain tissue homogenates.
                  
                     Elimination: After intravenous administration of 2 
mg ipratropium bromide to 10 healthy volunteers, the terminal half-life of 
ipratropium was approximately 1.6 hours. The total body clearance and renal 
clearance were estimated to be 2,505 and 1,019 mL/min, respectively. The amount 
of the total dose excreted unchanged in the urine (Ae) within 24 hours was 
approximately one-half of the administered dose.
                  
                     Pediatrics: Following administration of 42 mcg of 
ipratropium bromide per nostril two or three times a day in perennial rhinitis 
patients 6-18 years old, the mean amounts of the total dose excreted unchanged 
in the urine (8.6 to 11.1%) were higher than those reported in adult volunteers 
or adult perennial rhinitis patients (3.7 to 5.6%). Plasma ipratropium 
concentrations were relatively low (ranging from undetectable up to 0.49 ng/mL). 
No correlation of the amount of the total dose excreted unchanged in the urine 
(Ae) with age or gender was observed in the pediatric population.
                  
                     Special Populations: Gender does not appear to 
influence the absorption or excretion of nasally administered ipratropium 
bromide. The pharmacokinetics of ipratropium bromide have not been studied in 
patients with hepatic or renal insufficiency or in the elderly.
                  
                     Drug-Drug Interactions: No specific 
pharmacokinetic studies were conducted to evaluate potential drug-drug 
interactions.
                  
                  
                  
                  Pharmacodynamics
                  In two single dose trials (n=17), doses up to 336 mcg of 
ipratropium bromide did not significantly affect pupillary diameter, heart rate, 
or systolic/diastolic blood pressure. Similarly, in patients with induced-colds, 
ipratropium bromide nasal solution 0.06% (Nasal Spray) (84 mcg/nostril four 
times a day) had no significant effects on pupillary diameter, heart rate, or 
systolic/diastolic blood pressure.
                  Two nasal provocation trials in perennial rhinitis patients (n=44) using 
ipratropium bromide nasal spray showed a dose dependent increase in inhibition 
of methacholine induced nasal secretion with an onset of action within 15 
minutes (time of first observation).
                  Controlled clinical trials demonstrated that intranasal 
fluorocarbon-propelled ipratropium bromide does not alter physiologic nasal 
functions (e.g., sense of smell, ciliary beat frequency, mucociliary clearance, 
or the air conditioning capacity of the nose).
                  
                  
                  Clinical Trials The clinical trials for ipratropium bromide nasal solution 0.03% 
(Nasal Spray) were conducted in patients with nonallergic perennial rhinitis 
(NAPR) and in patients with allergic perennial rhinitis (APR). APR patients were 
those who experienced symptoms of nasal hypersecretion and nasal congestion or 
sneezing when exposed to specific perennial allergens (e.g., dust mites, molds) 
and were skin test positive to these allergens. NAPR patients were those who 
experienced symptoms of nasal hypersecretion and nasal congestion or sneezing 
throughout the year, but were skin test negative to common perennial 
allergens.
                  In four controlled, four- and eight-week comparisons of ipratropium bromide 
nasal solution 0.03% (Nasal Spray) (42 mcg per nostril, two or three times 
daily) with its vehicle, in patients with allergic or nonallergic perennial 
rhinitis, there was a statistically significant decrease in the severity and 
duration of rhinorrhea in the ipratropium bromide group throughout the entire 
study period. An effect was seen as early as the first day of therapy.
                  There was no effect of ipratropium bromide nasal solution 0.03% (Nasal Spray) 
on degree of nasal congestion, sneezing, or postnasal drip. The response to 
ipratropium bromide nasal solution 0.03% (Nasal Spray) did not appear to be 
affected by the type of perennial rhinitis (NAPR or APR), age, or gender. No 
controlled clinical trials directly compared the efficacy of BID versus TID 
treatment.
               
               
            
         