
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           Interaction with benzodiazepines: May increase buprenorphine-induced
respiratory depression.  Monitor patients on concurrent therapy closely.
(7.1)
                           CYP3A4 inhibitors/inducers: Initiating CYP3A4 inhibitors
or discontinuing CYP3A4 inducers may result in an increase in buprenorphine
plasma concentrations.  Closely monitor patients starting CYP3A4 inhibitors
or stopping CYP3A4 inducers for respiratory depression. (7.3)
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 Benzodiazepines
                     
                        There have been a number of reports regarding coma and death associated
with the misuse and abuse of the combination of buprenorphine and
benzodiazepines.  In many, but not all of these cases, buprenorphine
was misused by self-injection of crushed buprenorphine tablets.  Preclinical
studies have shown that the combination of benzodiazepines and buprenorphine
altered the usual ceiling effect on buprenorphine-induced respiratory
depression, making the respiratory effects of buprenorphine appear
similar to those of full opioid agonists.  Closely monitor patients
with concurrent use of BUTRANS and benzodiazepines. Warn patients
that it is extremely dangerous to self-administer benzodiazepines
while taking BUTRANS, and warn patients to use benzodiazepines concurrently
with BUTRANS only as directed by their physician.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 CNS Depressants
                     
                        The concomitant
use of BUTRANS with other CNS depressants including sedatives, hypnotics,
tranquilizers, general anesthetics, phenothiazines, other opioids,
and alcohol can increase the risk of respiratory depression, profound
sedation, coma and death. Monitor patients receiving CNS depressants
and BUTRANS for signs of respiratory depression, sedation, and hypotension.
When combined therapy with any of the above medications is considered,
the dose of one or both agents should be reduced [see Dosage
and Administration (2.2) and Warnings
and Precautions (5.4)].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3 Drugs Affecting Cytochrome P450 Isoenzymes
                     
                        
                           
                              Inhibitors of CYP3A4 and 2D6
                           
                        
                        Because the
CYP3A4 isoenzyme plays a major role in the metabolism of buprenorphine,
drugs that inhibit CYP3A4 activity may cause decreased clearance of
buprenorphine which could lead to an increase in buprenorphine plasma
concentrations and result in increased or prolonged opioid effects.
These effects could be more pronounced with concomitant use of CYP2D6
and 3A4 inhibitors. If co-administration with BUTRANS is necessary,
monitor patients for respiratory depression and sedation at frequent
intervals and consider dose adjustments until stable drug effects
are achieved [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                        
                        
                           
                              Inducers of CYP3A4
                           
                        
                        CYP450
3A4 inducers may induce the metabolism of buprenorphine and, therefore,
may cause increased clearance of the drug which could lead to a decrease
in buprenorphine plasma concentrations, lack of efficacy or, possibly,
development of an abstinence syndrome in a patient who had developed
physical dependence to buprenorphine.
                        After stopping the treatment of a CYP3A4
inducer, as the effects of the inducer decline, the buprenorphine
plasma concentration will increase which could increase or prolong
both the therapeutic and adverse effects, and may cause serious respiratory
depression. If co-administration or discontinuation of a CYP3A4 inducer
with BUTRANS is necessary, monitor for signs of opioid withdrawal
and consider dose adjustments until stable drug effects are achieved [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4 Muscle Relaxants
                     
                        Buprenorphine
may enhance the neuromuscular blocking action of skeletal muscle relaxants
and produce an increased degree of respiratory depression. Monitor
patients receiving muscle relaxants and BUTRANS for signs of respiratory
depression that may be greater than otherwise expected.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.5 Anticholinergics
                     
                        Anticholinergics
or other drugs with anticholinergic activity when used concurrently
with opioid analgesics may result in increased risk of urinary retention
and/or severe constipation, which may lead to paralytic ileus. Monitor
patients for signs of urinary retention or reduced gastric motility
when BUTRANS is used concurrently with anticholinergic drugs.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         