
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
                  NUCYNTA® is mainly metabolized by glucuronidation. The following substances have been included in a set of interaction studies without any clinically significant finding: acetaminophen, acetylsalicylic acid, naproxen and probenecid [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                  The pharmacokinetics of tapentadol were not affected when gastric pH or gastrointestinal motility were increased by omeprazole and metoclopramide, respectively [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
               
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           Use NUCYNTA® with caution in patients currently using specified centrally-acting drugs or alcohol. (7.3)
                           Do not use NUCYNTA® in patients currently using or within 14 days of using a monoamine oxidase inhibitor (MAOI). (7.4)
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 Drugs Metabolized by Cytochrome P450 Enzymes
                     
                        
                           In vitro investigations indicate that NUCYNTA® does not inhibit or induce P450 enzymes. Thus, clinically relevant interactions mediated by the cytochrome P450 system are unlikely to occur [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 Drugs That Inhibit or Induce Cytochrome P450 Enzymes
                     
                        The major pathway of tapentadol metabolism is conjugation with glucuronic acid to produce glucuronides. To a lesser extent, tapentadol is additionally metabolized to N-desmethyl tapentadol (13%) by CYP2C9 and CYP2C19 to hydroxy tapentadol (2%) by CYP2D6, which are further metabolized by conjugation. Since only a minor amount of NUCYNTA® is metabolized via the oxidative pathway clinically relevant interactions mediated by the cytochrome P450 system are unlikely to occur [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3 Centrally-Acting Drugs and Alcohol
                     
                        Patients receiving other opioid agonist analgesics, general anesthetics, phenothiazines, antiemetics, other tranquilizers, sedatives, hypnotics, or other CNS depressants (including alcohol) concomitantly with NUCYNTA® may exhibit an additive CNS depression. Interactive effects resulting in respiratory depression, hypotension, profound sedation, or coma may result if these drugs are taken in combination with NUCYNTA®. When such combined therapy is contemplated, a dose reduction of one or both agents should be considered [see Warnings and Precautions (5.2) and (5.6)].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4 Monoamine Oxidase Inhibitors
                     
                        NUCYNTA® is contraindicated in patients who are receiving monoamine oxidase (MAO) inhibitors or who have taken them within the last 14 days due to potential additive effects on norepinephrine levels which may result in adverse cardiovascular events [see Contraindications (4.3)].
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         