
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Animal Toxicology
                     
                        Evidence of a dose-limiting skeletal muscle toxicity has been observed in mice and rats (but not in dogs) following long-term (greater than 90 days) dosing with didanosine at doses that were approximately 1.2 to 12 times the estimated human exposure. The relationship of this finding to the potential of didanosine to cause myopathy in humans is unclear. However, human myopathy has been associated with administration of didanosine and other nucleoside analogues.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        The pharmacokinetic parameters of didanosine are summarized in Table 1. Didanosine is rapidly absorbed, with peak plasma concentrations generally observed from 0.25 to 1.50 hours following oral dosing with a buffered formulation. Increases in plasma didanosine concentrations were dose proportional over the range of 50 to 400 mg. Steady-state pharmacokinetic parameters did not differ significantly from values obtained after a single dose. Binding of didanosine to plasma proteins in vitro was low (<5%). Based on data from in vitro and animal studies, it is presumed that the metabolism of didanosine in man occurs by the same pathways responsible for the elimination of endogenous purines.
                        Comparisons of Didanosine Formulations: In didanosine delayed-release capsules, the active ingredient didanosine, is protected against degradation by stomach acid by the use of an enteric coating on the pellets in the capsule. The enteric coating dissolves when the pellets empty into the small intestines, the site of drug absorption. With buffered formulations of didanosine, administration with antacid provides protection from degradation by stomach acid. In healthy volunteers, as well as subjects infected with HIV, the area under the plasma concetration time curve (AUC) is equivalent for didanosine adminstered as the didanosine delayed-release formulation relative to a buffered tablet formulation. The peak plasma concentration (Cmax) of didanosine, administered as didanosine dleayed-release capsules, is reduced approximately 40% relative to didanosine buffered tablets. The time to the peak concentration (Tmax) increases from approximately 0.67 hours for didanosine buffered tablets to 2 hours for didanosine delayed-release capsules.
                        Effect of Food on Absorption of Didanosine: In the presence of food, the Cmax and AUC for didanosine were reduced by approximately 46% and 19%, respectively, compared to the fasting state. Didanosine should be taken on an empty stomach.
                        


                     



                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Special Populations
                     
                        Renal Insufficiency: It is recommended that the didanosine dose be modified in patients with reduced creatinine clearance and in patients receiving maintenance hemodialysis (see DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION). Data from two studies using a buffered formulation of didanosine indicated that the apparent oral clearance of didanosine decreased and the terminal elimination half-life increased as creatinine clearance decreased (see Table 2). Following oral administration, didanosine was not detectable in peritoneal dialysate fluid (n=6); recovery in hemodialysate (n=5) ranged from 0.6% to 7.4% of the dose over a 3 to 4 hour dialysis period. The absolute bioavailability of didanosine was not affected in patients requiring dialysis. 
                        


                        


Pediatric Patients: The pharmacokinetics of didanosine administered as didanosine delayed-release capsules have not been studied in pediatric patients.
                        Geriatric Patients: Didanosine pharmacokinetics have not been studied in patients over 65 years of age (see PRECAUTIONS, Geriatric use).
                        Gender: The effects of gender on didanosine pharmacokinetics have not been studied.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Drug Interactions
                     
                        (See also PRECAUTIONS, Drug Interactions.)
                        Ribavirin has been shown in vitro to increase intracellular triphosphate levels of didanosine, which could cause or worsen clinical toxicities (see PRECAUTIONS, Drug Interactions).
                        Didanosine Delayed-Release Capsules: Table 3 and  4  summarize the effects on AUC and Cmax, with a 90% confidence interval (CI) when available, following coadministration of didanosine delayed-release capsules with a variety of drugs. Clinical recommendations based on drug interaction studies for drugs in bold font are included in PRECAUTIONS, Drug Interactions and DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION.
                         
                        



                        


Didanosine Buffered Formulations: Table 5and 6  summarize the effects on AUC and Cmax, with a 90% or 95% CI when available, following coadministration of buffered formulations of didanosine with a variety of drugs. Except as noted in table footnotes, the results of these studies may be expected to apply to didanosine. For most of the listed drugs, no clinically significant pharmacokinetic interactions were noted. Clinical recommendations based on drug interaction studies for drugs in bold font are included in PRECAUTIONS, Drug Interactions and DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION (for tenofovir).
                        



