
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 Other Antiepileptic Drugs
                     
                        Gabapentin is not appreciably metabolized nor does it interfere with the metabolism of commonly coadministered antiepileptic drugs 
         
 
  [see Clinical Pharmacology (
          
  
   12.3)]
         
 
  .
        

 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 Hydrocodone 
                     
                        Coadministration of gabapentin (125 to 500 mg) decreases hydrocodone C
         
 
  max and AUC values in a dose-dependent manner. The C
         
 
  max and AUC values are 3% to 4% lower, respectively, after administration of 125 mg gabapentin and 21% to 22% lower, respectively, after administration of 500 mg gabapentin. Hydrocodone increases gabapentin AUC values by 14% 
         
 
  [see Clinical Pharmacology (
          
  
   12.3)].
         
 
  
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3 Morphine 
                     
                        A literature article reported that when a 60 mg controlled-release morphine capsule was administered 2 hours prior to a 600 mg gabapentin capsule (N=12), mean gabapentin AUC increased by 44% compared to gabapentin administered without morphine 
         
 
  [see Patient Counseling Information (
          
  
   17)]
         
 
  . Morphine pharmacokinetic parameter values were not affected by administration of gabapentin 2 hours after morphine. The magnitude of interaction at other doses is not known.
        

 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4       Maalox
        

 ® (aluminum hydroxide, magnesium hydroxide) 
       

                     
                        The mean bioavailability of gabapentin was reduced by about 20% with concomitant use of an antacid (Maalox
         
 
  ®) containing magnesium and aluminum hydroxides.  It is recommended that gabapentin be taken at least 2 hours following Maalox administration 
         
 
  [see Clinical Pharmacology (
          
  
   12.3)]
         
 
  .
        

 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.5 Drug/Laboratory Test Interactions 
                     
                        Because false positive readings were reported with the Ames N-Multistix SG
         
 
  ® dipstick test for urinary protein when gabapentin was added to other antiepileptic drugs, the more specific sulfosalicylic acid precipitation procedure is recommended to determine the presence of urine protein.
        

 
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         