
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        ALTABAX is an antibacterial agent [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.4)].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        In post-hoc analyses of manually over-read 12-lead ECGs from healthy subjects (N = 103), no significant effects on QT/QTc intervals were observed after topical application of retapamulin ointment on intact and abraded skin. Due to the low systemic exposure to retapamulin with topical application, QT prolongation in patients is unlikely [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Absorption
                           
                           
                              In a trial of healthy adult subjects, retapamulin ointment, 1% was applied once daily to intact skin (800 cm2 surface area) and to abraded skin (200 cm2 surface area) under occlusion for up to 7 days. Systemic exposure following topical application of retapamulin through intact and abraded skin was low. Three percent of blood samples obtained on Day 1 after topical application to intact skin had measurable retapamulin concentrations (lower limit of quantitation 0.5 ng per mL); thus Cmax values on Day 1 could not be determined. Eighty-two percent of blood samples obtained on Day 7 after topical application to intact skin and 97% and 100% of blood samples obtained after topical application to abraded skin on Days 1 and 7, respectively, had measurable retapamulin concentrations. The median Cmax value in plasma after application to 800 cm2 of intact skin was 3.5 ng per mL on Day 7 (range: 1.2 to 7.8 ng per mL). The median Cmax value in plasma after application to 200 cm2 of abraded skin was 11.7 ng per mL on Day 1 (range: 5.6 to 22.1 ng per mL) and 9.0 ng per mL on Day 7 (range: 6.7 to 12.8 ng per mL).
                              Plasma samples were obtained from 380 adult subjects and 136 pediatric subjects (aged 2 to 17 years) who were receiving topical treatment with ALTABAX topically twice daily. Eleven percent had measurable retapamulin concentrations (lower limit of quantitation 0.5 ng per mL), of which the median concentration was 0.8 ng per mL. The maximum measured retapamulin concentration in adults was 10.7 ng per mL and in pediatric subjects (aged 2 to 17 years) was 18.5 ng per mL.
                              A single plasma sample was obtained from 79 pediatric subjects (aged 2 to 24 months) who were receiving topical treatment with ALTABAX twice daily. Forty-six percent had measurable retapamulin concentrations (greater than 0.5 ng per mL) compared with 7% in pediatric subjects aged 2 to 17 years. A higher proportion (69%) of pediatric subjects aged 2 to 9 months had measurable concentrations of retapamulin compared with subjects aged 9 to 24 months (32%). Among pediatric subjects aged 2 to 9 months (n = 29), 4 subjects had retapamulin concentrations that were higher (greater than or equal to 26.9 ng per mL) than the maximum concentration observed in pediatric subjects aged 2 to 17 years (18.5 ng per mL). Among pediatric subjects aged 9 to 24 months (n = 50), 1 subject had a retapamulin concentration that was higher (95.1 ng per mL) than the maximum level observed in pediatric subjects aged 2 to 17 years.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Distribution
                           
                           
                              Retapamulin is approximately 94% bound to human plasma proteins, and the protein binding is independent of concentration. The apparent volume of distribution of retapamulin has not been determined in humans.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Metabolism
                           
                           
                              In vitro studies with human hepatocytes showed that the main routes of metabolism were mono-oxygenation and di-oxygenation. In vitro studies with human liver microsomes demonstrated that retapamulin is extensively metabolized to numerous metabolites, of which the predominant routes of metabolism were mono-oxygenation and N-demethylation. The major enzyme responsible for metabolism of retapamulin in human liver microsomes was cytochrome P450 3A4 (CYP3A4).
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Elimination
                           
                           
                              Retapamulin elimination in humans has not been investigated due to low systemic exposure after topical application.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.4 Microbiology
                     
                        Retapamulin is a semisynthetic derivative of the compound pleuromutilin, which is isolated through fermentation from Clitopilus passeckerianus (formerly Pleurotus passeckerianus). In vitro activity of retapamulin against isolates of Staphylococcus aureus as well as Streptococcus pyogenes has been demonstrated.
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Antimicrobial Mechanism of Action
                           
                           
                              Retapamulin selectively inhibits bacterial protein synthesis by interacting at a site on the 50S subunit of the bacterial ribosome through an interaction that is different from that of other antibiotics. This binding site involves ribosomal protein L3 and is in the region of the ribosomal P site and peptidyl transferase center. By virtue of binding to this site, pleuromutilins inhibit peptidyl transfer, block P-site interactions, and prevent the normal formation of active 50S ribosomal subunits. Retapamulin is bacteriostatic against Staphylococcus aureus and Streptococcus pyogenes at the retapamulin in vitro minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) for these organisms. At concentrations 1,000 times the in vitro MIC, retapamulin is bactericidal against these same organisms. Although cross-resistance between retapamulin and other antibacterial classes (such as clindamycin and oxazolidones) exist, isolates resistant to these classes may be susceptible to retapamulin.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Mechanisms of Decreased Susceptibility to Retapamulin
                           
                           
                              In vitro, 2 mechanisms that cause reduced susceptibility to retapamulin have been identified, specifically, mutations in ribosomal protein L3, the presence of Cfr rRNA methyltransferase or the presence of an efflux mechanism. Decreased susceptibility of S. aureus to retapamulin (highest retapamulin MIC was 2 mcg per mL) develops slowly in vitro via multistep mutations in L3 after serial passage in sub-inhibitory concentrations of retapamulin. There was no apparent treatment-associated reduction in susceptibility to retapamulin in the Phase 3 clinical program. The clinical significance of these findings is not known.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Other
                           
                           
                              Based on in vitro broth microdilution susceptibility testing, no differences were observed in susceptibility of S. aureus to retapamulin whether the isolates were methicillin-resistant or methicillin-susceptible. Retapamulin susceptibility did not correlate with clinical success rates in patients with methicillin-resistant S.aureus. The reason for this is not known but may have been influenced by the presence of particular strains of S. aureus possessing certain virulence factors, such as Panton-Valentine Leukocidin (PVL). In the case of treatment failure associated with S. aureus (regardless of methicillin susceptibility), the presence of strains possessing additional virulence factors (such as PVL) should be considered.
                              Retapamulin has been shown to be active against the following microorganisms, both in vitro and in clinical trials [see Indications and Usage (1)].
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Aerobic and Facultative Gram-Positive Bacteria: Staphylococcus aureus (methicillin-susceptible isolates only); Streptococcus pyogenes.
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Susceptibility Testing
                           
                           
                              The clinical microbiology laboratory should provide cumulative results of the in vitro susceptibility test results for antimicrobial drugs used in local hospitals and practice areas to the physician as periodic reports that describe the susceptibility profile of nosocomial and community-acquired pathogens. These reports should aid the physician in selecting the most effective antimicrobial.
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Susceptibility Testing Techniques:
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                       
                                       Dilution Techniques:
                                       
                                          Quantitative methods can be used to determine the MIC of retapamulin that will inhibit the growth of the bacteria being tested. The MIC provides an estimate of the susceptibility of bacteria to retapamulin. The MIC should be determined using a standardized procedure.1,2 Standardized procedures are based on a dilution method (broth or agar) or equivalent with standardized inoculum concentrations and standardized concentrations of retapamulin powder.
                                       
                                       
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                       
                                       Diffusion Techniques:
                                       
                                          Quantitative methods that require measurement of zone diameters also provide reproducible estimates of the susceptibility of bacteria to antimicrobial compounds. One such standardized procedure requires the use of standardized inoculum concentrations.2,3 This procedure uses paper disks impregnated with 2 mcg of retapamulin to test the susceptibility of microorganisms to retapamulin.
                                       
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Susceptibility Test Interpretive Criteria:
                                 
                                    In vitro susceptibility test interpretive criteria for retapamulin have not been determined for this topical antimicrobial. The relation of the in vitro MIC and/or disk diffusion susceptibility test results to clinical efficacy of retapamulin against the bacteria tested should be monitored.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Quality Control Parameters for Susceptibility Testing:
                                 
                                    In vitro susceptibility test quality control parameters were developed for retapamulin so that laboratories that test the susceptibility of bacterial isolates to retapamulin can determine if the susceptibility test is performing correctly. Standardized dilution techniques and diffusion methods require the use of laboratory control microorganisms to monitor the technical aspects of the laboratory procedures. Standard retapamulin powder should provide the following MIC and a 2 mcg retapamulin disk should produce the following zone diameters with the indicated quality control strains in Table 3.
                                    


                                    


NA = Not applicable.
                                    
                                       a  This quality control range is applicable using cation-adjusted Mueller-Hinton broth with 2% to 5% lysed horse blood.
                                    
                                       b  This quality control limit is applicable using Mueller-Hinton agar with 5% sheep blood.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         