
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           PGP Inducers/Inhibitors: Drugs that induce or inhibit PGP have the potential to alter digoxin pharmacokinetics. (7.1)
                           There are numerous drug interactions associated with digoxin. The potential for drug-drug interactions must be considered prior to and during drug therapy. See full prescribing information for a complete listing of pharmacokinetic (7.2) (12.3) and pharmacodynamic interactions (7.3).
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 P-Glycoprotein (PGP) Inducers/Inhibitors
                     
                        Digoxin is a substrate for P-glycoprotein, at the level of intestinal absorption, renal tubular section and biliary-intestinal secretion. Therefore, drugs that induce/inhibit P-glycoprotein have the potential to alter digoxin pharmacokinetics.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 Pharmacokinetic Drug Interactions on Serum Digoxin Levels in Adults
                     
                        


                     



                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3 Pharmacodynamic Drug Interactions
                     
                        


                     



                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4 Drug-Laboratory Test Interaction
                     
                        Endogenous substance of unknown composition (digoxin-like immunoreactive substances, DLIS) can interfere with standard radioimmunoassays for digoxin. The interference most often causes results to be falsely positive or falsely elevated, but sometimes it causes results to be falsely reduced. Some assays are more subject to these failings than others. Several LC/MS/MS methods are available that may provide less susceptibility to DLIS interference. DLIS are present in up to half of all neonates and in varying percentages of pregnant women, patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, patients with renal or hepatic dysfunction, and other patients who are volume-expanded for any reason. The measured levels of DLIS (as digoxin equivalents) are usually low (0.2 to 0.4 ng/mL), but sometimes they reach levels that would be considered therapeutic or even toxic.
                        In some assays, spironolactone, canrenone and potassium canrenoate may be falsely detected as digoxin, at levels up to 0.5 ng/mL. Some traditional Chinese and Ayurvedic medicine substances like Chan Su, Siberian Ginseng, Asian Ginseng, Ashwagandha or Dashen, can cause similar interference.
                        Spironolactone and DLIS are much more extensively protein-bound than digoxin. As a result, assays of free digoxin levels in protein-free ultrafiltrate (which tend to be about 25% less than total levels, consistent with the usual extent of protein binding) are less affected by spironolactone or DLIS. It should be noted that ultrafiltration does not solve all interference problems with alternative medicines. The use of an LC/MS/MS method may be the better option according to the good results it provides, especially in term of specificity and limit of quantization.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         