
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           Piperacillin and Tazobactam for Injection administration can significantly reduce tobramycin concentrations in hemodialysis patients. Monitor tobramycin concentrations in these patients. (7.1)
                           Probenecid prolongs the half-lives of piperacillin and tazobactam and should not be co-administered with piperacillin and tazobactam for injection unless the benefit outweighs the risk. (7.2)
                           Monitor coagulation parameters in patients receiving piperacillin and tazobactam for injection and heparin or oral anticoagulants. (7.3)
                           Piperacillin and Tazobactam for Injection may prolong the neuromuscular blockade of vecuronium and other non-depolarizing muscle relaxants.Monitor for adverse reactions related to neuromuscular blockade (7.4)
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 Aminoglycosides
                     
                        Piperacillin may inactivate aminoglycosides by converting them to microbiologically inert amides.
                        
                           
                              
                                 In vivo inactivation:
                           
                           

    When aminoglycosides are administered in conjunction with piperacillin to patients with end-stage renal disease requiring hemodialysis, the concentrations of the aminoglycosides (especially tobramycin) may be significantly reduced and should be monitored.
                        Sequential administration of piperacillin and tazobactam for injection and tobramycin to patients with either normal renal function or mild to moderate renal impairment has been shown to modestly decrease serum concentrations of tobramycin but no dosage adjustment is considered necessary.
                        
                           
                              In vitro inactivation:
                           
                           

    Due to the 
                              in vitro
                            inactivation of aminoglycosides by piperacillin, piperacillin and tazobactam for injection and aminoglycosides are recommended for separate administration. Piperacillin and Tazobactam for injection and aminoglycosides should be reconstituted, diluted, and administered separately when concomitant therapy with aminoglycosides is indicated. Piperacillin and Tazobactam for injection is compatible with amikacin and gentamicin for simultaneous Y-site infusion in certain diluents and at specific concentrations. Piperacillin and Tazobactam for injection is not compatible with tobramycin for simultaneous Y-site infusion [see Dosage and Administration (2.7)].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 Probenecid
                     
                        Probenecid administered concomitantly with piperacillin and tazobactam for injection prolongs the half-life of piperacillin by 21% and that of tazobactam by 71% because probenecid inhibits tubular renal secretion of both piperacillin and tazobactam. Probenecid should not be co-administered with piperacillin and tazobactam for injection unless the benefit outweighs the risk.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3 Anticoagulants
                     
                        Coagulation parameters should be tested more frequently and monitored regularly during simultaneous administration of high doses of heparin, oral anticoagulants, or other drugs that may affect the blood coagulation system or the thrombocyte function. [
                              see Warnings and Precautions (5.4)
                              
                           ]
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4 Vecuronium
                     
                        Piperacillin when used concomitantly with vecuronium has been implicated in the prolongation of the neuromuscular blockade of vecuronium. Piperacillin and Tazobactam for injection could produce the same phenomenon if given along with vecuronium. Due to their similar mechanism of action, it is expected that the neuromuscular blockade produced by any of the non-depolarizing muscle relaxants could be prolonged in the presence of piperacillin. Monitor for adverse reactions related to neuromuscular blockade (See package insert for vecuronium bromide).
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.5 Methotrexate
                     
                        Limited data suggests that co-administration of methotrexate and piperacillin may reduce the clearance of methotrexate due to competition for renal secretion. The impact of tazobactam on the elimination of methotrexate has not been evaluated. If concurrent therapy is necessary, serum concentrations of methotrexate as well as the signs and symptoms of methotrexate toxicity should be frequently monitored.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.6 Effects on Laboratory Tests
                     
                        There have been reports of positive test results using the Bio-Rad Laboratories Platelia Aspergillus EIA test in patients receiving piperacillin/tazobactam injection who were subsequently found to be free of Aspergillus infection. Cross-reactions with non-Aspergillus polysaccharides and polyfuranoses with the Bio-Rad Laboratories Platelia Aspergillus EIA test have been reported. Therefore, positive test results in patients receiving piperacillin/tazobactam should be interpreted cautiously and confirmed by other diagnostic methods. 
                        As with other penicillins, the administration of piperacillin and tazobactam for injection may result in a false-positive reaction for glucose in the urine using a copper-reduction method (CLINITEST®). It is recommended that glucose tests based on enzymatic glucose oxidase reactions be used.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         