
                     
                     
                     Drug Interactions
                     
                        Use of epinephrine with excessive doses of digitalis, mercurial diuretics, or other drugs that sensitize the heart to arrhythmias is not recommended. Anginal pain may be induced when coronary insufficiency is present.
                        The effects of epinephrine may be potentiated by tricyclic antidepressants; certain antihistamines, e.g., diphenhydramine, tripelennamine, d-chlorpheniramine; and sodium I-thyroxine.
                        In obstetrics, if vasopressor drugs are used either to correct hypotension or added to the local anesthetic solution, some oxytocic drugs may cause severe persistent hypertension; even rupture of a cerebral blood vessel may occur during the postpartum period.
                        All vasopressors should be used cautiously in patients taking monoamine oxidase (MAO) inhibitors.
                        
                        
                           Cyclopropane or halogenated hydrocarbon anesthetics such as halothane which sensitize the myocardium administration of a beta-adrenergic blocking drug.
                        
                           Diuretic agents may decrease vascular response to pressor drugs such as epinephrine.
                        Epinephrine may antagonize the neuron blockade produced by guanethidine resulting in decreased antihypertensive effect and requiring increased dosage of the latter.
                        Use of epinephrine with excessive doses of digitalis, mercurial diuretics or other drugs that sensitize the heart to arrhythmias is not recommended. Rapidly acting vasodilators such as nitrites or alpha-blocking agents may counteract the marked pressor effects of epinephrine.
                        
                           Propranolol administered concomitantly with epinephrine may block the beta-adrenergic effects of epinephrine, causing hypertension.
                     
                     
                  
               