
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        The mechanism of action of H.P. Acthar Gel in the treatment of
                           infantile spasms is unknown.
                        H.P. Acthar Gel and endogenous ACTH stimulate the adrenal cortex
                           to secrete cortisol, corticosterone, aldosterone, and a number of weakly
                           androgenic substances. Prolonged administration of large doses of H.P.
                           Acthar Gel induces hyperplasia and hypertrophy of the adrenal cortex and
                           continuous high output of cortisol, corticosterone and weak androgens.
                           The release of endogenous ACTH is under the influence of the nervous
                           system via the regulatory hormone released from the hypothalamus and by a
                           negative corticosteroid feedback mechanism. Elevated plasma cortisol
                           suppresses ACTH release.
                        H.P. Acthar Gel is also reported to bind to melanocortin
                           receptors.
                        The trophic effects of endogenous ACTH and H.P. Acthar Gel on the
                           adrenal cortex are not well understood beyond the fact that they appear
                           to be mediated by cyclic AMP. 
                        ACTH rapidly disappears from the circulation following its
                           intravenous administration; in people, the plasma half-life is about 15
                           minutes. The pharmacokinetics of H.P. Acthar Gel have not been adequately
                           characterized. 
                        The maximal effects of a trophic hormone on a target organ are
                           achieved when optimal amounts of hormone are acting continuously. Thus, a
                           fixed dose of H.P. Acthar Gel will demonstrate a linear increase in
                           adrenocortical secretion with increasing duration for the
                        infusion.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         