
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              •Strong CYP and P-gp/BCRP inhibitors: For patients receiving strong CYP and P-gp/BCRP inhibitors, consider a starting dose of 0.5 mg three times a day. Monitor for hypotension. (7.2)
                           
                              •Antacids: Separate administration by at least 1 hour. (7.2)
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 Pharmacodynamic Interactions with Adempas
                     
                        
                           Nitrates: Co-administration of Adempas with nitrates or nitric oxide donors (such as amyl nitrite) in any form is contraindicated because of hypotension [see Contraindications (4.2) and Clinical Pharmacology (12.2)].
                        
                           PDE Inhibitors: Co-administration of Adempas with specific PDE-5 inhibitors (such as sildenafil, tadalafil, or vardenafil) and nonspecific PDE inhibitors (such as dipyridamole or theophylline), is contraindicated because of hypotension [see Contraindications (4.3) and Clinical Pharmacology (12.2)]. Clinical experience with co-administration of Adempas and other phosphodiesterase inhibitors (for example, milrinone, cilostazole, roflumilast) is limited.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 Pharmacokinetic Interactions with Adempas 
                     
                        
                           Smoking: Plasma concentrations in smokers are reduced by 50-60% compared to nonsmokers. Based on pharmacokinetic modeling, for patients who are smokers, doses higher than 2.5 mg three times a day may be considered in order to match exposure seen in nonsmoking patients. Safety and effectiveness of Adempas doses higher than 2.5 mg three times a day have not been established. A dose reduction should be considered in patients who stop smoking [see Dosage and Administration (2.4) and Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                        
                        
                           Strong CYP and P-gp/BCRP inhibitors: Concomitant use of riociguat with strong cytochrome CYP inhibitors and P-gp/BCRP inhibitors such as azole antimycotics (for example, ketoconazole, itraconazole) or HIV protease inhibitors (such as ritonavir) increase riociguat exposure and may result in hypotension. Consider a starting dose of 0.5 mg 3 times a day when initiating Adempas in patients receiving strong CYP and P-gp/BCRP inhibitors. Monitor for signs and symptoms of hypotension on initiation and on treatment with strong CYP and P-gp/BCRP inhibitors. A dose reduction should be considered in patients who may not tolerate the hypotensive effect of riociguat [see Dosage and Administration (2.5), Warnings and Precautions (5.3) and Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                        
                           Strong CYP3A inducers: Strong inducers of CYP3A (for example, rifampin, phenytoin, carbamazepine, phenobarbital or St. John’s Wort) may significantly reduce riociguat exposure. Data are not available to guide dosing of riociguat when strong CYP3A inducers are co-administered. [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                        
                        
                           Antacids: Antacids such as aluminum hydroxide/magnesium hydroxide decrease riociguat absorption and should not be taken within 1 hour of taking Adempas [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         