
               
               
               12  CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Tiotropium is a long-acting, antimuscarinic agent, which
is often referred to as an anticholinergic.  It has similar affinity
to the subtypes of muscarinic receptors, M1 to M5.  In the airways, it exhibits pharmacological
effects through inhibition of M3-receptors
at the smooth muscle leading to bronchodilation.  The competitive
and reversible nature of antagonism was shown with human and animal
origin receptors and isolated organ preparations.  In preclinical in vitro as well as in vivo studies, prevention
of methacholine-induced bronchoconstriction effects was dose-dependent
and lasted longer than 24 hours.  The bronchodilation following inhalation
of tiotropium is predominantly a site-specific effect.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        
                           Cardiac Electrophysiology
                           
In a multicenter, randomized, double-blind trial using
tiotropium dry powder for inhalation that enrolled 198 patients with
COPD, the number of subjects with changes from baseline-corrected
QT interval of 30 to 60 msec was higher in the SPIRIVA group as compared
with placebo.  This difference was apparent using both the Bazett
(QTcB) [20 (20%) patients vs. 12 (12%) patients] and Fredericia (QTcF)
[16 (16%) patients vs. 1 (1%) patient] corrections of QT for heart
rate.  No patients in either group had either QTcB or QTcF of >500
msec.  Other clinical trials with SPIRIVA did not detect an effect
of the drug on QTc intervals.
                        The effect of tiotropium dry powder for inhalation
on QT interval was also evaluated in a randomized, placebo- and positive-controlled
crossover study in 53 healthy volunteers.  Subjects received tiotropium
inhalation powder 18 mcg, 54 mcg (3 times the recommended dose), or
placebo for 12 days. ECG assessments were performed at baseline and
throughout the dosing interval following the first and last dose of
study medication.  Relative to placebo, the maximum mean change from
baseline in study-specific QTc interval was 3.2 msec and 0.8 msec
for tiotropium inhalation powder 18 mcg and 54 mcg, respectively.
 No subject showed a new onset of QTc >500 msec or QTc changes from
baseline of ≥60 msec.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        Tiotropium is administered as an inhalation spray. Some of
the pharmacokinetic data described below were obtained with higher
doses than recommended for therapy. A dedicated pharmacokinetic study
in patients with COPD evaluating once-daily tiotropium delivered from
the RESPIMAT inhaler (5 mcg) and as inhalation powder (18 mcg) from
the HandiHaler resulted in a similar systemic exposure between the
two products.
                        
                           Absorption
                           
Following inhalation of the solution
by young healthy volunteers, urinary excretion data suggests that
approximately 33% of the inhaled dose reaches the systemic circulation.
 Oral solutions of tiotropium have an absolute bioavailability of
2% to 3%.  Food is not expected to influence the absorption of tiotropium
for the same reason.  Following 4-week SPIRIVA RESPIMAT once daily
dosing, maximum tiotropium plasma concentrations were observed 5-7 minutes
after inhalation. 
                        
                           Distribution
                           
The drug has a plasma
protein binding of 72% and shows a volume of distribution of 32 L/kg
after an intravenous dose to young healthy volunteers. Local concentrations
in the lung are not known, but the mode of administration suggests
substantially higher concentrations in the lung. Studies in rats have
shown that tiotropium does not penetrate the blood-brain barrier.
                        
                           Elimination
                           
The terminal half-life of tiotropium was between 5 and
6 days following dry powder inhalation.  Total clearance was 880 mL/min
after an intravenous dose in young healthy volunteers.  After chronic
once-daily dry powder inhalation by COPD patients, pharmacokinetic
steady-state was reached by day 7 with no accumulation thereafter.
                        
                           Metabolism
                           
The extent of metabolism is small. This is evident from a urinary
excretion of 74% of unchanged substance after an intravenous dose
to young healthy volunteers.  Tiotropium, an ester, is nonenzymatically
cleaved to the alcohol N-methylscopine and dithienylglycolic acid,
neither of which binds to muscarinic receptors.
                        
                           In vitro experiments with
human liver microsomes and human hepatocytes suggest that a fraction
of the administered dose (74% of an intravenous dose is excreted unchanged
in the urine, leaving 25% for metabolism) is metabolized by cytochrome
P450-dependent oxidation and subsequent glutathione conjugation to
a variety of Phase II metabolites. This enzymatic pathway can be inhibited
by CYP450 2D6 and 3A4 inhibitors, such as quinidine, ketoconazole,
and gestodene. Thus, CYP450 2D6 and 3A4 are involved in the metabolic
pathway that is responsible for the elimination of a small part of
the administered dose. In vitro studies using human
liver microsomes showed that tiotropium in supra-therapeutic concentrations
does not inhibit CYP450 1A1, 1A2, 2B6, 2C9, 2C19, 2D6, 2E1, or 3A4.
                        
                           Excretion
                           
Intravenously administered tiotropium bromide is mainly excreted
unchanged in urine (74%).  Following 21-day, once daily inhalation
of the solution by patients with COPD, 24-hour urinary excretion is
18.6% (0.93 mcg) of the dose. The renal clearance of tiotropium exceeds
the creatinine clearance, indicating secretion into the urine.
                        
                           Specific Populations
                           

                           Geriatric Patients
                           
As expected
for all predominantly renally excreted drugs, advancing age was associated
with a decrease of tiotropium renal clearance (347 mL/min in COPD
patients <65 years to 275 mL/min in COPD patients ≥65 years). 
This did not result in a corresponding increase in AUC0–6,ss and Cmax,ss values following inhalation of
the solution.
                        
                           Renal Impairment
                           
Following 4-week SPIRIVA RESPIMAT
once daily dosing in patients with COPD, mild renal impairment (creatinine
clearance 60-90 mL/min) resulted in 23% higher AUC0-6,ss and 17% higher Cmax,ss values;  moderate
renal impairment (creatinine clearance 30-60 mL/min) resulted in 57%
higher AUC0-6,ss  and 31% higher Cmax,ss values compared to COPD patients with normal renal
function (creatinine clearance >90 mL/min).  There lacks sufficient
data of tiotropium exposure in patients with severe renal impairment
(creatinine clearance <30 mL/min) following inhalation of the solution.
However AUC0-4 and Cmax were 94% and 52% higher, respectively, in patients with severe renal
impairment following intravenous infusion of tiotropium bromide.
                        
                           Hepatic Impairment
                           
The effects of hepatic impairment on the pharmacokinetics
of tiotropium were not studied.
                        
                           Drug Interactions
                           
An interaction study with tiotropium (14.4 mcg intravenous infusion
over 15 minutes) and cimetidine 400 mg three times daily or ranitidine
300 mg once-daily was conducted.  Concomitant administration of cimetidine
with tiotropium resulted in a 20% increase in the AUC0-4h, a 28% decrease in the renal clearance of tiotropium and no significant
change in the Cmax and amount excreted in urine
over 96 hours.  Co-administration of tiotropium with ranitidine did
not affect the pharmacokinetics of tiotropium. 
                        Common concomitant medications (long-acting
beta2-adrenergic agonists (LABA), inhaled corticosteroids
(ICS)) used by patients with COPD were not found to alter the exposure
to tiotropium.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         