
               
               
               
                  7     DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           Adrenergic agents: Use with caution. Additional adrenergic drugs may potentiate sympathetic effects. (7.1)

                           
                           Xanthine derivatives, systemic corticosteroids, and non-potassium sparing diuretics: Use with caution. May potentiate hypokalemia or ECG changes. (7.2, 7.3)

                           
                           MAO inhibitors, tricyclic antidepressants, macrolides, and drugs that prolong QTc interval:  Use with extreme caution. May potentiate effect on cardiovascular system. (7.4)

                           
                           Beta-blockers: Use with caution and only when medically necessary.  May decrease effectiveness and produce severe bronchospasm. (7.5)
                           Halogenated hydrocarbons: There is an elevated risk of arrhythmias in patients receiving concomitant anesthesia with halogenated hydrocarbons. (7.6)
                        
                        

                        

                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1     Adrenergic Drugs
                     
                        If additional adrenergic drugs are to be administered by any route, they should be used with caution because the pharmacologically predictable sympathetic effects of formoterol may be potentiated.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2     Xanthine Derivatives or Systemic Corticosteroids
                     
                        Concomitant treatment with xanthine derivatives or systemic corticosteroids may potentiate any hypokalemic effect of adrenergic agonists.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3     Diuretics
                     
                        The ECG changes or hypokalemia that may result from the administration of non-potassium sparing diuretics (such as loop or thiazide diuretics) can be acutely worsened by beta-agonists, especially when the recommended dose of the beta-agonist is exceeded. Although the clinical significance of these effects is not known, caution is advised in the coadministration of beta-agonist with non-potassium sparing diuretics.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4     Monoamine Oxidase Inhibitors and Tricyclic Antidepressants, QTc Prolonging Drugs
                     
                        Formoterol, as with other beta2-agonists, should be administered with extreme caution to patients being treated with monoamine oxidase inhibitors, tricyclic antidepressants, macrolides or drugs known to prolong the QTc interval because the action of adrenergic agonists on the cardiovascular system may be potentiated by these agents. Drugs that are known to prolong the QTc interval have an increased risk of ventricular arrhythmias.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.5     Beta-blockers
                     
                        Beta-adrenergic receptor antagonists (beta-blockers) and formoterol may inhibit the effect of each other when administered concurrently. Beta-blockers not only block the therapeutic effects of beta2-agonists, such as formoterol, but may produce severe bronchospasm in asthmatic patients. Therefore, patients with asthma should not normally be treated with beta-blockers. However, under certain circumstances, e.g., as prophylaxis after myocardial infarction, there may be no acceptable alternatives to the use of beta-blockers in patients with asthma. In this setting, cardioselective beta-blockers could be considered, although they should be administered with caution.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.6     Halogenated Hydrocarbons
                     
                        There is an elevated risk of arrhythmias in patients receiving concomitant anesthesia with halogenated hydrocarbons.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         