
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        Pharmacokinetics when all three of the PREVPAC components (PREVACID capsules, amoxicillin capsules, clarithromycin tablets) were coadministered has not been studied. Studies have shown no clinically significant interactions of PREVACID and amoxicillin or PREVACID and clarithromycin when administered together.  There is no information about the gastric mucosal concentrations of PREVACID, amoxicillin and clarithromycin after administration of these agents concomitantly.  The systemic pharmacokinetic information presented below is based on studies in which each product was administered alone.
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           PREVACID
                           
                              PREVACID capsules contain an enteric-coated granule formulation of lansoprazole. Absorption of lansoprazole begins only after the granules leave the stomach.  Absorption is rapid, with mean peak plasma levels of lansoprazole occurring after approximately 1.7 hours.  After a single-dose administration of 15 mg to 60 mg of oral lansoprazole, the peak plasma concentrations (Cmax) of lansoprazole and the area under the plasma concentration curves (AUCs) of lansoprazole were approximately proportional to the administered dose. Lansoprazole does not accumulate and its pharmacokinetics are unaltered by multiple dosing.
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Absorption
                                 
                                    The absorption of lansoprazole is rapid, with the mean Cmax occurring approximately 1.7 hours after oral dosing, and the absolute bioavailability is over 80%.  In healthy subjects, the mean (± SD) plasma half-life was 1.5 (± 1.0) hours. Both the Cmax and AUC are diminished by about 50 to 70% if lansoprazole is given 30 minutes after food, compared to the fasting condition.  There is no significant food effect if lansoprazole is given before meals.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Distribution
                                 
                                    Lansoprazole is 97% bound to plasma proteins.  Plasma protein binding is consistent over the concentration range of 0.05 to 5.0 mcg/mL.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Metabolism
                                 
                                    Lansoprazole is extensively metabolized in the liver.  Two metabolites have been identified in measurable quantities in plasma (the hydroxylated sulfinyl and sulfone derivatives of lansoprazole).  These metabolites have very little or no antisecretory activity.  Lansoprazole is thought to be transformed into two active species which inhibit acid secretion by blocking the proton pump [(H+,K+)-ATPase enzyme system] at the secretory surface of the gastric parietal cell. The two active species are not present in the systemic circulation. The plasma elimination half-life of lansoprazole is less than 2 hours while the acid inhibitory effect lasts more than 24 hours. Therefore, the plasma elimination half-life of lansoprazole does not reflect its duration of suppression of gastric acid secretion.  
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Elimination
                                 
                                    Following single-dose oral administration of PREVACID, virtually no unchanged lansoprazole was excreted in the urine. In one study, after a single oral dose of 14C-lansoprazole, approximately one-third of the administered radiation was excreted in the urine and two-thirds was recovered in the feces. This implies a significant biliary excretion of the lansoprazole metabolites.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Amoxicillin
                           
                              Amoxicillin is stable in the presence of gastric acid and may be given without regard to meals.  It is rapidly absorbed after oral administration.  It diffuses readily into most body tissues and fluids, with the exception of brain and spinal fluid, except when meninges are inflamed.  The half-life of amoxicillin is 61.3 minutes. Most of the amoxicillin is excreted unchanged in the urine; its excretion can be delayed by concurrent administration of probenecid.  In blood serum, amoxicillin is approximately 20% protein-bound.
                              Orally administered doses of 500 mg amoxicillin capsules result in average peak blood levels 1 to 2 hours after administration in the range of 5.5 mcg/mL to 7.5 mcg/mL.
                              Detectable serum levels are observed up to 8 hours after an orally administered dose of amoxicillin.  Approximately 60% of an orally administered dose of amoxicillin is excreted in the urine within 6 to 8 hours.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Clarithromycin
                           
                              Clarithromycin is rapidly absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract after oral administration.  The absolute bioavailability of 250 mg clarithromycin tablets was approximately 50%.  For a single 500 mg dose of clarithromycin, food slightly delays the onset of clarithromycin absorption, increasing the peak time from approximately 2 to 2.5 hours.  Food also increases the clarithromycin peak plasma concentration by about 24%, but does not affect the extent of clarithromycin bioavailability.  Food does not affect the onset of formation of the antimicrobially active metabolite, 14-OH clarithromycin or its peak plasma concentration but does slightly decrease the extent of metabolite formation, indicated by an 11% decrease in area under the plasma concentration-time curve (AUC).  Therefore, clarithromycin tablets may be given without regard to food. 
                              In nonfasting healthy human subjects (males and females), peak plasma concentrations were attained within 2 to 3 hours after oral dosing.  Steady-state peak plasma clarithromycin concentrations were attained within 3 days and were approximately 3 to 4 mcg/mL with a 500 mg dose administered every 8 to 12 hours.  The elimination half-life of clarithromycin was 5 to 7 hours with 500 mg administered every 8 to 12 hours.  The nonlinearity of clarithromycin pharmacokinetics is slight at the recommended dose of 500 mg administered every 8 to 12 hours.  With a 500 mg every 8 to 12 hours dosing, the peak steady-state concentration of 14-OH clarithromycin is up to 1 mcg/mL, and its elimination half-life is about 7 to 9 hours.  The steady-state concentration of this metabolite is generally attained within 3 to 4 days.
                              After a 500 mg tablet every 12 hours, the urinary excretion of clarithromycin is approximately 30%.  The renal clearance of clarithromycin approximates the normal glomerular filtration rate.  The major metabolite found in urine is 14-OH clarithromycin, which accounts for an additional 10% to 15% of the dose with a 500 mg tablet administered every 12 hours.
                              The steady-state concentrations of clarithromycin in subjects with impaired hepatic function did not differ from those in normal subjects; however, the 14-OH clarithromycin concentrations were lower in the hepatically impaired subjects.  The decreased formation of 14-OH clarithromycin was at least partially offset by an increase in renal clearance of clarithromycin in the subjects with impaired hepatic function when compared to healthy subjects.
                              The pharmacokinetics of clarithromycin was also altered in subjects with impaired renal function (see 
                                    PRECAUTIONS
                                  and 
                                    DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION
                                 ).
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Special Populations
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Geriatric Use 
                                 
                                    The clearance of lansoprazole is decreased in the elderly, with elimination half-life increased approximately 50% to 100%.  Because the mean half-life in the elderly remains between 1.9 to 2.9 hours, repeated once daily dosing does not result in accumulation of lansoprazole.  Peak plasma levels were not increased in the elderly.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Renal Impairment
                                 
                                    In patients with severe renal impairment, plasma protein binding decreased by 1.0% to 1.5% after administration of 60 mg of lansoprazole.  Patients with renal impairment had a shortened elimination half-life and decreased total AUC (free and bound).  The AUC for free lansoprazole in plasma, however, was not related to the degree of renal impairment; and the Cmax and Tmax (time to reach the maximum concentration) were not different than the Cmax and Tmax from subjects with normal renal function.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Hepatic Impairment
                                 
                                    In patients with various degrees of chronic hepatic impairment, the mean plasma half-life of lansoprazole was prolonged from 1.5 hours to 3.2 to 7.2 hours.  An increase in the mean AUC of up to 500% was observed at steady state in hepatically-impaired patients compared to healthy subjects.  Consider dose reduction in patients with severe hepatic impairment.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Gender
                                 
                                    In a study comparing 12 male and 6 female human subjects who received lansoprazole, no gender differences were found in pharmacokinetics and intragastric pH results (see PRECAUTIONS, PREVACID, Use in Women).
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Race
                                 
                                    The pooled pharmacokinetic parameters of PREVACID from twelve U.S. Phase I studies (N=513) were compared to the mean pharmacokinetic parameters from two Asian studies (N=20).  The mean AUCs of PREVACID in Asian subjects were approximately twice those seen in pooled U.S. data; however, the inter-individual variability was high.  The Cmax values were comparable.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Pharmacodynamics
                     
                  
               
            
         