
                     
                     
                     Drug Interactions
                     
                        No drug interaction studies have been conducted specifically with PREVPAC. The following drug interactions are for the individual drug components: PREVACID (lansoprazole), amoxicillin, and clarithromycin.  Therefore, the decision to adjust dosage should depend on the clinician's assessment of among other things, the cumulative or net effect of the drug components of PREVPAC. 
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           PREVACID
                           
                              PREVACID causes long-lasting inhibition of gastric acid secretion. PREVACID substantially decreases the systemic concentrations of the HIV protease inhibitor atazanavir, which is dependent upon the presence of gastric acid for absorption, and may result in a loss of therapeutic effect of atazanavir and the development of HIV resistance. Therefore, PREVACID, or other proton pump inhibitors, should not be co-administered with atazanavir.
                              It is theoretically possible that PREVACID may also interfere with the absorption of other drugs where gastric pH is an important determinant of bioavailability (e.g., ampicillin esters, digoxin, iron salts, ketoconazole).
                              PREVACID is metabolized through the cytochrome P450 system, specifically through the CYP3A and CYP2C19 isozymes.  Studies have shown that PREVACID does not have clinically significant interactions with other drugs metabolized by the cytochrome P450 system, such as warfarin, antipyrine, indomethacin, ibuprofen, phenytoin, propranolol, prednisone, diazepam, or clarithromycin in healthy subjects.  These compounds are metabolized through various cytochrome P450 isozymes including CYP1A2, CYP2C9, CYP2C19, CYP2D6, and CYP3A.  
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Theophylline
                                 
                                    When PREVACID was administered concomitantly with theophylline (CYP1A2, CYP3A), a minor increase (10%) in the clearance of theophylline was seen.  Because of the small magnitude and the direction of the effect on theophylline clearance, this interaction is unlikely to be of clinical concern.  Nonetheless, individual patients may require additional titration of their theophylline dosage when PREVACID is started or stopped to ensure clinically effective blood levels.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Tacrolimus
                                 
                                    Concomitant administration of lansoprazole and tacrolimus may increase whole blood levels of tacrolimus, especially in transplant patients who are intermediate or poor metabolizers of CYP2C19.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Warfarin
                                 
                                    In a study of healthy subjects, neither the pharmacokinetics of warfarin enantiomers nor prothrombin time were affected following single or multiple 60 mg doses of lansoprazole.  However, there have been reports of increased International Normalized Ratio (INR) and prothrombin time in patients receiving proton pump inhibitors, including PREVACID, and warfarin concomitantly.  Increases in INR and prothrombin time may lead to abnormal bleeding and even death.  Patients treated with proton pump inhibitors and warfarin concomitantly may need to be monitored for increases in INR and prothrombin time.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Sucralfate
                                 
                                    In a single-dose crossover study examining PREVACID 30 mg and omeprazole 20 mg each administered alone and concomitantly with sucralfate 1 gram, absorption of the proton pump inhibitors was delayed and their bioavailability was reduced by 17% and 16%, respectively, when administered concomitantly with sucralfate. Therefore, proton pump inhibitors should be taken at least 30 minutes prior to sucralfate. In clinical trials, antacids were administered concomitantly with PREVACID and there was no evidence of a change in the efficacy of PREVACID.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Amoxicillin
                           
                              Probenecid decreases the renal tubular secretion of amoxicillin.  Concurrent use of amoxicillin and probenecid may result in increased and prolonged blood levels of amoxicillin.
                              Chloramphenicol, macrolides, sulfonamides, and tetracyclines may interfere with bactericidal effects of penicillin.  This has been demonstrated in vitro; however, the clinical significance of this interaction is not well documented.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Clarithromycin
                           
                              Clarithromycin use in patients who are receiving theophylline may be associated with an increase of serum theophylline concentrations.  Monitoring of serum theophylline concentrations should be considered for patients receiving high doses of theophylline or with baseline concentrations in the upper therapeutic range.  In two studies in which theophylline was administered with clarithromycin (a theophylline sustained-release formulation was dosed at either 6.5 mg/kg  or 12 mg/kg  together with 250 or 500 mg q12h clarithromycin), the steady-state levels of Cmax, Cmin, and the area under the serum concentration time curve (AUC) of theophylline increased about 20%.
                              Concomitant administration of single doses of clarithromycin and carbamazepine has been shown to result in increased plasma concentrations of carbamazepine.  Blood level monitoring of carbamazepine may be considered.
                              When clarithromycin and terfenadine were coadministered, plasma concentrations of the active acid metabolite of terfenadine were threefold higher, on average, than the values observed when terfenadine was administered alone.  The pharmacokinetics of clarithromycin and the 14-OH-clarithromycin were not significantly affected by coadministration of terfenadine once clarithromycin reached steady-state conditions. Concomitant administration of clarithromycin with terfenadine is contraindicated (see 
                                    CONTRAINDICATIONS
                                 ).
                              Simultaneous oral administration of clarithromycin tablets and zidovudine to HIV-infected adult patients resulted in decreased steady-state zidovudine concentrations. When 500 mg of clarithromycin were administered twice daily, steady-state zidovudine AUC was reduced by a mean of 12% (n = 4). Individual values ranged from a decrease of 34% to an increase of 14%. Based on limited data in 24 patients, when clarithromycin tablets were administered two to four hours prior to oral zidovudine, the steady-state zidovudine Cmax was increased by approximately 2-fold, whereas the AUC was unaffected.
                              Simultaneous administration of clarithromycin tablets and didanosine to 12 HIV-infected adult patients resulted in no statistically significant change in didanosine pharmacokinetics.
                              Concomitant administration of fluconazole 200 mg daily and clarithromycin 500 mg twice daily to 21 healthy volunteers led to increases in the mean steady-state clarithromycin Cmin and AUC of 33% and 18%, respectively. Steady-state concentrations of 14-OH clarithromycin were not significantly affected by concomitant administration of fluconazole.
                              Concomitant administration of clarithromycin and ritonavir (n = 22) resulted in a 77% increase in clarithromycin AUC and a 100% decrease in the AUC of 14-OH clarithromycin. Clarithromycin may be administered without dosage adjustment to patients with normal renal function taking ritonavir. However, for patients with renal impairment and receiving  ritonavir, the dose of clarithromycin should be reduced.  Refer to the clarithromycin package insert for complete information.   
                              Spontaneous reports in the post-marketing period suggest that concomitant administration of clarithromycin and oral anticoagulants may potentiate the effects of the oral anticoagulants.  Prothrombin times should be carefully monitored while patients are receiving clarithromycin and oral anticoagulants simultaneously.
                              Elevated digoxin serum concentrations in patients receiving clarithromycin and digoxin concomitantly have also been reported in post-marketing surveillance.  Some patients have shown clinical signs consistent with digoxin toxicity, including potentially fatal arrhythmias. Serum digoxin levels should be carefully monitored while patients are receiving digoxin and clarithromycin simultaneously.
                              Colchicine is a substrate for both CYP3A and the efflux transporter, P-glycoprotein (Pgp).  Clarithromycin and other macrolides are known to inhibit CYP3A and Pgp.  When clarithromycin and colchicine are administered together, inhibition of Pgp and/or CYP3A by clarithromycin may lead to increased exposure to colchicine.  Patients should be monitored for clinical symptoms of colchicine toxicity (see 
                                    WARNINGS
                                 ).
                              Erythromycin and clarithromycin are substrates and inhibitors of the 3A isoform subfamily of the cytochrome P450 enzyme system (CYP3A).  Coadministration of erythromycin or clarithromycin and a drug primarily metabolized by CYP3A may be associated with elevations in drug concentrations that could increase or prolong both the therapeutic and adverse effects of the concomitant drug.  Dosage adjustments may be considered, and when possible, serum concentrations of drugs primarily metabolized by CYP3A should be monitored closely in patients concurrently receiving clarithromycin or erythromycin.
                              The following are examples of some clinically significant CYP3A based drug interactions.  Interactions with other drugs metabolized by the CYP3A isoform are also possible.  Increased serum concentrations of carbamazepine and the active acid metabolite of terfenadine were observed in clinical trials with clarithromycin.
                              The following CYP3A based drug interactions have been observed with erythromycin products and/or with clarithromycin in post-marketing experience:
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Antiarrhythmics
                                 
                                    There have been post-marketing reports of torsades de pointes occurring with concurrent use of clarithromycin and quinidine or disopyramide. Electrocardiograms should be monitored for QTc prolongation during coadministration of clarithromycin with these drugs.  Serum concentrations of these medications should also be monitored.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Ergotamine/Dihydroergotamine
                                 
                                    Post-marketing reports indicate that coadministration of clarithromycin with ergotamine or dihydroergotamine has been associated with acute ergot toxicity characterized by vasospasm and ischemia of the extremities and other tissues including the central nervous system.  Concomitant administration of clarithromycin with ergotamine or dihydroergotamine is contraindicated (see 
                                          CONTRAINDICATIONS
                                       ). 												
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Triazolobenziodidiazepines (such as triazolam and alprazolam) and Related Benzodiazepines (such as midazolam)
                                 
                                    Erythromycin has been reported to decrease the clearance of triazolam and midazolam, and thus, may increase the pharmacologic effect of these benzodiazepines.  There have been postmarketing reports of drug interactions and CNS effects (e.g., somnolence and confusion) with the concomitant use of clarithromycin and triazolam.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 HMG-CoA Reductase Inhibitors
                                 
                                    As with other macrolides, clarithromycin has been reported to increase concentrations of HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors (e.g., lovastatin and simvastatin).  Rare reports of rhabdomyolysis have been reported in patients taking these drugs concomitantly.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Sildenafil (Viagra)
                                 
                                    Erythromycin has been reported to increase the systemic exposure (AUC) of sildenafil.  A similar interaction may occur with clarithromycin; reduction of sildenafil dosage should be considered (see Viagra package insert). 
                                    There have been spontaneous or published reports of CYP3A based interactions of erythromycin and/or clarithromycin with cyclosporine, carbamazepine, tacrolimus, alfentanil, disopyramide, rifabutin, quinidine, methylprednisolone, cilostazol, and bromocriptine.
                                    Concomitant administration of clarithromycin with cisapride, pimozide, astemizole, or terfenadine is contraindicated (see 
                                          CONTRAINDICATIONS
                                       ).
                                    In addition, there have been reports of interactions of erythromycin or clarithromycin with drugs not thought to be metabolized by CYP3A, including hexobarbital, phenytoin, and valproate.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               