
               
               
               12  CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1  Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Within the blood, the acoustic impedance of
Lumason microspheres is lower than that of the surrounding non-aqueous
tissue.  Therefore, an ultrasound beam is reflected from the interface
between the microspheres and the surrounding tissue. The reflected
ultrasound signal provides a visual image that shows a contrast between
the blood and the surrounding tissues.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2  Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        A recommended dose of Lumason provides useful
echocardiographic signal intensity for two minutes after the injection.
                        In clinical studies, echocardiography
was conducted at a mechanical index (MI) ≤ 0.8 in the majority of
patients.  Lumason microspheres are destroyed and contrast enhancement
decreases as the MI increases.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3  Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        The pharmacokinetic of the SF6 gas component of Lumason was evaluated in 12 healthy adult subjects
(7 men and 5 women).  After intravenous bolus injections of 0.03 mL/kg
and 0.3 mL/kg of Lumason, corresponding to approximately 1 and 10
times the recommended doses, concentrations of SF6 in blood peaked within 1 to 2 minutes for both doses.  The terminal
half-life of SF6 in blood was approximately
10 minutes for the 0.3 mL/kg dose. (At the 0.03 mL/kg dose, terminal
half-life could not be estimated.)  The area-under-the-curve of SF6 was dose-proportional over the dose range studied.
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Distribution
                           
                           
                              In a study of healthy subjects, the mean
values for the apparent steady-state volume of distribution of SF6 were 341 L and 710 L for Lumason doses of 0.03 mL/kg
and 0.3 mL/kg, respectively.  Preferential distribution to the lung
is likely responsible for these values.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Elimination
                           
                           
                              The SF6 component of
Lumason is eliminated via the lungs.  In a clinical study that examined
SF6 elimination twenty minutes following Lumason
injection, the mean cumulative recovery of SF6 in expired air was 82 ± 20% (SD) at the 0.03 mL/kg dose and 88 ±
26% (SD) at the 0.3 mL/kg dose.
                              SF6 undergoes first
pass elimination within the pulmonary circulation; approximately 40%
to 50% of the SF6 content was eliminated in
the expired air during the first minute following Lumason injection.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Metabolism
                           
                           
                              SF6 undergoes little
or no biotransformation; 88% of an administered dose is recovered
unchanged in expired air.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Pharmacokinetics in Special Populations
                           
                           
                              
                                 Pulmonary Impairment:
                              
                              In a study of patients
with pulmonary impairment, blood concentrations of SF6 peaked at 1 to 4 minutes following Lumason administration. The cumulative
recovery of SF6 in expired air was 102 ± 18%
(mean ± standard deviation), and the terminal half-life of SF6 in blood was similar to that measured in healthy subjects.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         