
               
               
               
12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY

               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
12.1 Mechanism of Action

                     
                        Lorcaserin is believed to decrease food consumption and promote satiety by selectively activating 5-HT2C receptors on anorexigenic pro-opiomelanocortin neurons located in the hypothalamus. The exact mechanism of action is not known.
                        Lorcaserin at the recommended daily dose selectively interacts with 5-HT2C receptors as compared to 5-HT2A and 5-HT2B receptors (see Table 5), other 5-HT receptor subtypes, the 5-HT receptor transporter, and 5-HT reuptake sites.
                        


                     



                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
12.2 Pharmacodynamics

                     
                        
                           Cardiac Electrophysiology. The effect of multiple oral doses of lorcaserin 15 mg and 40 mg once daily on QTc interval was evaluated in a randomized, placebo- and active- (moxifloxacin 400 mg) controlled four-treatment arm parallel thorough QT study in 244 healthy subjects. In a study with demonstrated ability to detect small effects, the upper bound of the one-sided 95% confidence interval for the largest placebo adjusted, baseline-corrected QTc based on individual correction method (QTcI) was below 10 ms, the threshold for regulatory concern.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
12.3 Pharmacokinetics

                     
                            Absorption
                        
                        Lorcaserin is absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract with peak plasma concentration occurring 1.5 - 2 hours after oral dosing. The absolute bioavailability of lorcaserin has not been determined. Lorcaserin has a plasma half life of ~11 hours; steady state is reached within 3 days after twice daily dosing, and accumulation is estimated to be approximately 70%.
                        
                           Effect of Food. Twelve adult volunteers (6 men and 6 women) were given a single 10 mg oral dose of BELVIQ in a fasted state and after administration of a high fat (approximately 50% of total caloric content of the meal) and high-calorie (approximately 800-1000 calories) meal. The Cmax increased approximately 9% and exposure (AUC) increased approximately 5% under fed conditions. Tmax was delayed approximately 1 hour in the fed state. BELVIQ can be administered with or without food.
                            Distribution
                        
                        Lorcaserin distributes to the cerebrospinal fluid and central nervous system in humans. Lorcaserin hydrochloride is moderately bound (~70%) to human plasma proteins.
                            Metabolism
                        
                        Lorcaserin is extensively metabolized in the liver by multiple enzymatic pathways. After oral administration of BELVIQ, the major circulating metabolite is lorcaserin sulfamate (M1), with a plasma Cmax that exceeds lorcaserin Cmax by 1- to 5-fold. N-carbamoyl glucuronide lorcaserin (M5) is the major metabolite in urine; M1 is a minor metabolite in urine, representing approximately 3% of dose. Other minor metabolites excreted in urine were identified as glucuronide or sulfate conjugates of oxidative metabolites. The principal metabolites exert no pharmacological activity at serotonin receptors.
                            Elimination
                        
                        Lorcaserin is extensively metabolized by the liver and the metabolites are excreted in the urine. In a human mass balance study in which healthy subjects ingested radiolabeled lorcaserin, 94.5% of radiolabeled material was recovered, with 92.3% and 2.2% recovered from urine and feces, respectively.
                            Specific Populations
                        
                        
                           Renal Impairment. The disposition of lorcaserin was studied in patients with varying degrees of renal function. Creatinine clearance (CLcr) was calculated by Cockgroft-Gault equation based on ideal body weight (IBW). Impaired renal function decreased Cmax of lorcaserin, with no change in AUC.
                        Exposure of lorcaserin sulfamate metabolite (M1) was increased in patients with impaired renal function by approximately 1.7-fold in mild (CLcr = 50-80 mL/min), 2.3-fold in moderate (CLcr = 30-50 mL/min) and 10.5-fold in severe renal impairment (CLcr = <30 mL/min) compared to normal subjects (CLcr >80 mL/min).
                        Exposure of the N-carbamoyl-glucuronide metabolite (M5) was increased in patients with impaired renal function by approximately 1.5-fold in mild (CLcr = 50-80 mL/min), 2.5-fold in moderate (CLcr = 30-50 mL/min) and 5.1-fold in severe renal impairment (CLcr = <30 mL/min) compared to normal subjects (CLcr >80 mL/min).
                        The terminal half-life of M1 is prolonged by 26%, 96%, and 508% in mild, moderate, and severe renal impairment, respectively. The terminal half-life of M5 is prolonged by 0%, 26%, and 22% in mild, moderate, and severe renal impairment, respectively. The metabolites M1 and M5 accumulate in patients with severely impaired renal function.
                        Approximately 18% of metabolite M5 in the body was cleared from the body during a standard 4-hour hemodialysis procedure. Lorcaserin and M1 were not cleared by hemodialysis. Lorcaserin is not recommended for patients with severe renal impairment (CLcr <30 mL/min) or patients with end stage renal disease [see Use in Specific Populations (8.6)].
                            Estimate Ideal Body Weight (IBW) in (kg)
                        
                            Males: IBW = 50 kg + 2.3 kg for each inch over 5 feet.
    Females: IBW = 45.5 kg + 2.3 kg for each inch over 5 feet.
                            The Cockroft-Gault calculation using the IBW:
                        
                            female:
                           
    GFR (mL/min) = 0.85 x (140-age) x ideal body weight (kg)
                           
                                             72 x serum creatinine (mg/dL)
                            male:
                           
    GFR (mL/min) = (140-age) x ideal body weight (kg)
                           
                                  72 x serum creatinine (mg/dL)
                        
                           Hepatic Impairment. The disposition of lorcaserin was evaluated in patients with hepatic impairment and subjects with normal hepatic function. Lorcaserin Cmax was 7.8% and 14.3% lower, in subjects with mild (Child-Pugh score 5-6) and moderate (Child-Pugh score 7-9) hepatic impairment, respectively, than that in subjects with normal hepatic function. The half-life of lorcaserin is prolonged by 59% to 19 hours in patients with moderate hepatic impairment. Lorcaserin exposure (AUC) is approximately 22% and 30% higher in patients with mild and moderate hepatic impairment, respectively. Dose adjustment is not required for patients with mild to moderate hepatic impairment. The effect of severe hepatic impairment on lorcaserin was not evaluated [see Use in Specific Populations (8.7)].
                        
                           Gender. No dosage adjustment based on gender is necessary. Gender did not meaningfully affect the pharmacokinetics of lorcaserin.
                        
                           Geriatric. No dosage adjustment is required based on age alone. In a clinical trial of 12 healthy elderly (age greater than 65 years) subjects and 12 matched adult patients, lorcaserin exposure (AUC and Cmax) was equivalent in the two groups. Cmax was approximately 18% lower in the elderly group, and Tmax was increased from 2 hours to 2.5 hours in the elderly group as compared to the non-elderly adult group.
                        
                           Race. No dosage adjustment based on race is necessary. Race did not meaningfully affect the pharmacokinetics of lorcaserin.
                        
                           Drug-Drug Interactions
                        
                        Lorcaserin inhibits CYP 2D6-mediated metabolism. In a clinical trial in 21 CYP 2D6 extensive metabolizers, concomitant administration of lorcaserin (10 mg BID for 4 days) increased dextromethorphan peak concentrations (Cmax) by approximately 76% and exposure (AUC) by approximately 2-fold [see Drug Interactions (7.2)].
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         