
                     
                     
                     Drug Interactions 
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Dual Blockade of the Renin-Angiotensin System (RAS)
                              
                              Dual blockade of the RAS with angiotensin receptor blockers, ACE inhibitors, or aliskiren is associated with increased risks of hypotension, hyperkalemia, and changes in renal function (including acute renal failure) compared to monotherapy. Most patients receiving the combination of two RAS inhibitors do not obtain any additional benefit compared to monotherapy. In general, avoid combined use of RAS inhibitors. Closely monitor blood pressure, renal function and electrolytes in patients on TEVETEN and other agents that affect the RAS.
                              Do not co-administer aliskiren with TEVETEN in patients with diabetes.  Avoid use of aliskiren with TEVETEN in patients with renal impairment (GFR <60 ml/min).
                              Eprosartan has been shown to have no effect on the pharmacokinetics of digoxin and the pharmacodynamics of warfarin and glyburide. Thus, no dosing adjustments are necessary during concomitant use with these agents. Because eprosartan is not metabolized by the cytochrome P450 system, inhibitors of CYP450 enzyme would not be expected to affect its metabolism, and ketoconazole and fluconazole, potent inhibitors of CYP3A and 2C9, respectively, have been shown to have no effect on eprosartan pharmacokinetics. Ranitidine also has no effect on eprosartan pharmacokinetics. 
                              Eprosartan (up to 400 mg b.i.d. or 800 mg q.d.) doses have been safely used concomitantly with a thiazide diuretic (hydrochlorothiazide). Eprosartan doses of up to 300 mg b.i.d. have been safely used concomitantly with sustained-release calcium channel blockers (sustained-release nifedipine) with no clinically significant adverse interactions.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Non-Steroidal Anti-Inflammatory Agents including Selective Cyclooxygenase-2 Inhibitors (COX-2 Inhibitors)
                              
                              In patients who are elderly, volume-depleted (including those on diuretic therapy), or with compromised renal function, co-administration of NSAIDs, including selective COX-2 inhibitors, with angiotensin II receptor antagonists, including eprosartan, may result in deterioration of renal function, including possible acute renal failure.  These effects are usually reversible.  Monitor renal function periodically in patients receiving eprosartan and NSAID therapy.
                              The antihypertensive effect of angiotensin II receptor antagonists, including eprosartan may be attenuated by NSAIDs including selective COX-2 inhibitors.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Lithium
                              
                              Increases in serum lithium concentrations and lithium toxicity have been reported during concomitant administration of lithium with angiotensin II receptor agonists. Monitor serum lithium levels during concomitant use.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               