
                     
                     
                     Interactions
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Drug Interactions
                           
                              
                                 Use with Other CNS Depressants
                              
                              If ALPRAZOLAM Tablets are to be combined with other psychotropic agents or anticonvulsant drugs, careful consideration should be given to the pharmacology of the agents to be employed, particularly with compounds which might potentiate the action of bbenzodiazepines. The benzodiazepines, including alprazolam, produce additive CNS depressan eeffects when co-administered with other psychotropic medications, anticonvulsants, antihistaminics, ethanol and other drugs which themselves produce CNS depression.
                              
                                 Use with Imipramine and Desipramine
                              
                              The steady state plasma concentrations of imipramine and desipramine have been reported to be increased an average of 31% and 20%, respectively, by the concomitant administration oof ALPRAZOLAM Tablets in doses up to 4 mg/day. The clinical significance of these changess unknown.
                              
                                 Drugs that inhibit alprazolam metabolism via cytochrome P45Q 3A 
                              
                              The initial step in alprazolam metabolism is hydroxylation catalyzed by cytochrome P450 33A (CYP3A). Drugs which inhibit this metabolic pathway may have a profound effect on tthe clearance of alprazolam (see CONTRAINDICATIONS and WARNINGS for additional drug oof this type).
                              
                                 Drugs demonstrated to be CYP3A inhibitors of possible clinical significance on the basic oof clinical studies involving alprazolam (caution is recommended during coadministration wwith alprazolam)
                              
                              Fluoxetine—Coadministration of fluoxetine with alprazolam increased the maximum plasma cconcentration of alprazolam by 46%, decreased clearance by 21%, increased half-life by 17%, and decreased measured psychomotor performance.
                              Propoxyphene—Coadministration of propoxyphene decreased the maximum plasma concentration of alprazolam by 6%, decreased clearance by 38%, and increased half-life by 58%.
                              Oral Contraceptives—Coadministration of oral contraceptives increased the maximum plasm cconcentration of alprazolam by 18%, decreased clearance by 22%, and increased half-life bby 29%.
                              
                                 Drugs and other substances demonstrated to be CYP 3 A inhibitors on the basis of clinical studies involving benzodiazepines metabolized similarly to alprazolam or on the basis of in vitro studies with alprazolam or other benzodiazepines (caution is recommended during coadministration with alprazolam).
                              
                              Available data from clinical studies of benzodiazepines other than alprazolam suggest a possible drug interaction with alprazolam for the following: diltiazem, isoniazid, macrolide antibiotics such as erythromycin and clarithromycin, and grapefruit juice. Data from in vitro studies of alprazolam suggest a possible drug interaction with alprazolam for the following: sertraline and paroxetine. However, data from an in vivo drug interaction study involving a single dose of alprazolam 1 mg and steady state dose of sertraline (50 to 150 mg/day) did not reveal any clinically significant changes in the pharmacokinetics of alprazolam. Data from in vitro studies of benzodiazepines other than alprazolam suggest a possible drug interaction for the following: ergotamine, cyclosporine, amiodarone, nicardipine, and nifedipine. Caution is recommended during the coadministration of any of these with alprazolam (see WARNINGS).
                              
                                 Drugs demonstrated to be inducers of CYP3A
                              
                              Carbamazepine can increase alprazolam metabolism and therefore can decrease plasma levels of alprazolam.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               