
               
               
                7 DRUG INTERACTIONS 
               
                  
                     In vitro studies were conducted to
                     investigate the potential of gabapentin to inhibit the major cytochrome P450
                     enzymes (CYP1A2, CYP2A6, CYP2C9, CYP2C19, CYP2D6, CYP2E1, and CYP3A4) that
                     mediate drug and xenobiotic metabolism using isoform selective marker
                     substrates and human liver microsomal preparations. Only at the highest
                     concentration tested (171 mcg/mL; 1mM) was a slight degree of inhibition (14%
                     to 30%) of isoform CYP2A6 observed. No inhibition of any of the other isoforms
                     tested was observed at gabapentin concentrations up to 171 mcg/mL
                     (approximately 15 times the Cmax at 3600 mg/day).
                  Gabapentin is not appreciably metabolized nor does it interfere with
                     the metabolism of commonly coadministered antiepileptic drugs.
                  The drug interaction data described in this section were obtained from
                     studies involving healthy adults and adult patients with epilepsy.
               
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           An increase in gabapentin AUC values have been reported when
                              administered with hydrocodone. (7.6)
                           An increase in gabapentin AUC values have been reported when
                              administered with morphine. (7.7)
                           An antacid containing aluminum hydroxide and magnesium hydroxide
                              reduced the bioavailability of gabapentin immediate release by about
                              approximately 20%, but by only 5% when gabapentin was taken 2 hours
                              after antacids. It is recommended that GRALISE be taken at least
                              2 hours following antacid administration. (7.10)
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                      7.1 Phenytoin 
                     
                        In a single (400 mg) and multiple dose (400 mg three times daily)
                           study of gabapentin immediate release in epileptic patients (N=8)
                           maintained on phenytoin monotherapy for at least 2 months, gabapentin had
                           no effect on the steady-state trough plasma concentrations of phenytoin
                           and phenytoin had no effect on gabapentin pharmacokinetics.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                      7.2 Carbamazepine 
                     
                        Steady-state trough plasma carbamazepine and carbamazepine 10, 11
                           epoxide concentrations were not affected by concomitant gabapentin
                           immediate release (400 mg three times daily; N=12) administration.
                           Likewise, gabapentin pharmacokinetics were unaltered by carbamazepine
                           administration.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                      7.3 Valproic Acid 
                     
                        The mean steady-state trough serum valproic acid concentrations
                           prior to and during concomitant gabapentin immediate release
                           administration (400 mg three times daily; N=17) were not different and
                           neither were gabapentin pharmacokinetic parameters affected by valproic
                           acid.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                      7.4 Phenobarbital 
                     
                        Estimates of steady-state pharmacokinetic parameters for
                           phenobarbital or gabapentin immediate release (300 mg three times daily;
                           N=12) are identical whether the drugs are administered alone or
                        together.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                      7.5 Naproxen 
                     
                        Coadministration of single doses of naproxen (250 mg) and
                           gabapentin immediate release (125 mg) to 18 volunteers increased
                           gabapentin absorption by 12% to 15%. Gabapentin immediate release had no
                           effect on naproxen pharmacokinetics. The doses are lower than the
                           therapeutic doses for both drugs. The effect of coadministration of these
                           drugs at therapeutic doses is not known.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                      7.6 Hydrocodone 
                     
                        Coadministration of gabapentin immediate release (125 mg and
                           500 mg) and hydrocodone (10 mg) reduced hydrocodone Cmax by 3%
                           and 21%, respectively, and AUC by 4% and 22%, respectively. The mechanism
                           of this interaction is unknown. Gabapentin AUC values were increased by
                           14%; the magnitude of the interaction at other doses is not
                        known.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                      7.7 Morphine 
                     
                        When a single dose (60 mg) of controlled-release morphine capsule
                           was administered 2 hours prior to a single dose (600 mg) of gabapentin
                           immediate release in 12 volunteers, mean gabapentin AUC values increased
                           by 44% compared to gabapentin immediate release administered without
                           morphine. The pharmacokinetics of morphine were not affected by
                           administration of gabapentin immediate release 2 hours after morphine.
                           The magnitude of this interaction at other doses is not
                        known.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                      7.8 Cimetidine 
                     
                        Cimetidine 300 mg decreased the apparent oral clearance of
                           gabapentin by 14% and creatinine clearance by 10%. The effect of
                           gabapentin immediate release on cimetidine was not evaluated. This
                           decrease is not expected to be clinically significant.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                      7.9 Oral Contraceptives 
                     
                        Gabapentin immediate release (400 mg three times daily) had no
                           effect on the pharmacokinetics of norethindrone (2.5 mg) or ethinyl
                           estradiol (50 mcg) administered as a single tablet, except that the
                              Cmax of norethindrone was increased by 13%. This
                           interaction is not considered to be clinically significant.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                      7.10 Antacid (containing aluminum
                        hydroxide and magnesium hydroxide) 
                     
                        An antacid containing aluminum hydroxide and magnesium hydroxide
                           reduced the bioavailability of gabapentin immediate release by about
                           approximately 20%, but by only 5% when gabapentin immediate release was
                           taken 2 hours after the antacid. It is recommended that GRALISE be taken
                           at least 2 hours following the antacid (containing aluminum hydroxide and
                           magnesium hydroxide) administration.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                      7.11 Probenecid 
                     
                        Gabapentin immediate release pharmacokinetic parameters were
                           comparable with and without probenecid, indicating that gabapentin does
                           not undergo renal tubular secretion by the pathway that is blocked by
                           probenecid.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                      7.12 Drug/Laboratory Test Interactions 
                     
                        False positive readings were reported with the Ames-N-Multistix
                           SG® dipstick test for urine protein when gabapentin was added to
                           other antiepileptic drugs; therefore, the more specific sulfosalicylic
                           acid precipitation procedure is recommended to determine the presence of
                           urine protein.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         