
               
               
               
                  7     DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  Interactions between ILARIS and other medicinal products have not been investigated in formal studies.
               
               
               
                  
                     
                        
No formal drug interaction studies have been conducted with ILARIS. (7)
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1     TNF-Blocker and IL-1 Blocking Agent
                     
                     
                        An increased incidence of serious infections and an increased risk of neutropenia have been associated with administration of another IL-1 blocker in combination with TNF inhibitors in another patient population.  Use of ILARIS with TNF inhibitors may also result in similar toxicities and is not recommended because this may increase the risk of serious infections [see Warnings and Precautions (5.1)].  
                        The concomitant administration of ILARIS with other drugs that block IL-1 has not been studied.  Based upon the potential for pharmacological interactions between ILARIS and a recombinant IL-1ra, concomitant administration of ILARIS and other agents that block IL-1 or its receptors is not recommended.  
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2     Immunization
                     
                     
                        No data are available on either the effects of live vaccination or the secondary transmission of infection by live vaccines in patients receiving ILARIS.  Therefore, live vaccines should not be given concurrently with ILARIS.  It is recommended that, if possible, pediatric and adult patients should complete all immunizations in accordance with current immunization guidelines prior to initiating ILARIS therapy [see Warnings and Precautions (5.4)].  
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3     Cytochrome P450 Substrates
                     
                     
                        The formation of CYP450 enzymes is suppressed by increased levels of cytokines (e.g., IL-1) during chronic inflammation.  Thus it is expected that for a molecule that binds to IL-1, such as canakinumab, the formation of CYP450 enzymes could be normalized.  This is clinically relevant for CYP450 substrates with a narrow therapeutic index, where the dose is individually adjusted (e.g., warfarin).  Upon initiation of canakinumab, in patients being treated with these types of medicinal products, therapeutic monitoring of the effect or drug concentration should be performed and the individual dose of the medicinal product may need to be adjusted as needed.  
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         