
               
               
               
                  
                  CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY

                     

                  
                  
                  
                  
                  Absorption

                     

                  
                  Moxifloxacin, given as an oral tablet, is well absorbed from the 
gastrointestinal tract. The absolute bioavailability of moxifloxacin is 
approximately 90 percent. Co-administration with a high fat meal (i.e., 500 
calories from fat) does not affect the absorption of moxifloxacin.
                  Consumption of 1 cup of yogurt with moxifloxacin does not significantly 
affect the extent or rate of systemic absorption (AUC).
                  

                  
                     
                  
                  
                     

                  
                  

                  
                  
                  Mean Steady-State Plasma Concentrations of 
Moxifloxacin Obtained With Once Daily Dosing of 400 mg Either Orally (n=10) or 
by I.V. Infusion (n=12)
                  
                     

                  
                  
                  
                  
                  Distribution
                  

                  

                  Moxifloxacin is approximately 30-50% bound to serum proteins, 
independent of drug concentration. The volume of distribution of moxifloxacin 
ranges from 1.7 to 2.7 L/kg. Moxifloxacin is widely distributed throughout the 
body, with tissue concentrations often exceeding plasma concentrations. 
Moxifloxacin has been detected in the saliva, nasal and bronchial secretions, 
mucosa of the sinuses, skin blister fluid, subcutaneous tissue, skeletal muscle, 
and abdominal tissues and fluids following oral or intravenous administration of 
400 mg. Moxifloxacin concentrations measured post-dose in various tissues and 
fluids following a 400 mg oral or I.V. dose are summarized in the following 
table. The rates of elimination of moxifloxacin from tissues generally parallel 
the elimination from plasma.
                  
                     

                  
                  
                  Metabolism
                  Approximately 52% of an oral or intravenous dose of moxifloxacin 
is metabolized via glucuronide and sulfate conjugation. The cytochrome P450 
system is not involved in moxifloxacin metabolism, and is not affected by 
moxifloxacin. The sulfate conjugate (M1) accounts for approximately 38% of the 
dose, and is eliminated primarily in the feces. Approximately 14% of an oral or 
intravenous dose is converted to a glucuronide conjugate (M2), which is excreted 
exclusively in the urine. Peak plasma concentrations of M2 are approximately 40% 
those of the parent drug, while plasma concentrations of M1 are generally less 
than 10% those of moxifloxacin.
                  
                     In vitro studies with cytochrome (CYP) P450 
enzymes indicate that moxifloxacin does not inhibit CYP3A4, CYP2D6, CYP2C9, 
CYP2C19, or CYP1A2, suggesting that moxifloxacin is unlikely to alter the 
pharmacokinetics of drugs metabolized by these enzymes.
                  
                     

                  
                  
                  
                  
                  Excretion
                  Approximately 45% of an oral or intravenous dose of moxifloxacin 
is excreted as unchanged drug (~20% in urine and ~25% in feces). A total of 96% 
± 4% of an oral dose is excreted as either unchanged drug or known metabolites. 
The mean (± SD) apparent total body clearance and renal clearance are 12 ± 2 
L/hr and 2.6 ± 0.5 L/hr, respectively.
                  
                     

                  
               
               
               
                  
                     Figure 1
                     
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         