
               
               
               
                  
                  Drug Interactions:
                  

                  

                  Antacids, Sucralfate, Metal Cations, Multivitamins: Quinolones 
form chelates with alkaline earth and transition metal cations. Oral 
administration of quinolones with antacids containing aluminum or magnesium, 
with sucralfate, with metal cations such as iron, or with multivitamins 
containing iron or zinc, or with formulations containing divalent and trivalent 
cations such as VIDEX® (didanosine) chewable/buffered 
tablets or the pediatric powder for oral solution, may substantially interfere 
with the absorption of quinolones, resulting in systemic concentrations 
considerably lower than desired. Therefore, moxifloxacin should be taken at 
least 4 hours before or 8 hours after these agents. (See CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY, Drug Interactions and 
DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION.)
                  No clinically significant drug-drug interactions between itraconazole, 
theophylline, warfarin, digoxin, atenolol, oral contraceptives or glyburide have 
been observed with moxifloxacin. Itraconazole, theophylline, digoxin, 
probenecid, morphine, ranitidine, and calcium have been shown not to 
significantly alter the pharmacokinetics of moxifloxacin. (See CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY.) 
                  Warfarin: No significant effect of moxifloxacin on R- and S-warfarin was 
detected in a clinical study involving 24 healthy volunteers. No significant 
changes in prothrombin time were noted in the presence of moxifloxacin. 
Quinolones, including moxifloxacin, have been reported to enhance the 
anticoagulant effects of warfarin or its derivatives in the patient population. 
In addition, infectious disease and its accompanying inflammatory process, age, 
and general status of the patient are risk factors for increased anticoagulant 
activity. Therefore the prothrombin time, International Normalized Ratio (INR), 
or other suitable anticoagulation tests should be closely monitored if a 
quinolone is administered concomitantly with warfarin or its derivatives. 
                  Drugs metabolized by Cytochrome P450 enzymes: In 
vitro studies with cytochrome P450 isoenzymes (CYP) indicate that 
moxifloxacin does not inhibit CYP3A4, CYP2D6, CYP2C9, CYP2C19, or CYP1A2, 
suggesting that moxifloxacin is unlikely to alter the pharmacokinetics of drugs 
metabolized by these enzymes (e.g. midazolam, cyclosporine, warfarin, 
theophylline).
                  Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs): Although not observed with 
moxifloxacin in preclinical and clinical trials, the concomitant administration 
of a nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug with a quinolone may increase the risks 
of CNS stimulation and convulsions. (See 
WARNINGS.)
                  
                     

                  
                  
                  
                  
                  Carcinogenesis, Mutagenesis, Impairment of 
Fertility:
                  

                  

                  Long term studies in animals to determine the carcinogenic 
potential of moxifloxacin have not been performed.
                  Moxifloxacin was not mutagenic in 4 bacterial strains (TA 98, TA 100, TA 
1535, TA 1537) used in the Ames Salmonella reversion 
assay. As with other quinolones, the positive response observed with 
moxifloxacin in strain TA 102 using the same assay may be due to the inhibition 
of DNA gyrase. Moxifloxacin was not mutagenic in the CHO/HGPRT mammalian cell 
gene mutation assay. An equivocal result was obtained in the same assay when v79 
cells were used. Moxifloxacin was clastogenic in the v79 chromosome aberration 
assay, but it did not induce unscheduled DNA synthesis in cultured rat 
hepatocytes. There was no evidence of genotoxicity in 
vivo in a micronucleus test or a dominant lethal test in mice. 
                  Moxifloxacin had no effect on fertility in male and female rats at oral doses 
as high as 500 mg/kg/day, approximately 12 times the maximum recommended human 
dose based on body surface area (mg/m2), or at 
intravenous doses as high as 45 mg/kg/day, approximately equal to the maximum 
recommended human dose based on body surface area (mg/m2). At 500 mg/kg orally there were slight effects on sperm 
morphology (head-tail separation) in male rats and on the estrous cycle in 
female rats.
                  
                     

                  
                  
                  
                  
                  Pregnancy:
                  

                  
                  
                  Teratogenic Effects.
                  
                  Pregnancy Category C:Moxifloxacin was not teratogenic when administered to pregnant 
rats during organogenesis at oral doses as high as 500 mg/kg/day or 0.24 times 
the maximum recommended human dose based on systemic exposure (AUC), but 
decreased fetal body weights and slightly delayed fetal skeletal development 
(indicative of fetotoxicity) were observed. Intravenous administration of 80 
mg/kg/day (approximately 2 times the maximum recommended human dose based on 
body surface area (mg/m2)) to pregnant rats resulted in maternal toxicity and a 
marginal effect on fetal and placental weights and the appearance of the 
placenta. There was no evidence of teratogenicity at intravenous doses as high 
as 80 mg/kg/day. Intravenous administration of 20 mg/kg/day (approximately equal 
to the maximum recommended human oral dose based upon systemic exposure) to 
pregnant rabbits during organogenesis resulted in decreased fetal body weights 
and delayed fetal skeletal ossification. When rib and vertebral malformations 
were combined, there was an increased fetal and litter incidence of these 
effects. Signs of maternal toxicity in rabbits at this dose included mortality, 
abortions, marked reduction of food consumption, decreased water intake, body 
weight loss and hypoactivity. There was no evidence of teratogenicity when 
pregnant cynomolgus monkeys were given oral doses as high as 100 mg/kg/day (2.5 
times the maximum recommended human dose based upon systemic exposure). An 
increased incidence of smaller fetuses was observed at 100 mg/kg/day. In an oral 
pre- and postnatal development study conducted in rats, effects observed at 500 
mg/kg/day included slight increases in duration of pregnancy and prenatal loss, 
reduced pup birth weight and decreased neonatal survival. Treatment-related 
maternal mortality occurred during gestation at 500 mg/kg/day in this study.
                  Since there are no adequate or well-controlled studies in pregnant women, 
moxifloxacin should be used during pregnancy only if the potential benefit 
justifies the potential risk to the fetus.
                  
                     

                  
                  
                  
                  
                  Nursing Mothers:
                  

                  

                  Moxifloxacin is excreted in the breast milk of rats. Moxifloxacin 
may also be excreted in human milk. Because of the potential for serious adverse 
reactions in infants who are nursing from mothers taking moxifloxacin, a 
decision should be made whether to discontinue nursing or to discontinue the 
drug, taking into account the importance of the drug to the mother.
                  
                  
                  Pediatric Use:Safety and effectiveness in pediatric patients and adolescents 
less than 18 years of age have not been established. Moxifloxacin causes 
arthropathy in juvenile animals. (See 
                        WARNINGS
                     .)
                  
                     

                  
                  
                  
                  
                  Geriatric Use:
                  

                  

                  Geriatric patients are at increased risk for developing severe 
tendon disorders including tendon rupture when being treated with a 
fluoroquinolone such as AVELOX. This risk is further increased in patients 
receiving concomitant corticosteroid therapy. Tendinitis or tendon rupture can 
involve the Achilles, hand, shoulder, or other tendon sites and can occur during 
or after completion of therapy; cases occurring up to several months after 
fluoroquinolone treatment have been reported. Caution should be used when 
prescribing AVELOX to elderly patients especially those on corticosteroids. 
Patients should be informed of this potential side effect and advised to 
discontinue AVELOX and contact their healthcare provider if any symptoms of 
tendinitis or tendon rupture occur (See BOXED WARNING, WARNINGS, and ADVERSE REACTIONS/Post-Marketing Adverse Event 
Reports).
                  In controlled multiple-dose clinical trials, 23% of patients receiving oral 
moxifloxacin were greater than or equal to 65 years of age and 9% were greater 
than or equal to 75 years of age. The clinical trial data demonstrate that there 
is no difference in the safety and efficacy of oral moxifloxacin in patients 
aged 65 or older compared to younger adults. 
                  In trials of intravenous use, 42% of moxifloxacin patients were greater than 
or equal to 65 years of age, and 23% were greater than or equal to 75 years of 
age. The clinical trial data demonstrate that the safety of intravenous 
moxifloxacin in patients aged 65 or older was similar to that of 
comparator-treated patients. In general, elderly patients may be more 
susceptible to drug-associated effects of the QT interval. Therefore, AVELOX 
should be avoided in patients taking drugs that can result in prolongation of 
the QT interval (e.g., class IA or class III antiarrhythmics) or in patients 
with risk factors for torsade de pointes (e.g., known QT prolongation, 
uncorrected hypokalemia). 
               
               
            
         