
               
               
               7. DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  
                     
                        Drugs or herbal products that induce certain enzymes, including CYP3A4, may decrease the effectiveness of COCs or increase breakthrough bleeding. Counsel patients to use a back-up method or alternative method of contraception when enzyme inducers are used with COCs. (7)
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        No formal drug-drug interaction studies were conducted with levonorgestrel and ethinyl estradiol tablets and ethinyl estradiol tablets.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     7.1 Changes in Contraceptive Effectiveness Associated with Co-Administration of Other Products
                     
                        If a woman on hormonal contraceptives takes a drug or herbal product that induces enzymes, including CYP3A4, that metabolize contraceptive hormones, counsel her to use additional contraception or a different method of contraception. Drugs or herbal products that induce such enzymes may decrease the plasma concentrations of contraceptive hormones, and may decrease the effectiveness of hormonal contraceptives or increase breakthrough bleeding.  Some drugs or herbal products that may decrease the effectiveness of hormonal contraceptives include:
                        
                           barbiturates
                           bosentan
                           carbamazepine
                           felbamate
                           griseofulvin
                           oxcarbazepine
                           phenytoin
                           rifampin
                           St. John’s wort
                           topiramate
                        
                        HIV protease inhibitors: Significant changes (increase or decrease) in the plasma levels of the estrogen and progestin have been noted in some cases of co-administration of HIV protease inhibitors.
                        Antibiotics: There have been reports of pregnancy while taking hormonal contraceptives and antibiotics, but clinical pharmacokinetic studies have not shown consistent effects of antibiotics on plasma concentrations of synthetic steroids.
                        Consult the labeling of all concurrently-used drugs to obtain further information about interactions with hormonal contraceptives or the potential for enzyme alterations.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     7.2 Increase in Plasma Levels of Estradiol Associated with Co-Administered Drugs
                     
                        Co administration of atorvastatin and certain COCs containing ethinyl estradiol increase AUC values for ethinyl estradiol by approximately 20%. Ascorbic acid and acetaminophen may increase plasma ethinyl estradiol levels, possibly by inhibition of conjugation. CYP3A4 inhibitors such as itraconazole or ketoconazole may increase plasma hormone levels.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     7.3 Changes in Plasma Levels of Co-Administered Drugs
                     
                        Combination OCs containing some synthetic estrogens (e.g., ethinyl estradiol) may inhibit the metabolism of other compounds. Combination OCs have been shown to significantly decrease plasma concentrations of lamotrigine likely due to induction of lamotrigine glucuronidation. This may reduce seizure control; therefore, dosage adjustments of lamotrigine may be necessary. Consult the labeling of the concurrently-used drug to obtain further information about interactions with COCs or the potential for enzyme alterations.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         