
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  
                     PHARMACODYNAMICS
                  
                  Ketorolac tromethamine is a nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID). Ketorolac tromethamine inhibits synthesis of prostaglandins and may be considered a peripherally-acting analgesic. The biological activity of ketorolac tromethamine is associated with the S-form. Ketorolac tromethamine possesses no sedative or anxiolytic properties.
                  Pain relief was statistically different after ketorolac tromethamine dosing from that of placebo at 1/2 hour (the first time point at which it was measured) following the largest recommended doses of ketorolac tromethamine, and by 1 hour following the smallest recommended doses. The peak analgesic effect occurred within 2 to 3 hours and was not statistically significantly different over the recommended dosage range of ketorolac tromethamine. The greatest difference between large and small doses of ketorolac tromethamine by either route was in the duration of analgesia.
                  
                     PHARMACOKINETICS
                  
                  Ketorolac tromethamine is a racemic mixture of [-]S- and [+]R-enantiomeric forms, with the S-form having analgesic activity.
                  
                     
                        Comparison of IV, IM and Oral Pharmacokinetics
                     
                  
                  The pharmacokinetics of ketorolac tromethamine, following IV, IM, and oral doses of ketorolac tromethamine, are compared in Table 1. The extent of bioavailability following administration of the oral and IM forms of ketorolac tromethamine was equal to that following an IV bolus.
                  
                     
                        Linear Kinetics
                     
                  
                  Following administration of single oral, IM or IV dose of ketorolac tromethamine, in the recommended dosage ranges, the clearance of the racemate does not change. This implies that the pharmacokinetics of ketorolac tromethamine in humans, following single or multiple IM, IV, or recommended oral doses of ketorolac tromethamine, are linear. At the higher recommended doses, there is a proportional increase in the concentrations of free and bound racemate. 
                  
                     
                        Binding and Distribution
                     
                  
                  The ketorolac tromethamine racemate has been shown to be highly protein-bound (99%). Nevertheless, even plasma concentrations as high as 10 mcg/mL will only occupy approximately 5% of the albumin binding sites. Thus, the unbound fraction for each enantiomer will be constant over the therapeutic range. A decrease in serum albumin, however, will result in increased free drug concentrations.
                  The mean apparent volume (Vβ) of ketorolac tromethamine following complete distribution was approximately 13 liters. This parameter was determined from single-dose data.
                  
                     
                        Metabolism
                     
                  
                  Ketorolac tromethamine is largely metabolized in the liver. The metabolic products are hydroxylated and conjugated forms of the parent drug. The products of metabolism, and some unchanged drug, are excreted in the urine.
                  
                     
                        Clearance and Excretion
                     
                  
                  A single-dose study with 10 mg ketorolac tromethamine (n=9) demonstrated that the S-enantiomer is cleared approximately two times faster than the R-enantiomer, and that the clearance was independent of the route of administration. This means that the ratio of S/R plasma concentrations decreases with time after each dose. There is little or no inversion of the R- to S- form in humans. The clearance of the racemate in normal subjects, elderly individuals, and in hepatically and renally impaired patients, is outlined in Table 2.
                  The half-life of the ketorolac tromethamine S-enantiomer was approximately 2.5 hours (SD±0.4) compared with 5 hours (SD±1.7) for the R-enantiomer. In other studies, the half-life for the racemate has been reported to lie within the range of 5 - 6 hours.
                  



                  



                     Accumulation
                  
                  Ketorolac tromethamine administered as an IV bolus every 6 hours for 5 days to healthy subjects (n=13), showed no significant difference in Cmax on Day 1 and Day 5. Trough levels averaged 0.29 mcg/mL (SD±0.13) on Day 1 and 0.55 mcg/mL (SD±0.23) on Day 6. Steady state was approached after the fourth dose.
                  Accumulation of ketorolac tromethamine has not been studied in special populations (geriatric, pediatric, renal failure or hepatic disease patients). 
                  
                     Kinetics in Special Populations
                  
                  
                     
                        Elderly Patients
                     
                  
                  Based on single-dose data only, the half-life of the ketorolac tromethamine racemate increased from 5 to 7 hours in the elderly (65 - 78 years) compared with young healthy volunteers (24 - 35 years) (see Table 2). There was little difference in the Cmax for the two groups (elderly, 2.52 mcg/mL±0.77; young, 2.99 mcg/mL±1.03) (see PRECAUTIONS − Use in the Elderly).
                  
                     
                        Renally Impaired Patients
                     
                  
                  Based on single-dose data only, the mean half-life of ketorolac tromethamine in renally impaired patients is between 6 and 19 hours and is dependent on the extent of the impairment. There is poor correlation between creatinine clearance and total ketorolac tromethamine clearance in the elderly and populations with renal impairment (r=0.5).
                  In patients with renal disease, the AUC∞ of each enantiomer increased by approximately 100% compared with healthy volunteers. The volume of distribution doubles for the S-enantiomer and increases by 1/5th for the R-enantiomer. The increase in volume of distribution of ketorolac tromethamine implies an increase in unbound fraction.
                  The AUC∞ ratio of the ketorolac tromethamine enantiomers in healthy subjects and patients remained similar, indicating there was no selective excretion of either enantiomer in patients compared to healthy subjects (see WARNINGS– Renal Effects).
                  
                     
                        Hepatic Effects
                     
                  
                  There was no significant difference in estimates of half-life, AUC∞, Cmax, in 7 patients with liver disease compared to healthy volunteers (see PRECAUTIONS – Hepatic Effects).
               
               
            
         