


CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
Retrograde introduction of HYPAQUE-CYSTO solution provides radiopacity of the contents of the urinary bladder. When used during micturation as a function test, it also opacifies the bladder neck and lower urinary tract. Continuous fluoroscopic and monitoring of urinary bladder contractions will demonstrate cystoureteric reflux and its extent, if present.HYPAQUE-CYSTO is not absorbed from the urinary tract to any extent (< 2°), therefore, systemic effects are rare. However, pyelorenal intravasation (especially in patients with ureteric reflux) can occur. Therefore, the potential for adverse effects, such as occur with intravascular use, are possible.At physiologic pH, the water-soluble contrast media are completely dissociated into a radiopaque anion and a solubilizing cation.





EXCRETION
HYPAQUE-CYSTO which gains inadvertent intravascular entry is not metabolized but excreted unchanged in the urine, each diatrizoate molecule remaining "obligated" to its cation moiety.Diatrizoate solutions may be excreted either through the kidneys or the liver. These two excretory pathways are not mutually exclusive, but the main route of excretion seems to be governed by the affinity of the contrast medium for serum albumin. From 0% to 10% of diatrizoate meglumine is bound to serum protein.Diatrizoate salts are excreted unchanged predominantly through the kidneys by glomerular filtration. The amount excreted during any period of time is determined by the filtered load; ie, the product of plasma contrast media concentration and glomerular filtration rate.The liver and small intestine provide the major alternate route of excretion for diatrizoate. In patients free of severe renal disease, the fecal recovery is less than 2 percent. In patients with severe renal impairment the
excretion of these contrast media through the gallbladder and into the small intestine sharply increases; up to 20 percent in the feces in 48 hours.Saliva is a minor secretory pathway for injectable radiopaque diagnostic agents. In patients with normal renal function, minimal amounts of contrast media are secreted unchanged.







PREGNANCY AND LACTATION
Diatrizoate meglumine crosses the human placental barrier by simple diffusion and appears to enter fetal tissues passively. No apparent harm to the fetus occurs. Procedures including radiation involve a certain risk related to the exposure of the fetus.Diatrizoate solutions are excreted unchanged in human milk.




