
               
               
                CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY 
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                      Pharmacodynamics 
                     
                        Prostate Specific Membrane Antigen is expressed in many primary and metastatic prostate cancer lesions, and in vitro immunohistologic studies have shown 7E11-C5.3 to be reactive with > 95% of the prostate adenocarcinomas evaluated. In general, PSMA expression by prostate cancer cells is either unchanged or increased in patients treated with hormonal therapy (see PRECAUTIONS, Drug Interactions). The 7E11-C5.3 antibody is immunoreactive with normal and hypertrophic adult prostate tissue. In clinical studies of patients with prostate cancer, Indium In 111 ProstaScint® (capromab pendetide) localized to the prostate, and some known primary and metastatic tumor sites.
                        Non-antigen-dependent localization, suspected to be secondary to catabolism, has been observed in the liver, spleen, and bone marrow. Although there is variation among individuals, there may also be localization and imaging activity in the bowel, blood pool, kidneys, urinary bladder, and genitalia. Intracellular localization of 7E11-C5.3 has been observed in histochemically prepared tissue sections from normal adult skeletal and cardiac muscle, although primate studies revealed no specific localization to these tissues.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                      Pharmacokinetics 
                     
                        Based on data obtained from clinical studies, Indium In 111 ProstaScint® demonstrated a monoexponential elimination pattern with a terminal-phase half life of 67 ± 11 hours (mean ± SD). Approximately 10% of the administered radioisotope dose is excreted in the urine during the 72 hours following intravenous infusion. The pharmacokinetics of Indium In 111 ProstaScint® are characterized by slow serum clearance rate (42 ± 22 mL/hr) and small volume of distribution (4 ± 2.1 L).
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         