
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Oral Contraception
                     
                        Combination oral contraceptives act by suppression of gonadotropins. Although the primary mechanism of this action is inhibition of ovulation, other alterations include changes in the cervical mucus (which increase the difficulty of sperm entry into the uterus) and the endometrium (which reduce the likelihood of implantation).
                        Receptor binding studies, as well as studies in animals and humans, have shown that norgestimate and 17-deacetyl norgestimate, the major serum metabolite, combine high progestational activity with minimal intrinsic androgenicity.90–93 Norgestimate, in combination with ethinyl estradiol, does not counteract the estrogen-induced increases in sex hormone binding globulin (SHBG), resulting in lower serum testosterone.90,91,94
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     PHARMACOKINETICS
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Absorption
                           
                           
                              Norgestimate (NGM) and ethinyl estradiol (EE) are rapidly absorbed following oral administration. Norgestimate is rapidly and completely metabolized by first pass (intestinal and/or hepatic) mechanisms to norelgestromin (NGMN) and norgestrel (NG), which are the major active metabolites of norgestimate.
                              Peak serum concentrations of NGMN and EE are generally reached by 2 hours after administration of MonoNessa®. Accumulation following multiple dosing of the 250 mcg NGM / 35 mcg dose is approximately 2-fold for NGMN and EE compared with single dose administration. The pharmacokinetics of NGMN is dose proportional following NGM doses of 180 mcg to 250 mcg. Steady-state concentration of EE is achieved by Day 7 of each dosing cycle. Steady-state concentrations of NGMN and NG are achieved by Day 21. Non-linear accumulation (approximately 8 fold) of norgestrel is observed as a result of high affinity binding to SHBG (sex hormone-binding globulin), which limits its biological activity.
                              


                              


The effect of food on the pharmacokinetics of MonoNessa® has not been studied.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Distribution
                           
                           
                              Norelgestromin and norgestrel are highly bound (>97%) to serum proteins. Norelgestromin is bound to albumin and not to SHBG, while norgestrel is bound primarily to SHBG. Ethinyl estradiol is extensively bound (>97%) to serum albumin and induces an increase in the serum concentrations of SHBG.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Metabolism
                           
                           
                              Norgestimate is extensively metabolized by first-pass mechanisms in the gastrointestinal tract and/or liver. Norgestimate's primary active metabolite is norelgestromin. Subsequent hepatic metabolism of norelgestromin occurs and metabolites include norgestrel, which is also active, and various hydroxylated and conjugated metabolites. Ethinyl estradiol is also metabolized to various hydroxylated products and their glucuronide and sulfate conjugates.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Excretion
                           
                           
                              The metabolites of norelgestromin and ethinyl estradiol are eliminated by renal and fecal pathways. Following administration of 14C-norgestimate, 47% (45–49%) and 37% (16–49%) of the administered radioactivity was eliminated in the urine and feces, respectively. Unchanged norgestimate was not detected in the urine. In addition to 17-deacetyl norgestimate, a number of metabolites of norgestimate have been identified in human urine following administration of radiolabeled norgestimate. These include 18,19-Dinor-17-pregn-4-en-20-yn-3-one,17-hydroxy-13-ethyl,(17α)-(-);18,19-Dinor-5β-17-pregnan-20-yn,3α,17β-dihydroxy-13-ethyl,(17α), various hydroxylated metabolites and conjugates of these metabolites.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Special Populations
                           
                           
                              The effects of body weight, body surface area or age on the pharmacokinetics of MonoNessa® have not been studied.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Hepatic Impairment
                           
                           
                              The effects of hepatic impairment on the pharmacokinetics of MonoNessa® have not been studied. However, steroid hormones may be poorly metabolized in women with impaired liver function (see PRECAUTIONS).
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Renal Impairment
                           
                           
                              The effects of renal impairment on the pharmacokinetics of MonoNessa® have not been studied.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Drug-Drug Interactions
                           
                           
                              No formal drug-drug interaction studies were conducted with MonoNessa®. Interactions between contraceptive steroids and other drugs have been reported in the literature (see PRECAUTIONS).
                              Although norelgestromin and its metabolites inhibit a variety of P450 enzymes in human liver microsomes, under the recommended dosing regimen, the in vivo concentrations of norelgestromin and its metabolites, even at the peak serum levels, are relatively low compared to the inhibitory constant (Ki).
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         