
                     
                     
                     
                        Drug Interactions
                     
                     
                        
                           Potassium Supplements and Potassium-Sparing Diuretics: Potassium-sparing diuretics (spironolactone, amiloride, triamterene, and others) or potassium supplements can increase the risk of hyperkalemia. If concomitant use of such agents is indicated, monitor serum potassium frequently.
                        
                           
                        
                        
                           Lithium: Increased serum lithium levels and symptoms of lithium toxicity have been reported in patients receiving ACE inhibitors during therapy with lithium. Because renal clearance of lithium is reduced by thiazides, the risk of lithium toxicity is presumably raised further when, as in therapy with quinapril HCl and hydrochlorothiazide tablets, a thiazide diuretic is coadministered with the ACE inhibitor. Quinapril HCl and hydrochlorothiazide tablets and lithium should be coadministered with caution, and frequent monitoring of serum lithium levels is recommended.
                        
                        
                           Dual Blockade of the Renin-Angiotensin System (RAS): Dual blockade of the RAS with angiotensin receptor blockers, ACE inhibitors, or aliskiren is associated with increased risks of hypotension, hyperkalemia, and changes in renal function (including acute renal failure) compared to monotherapy. Most patients receiving the combination of two RAS inhibitors do not obtain any additional benefit compared to monotherapy. In general, avoid combined use of RAS inhibitors. Closely monitor blood pressure, renal function and electrolytes in patients on quinapril HCl and hydrochlorothiazide tablets and other agents that affect the RAS.
                        Do not co-administer aliskiren with quinapril HCl and hydrochlorothiazide tablets in patients with diabetes. Avoid concomitant use of aliskiren with quinapril HCl and hydrochlorothiazide tablets in patients with renal impairment (GFR <60 mL/min/ 1.73 m2).
                        
                        
                           Tetracycline and Other Drugs That Interact with Magnesium: Simultaneous administration of tetracycline with quinapril reduced the absorption of tetracycline by approximately 28% to 37%, possibly due to the high magnesium content in quinapril tablets. This interaction should be considered if coprescribing quinapril and tetracycline or other drugs that interact with magnesium.
                        
                           
                        
                        
                           Gold: Nitritoid reactions (symptoms include facial flushing, nausea, vomiting, and hypotension) have been reported rarely in patients on therapy with injectable gold (sodium aurothiomalate) and concomitant ACE inhibitor therapy.
                        
                           
                        
                        
                           Non-Steroidal Anti-Inflammatory Agents including Selective Cyclooxygenase-2 Inhibitors (COX-2 Inhibitors): In patients who are elderly, volume-depleted (including those on diuretic therapy), or with compromised renal function, co-administration of NSAIDs, including selective COX-2 inhibitors, with ACE inhibitors, including quinapril, may result in deterioration of renal function, including possible acute renal failure. These effects are usually reversible. Monitor renal function periodically in patients receiving quinapril and NSAID therapy.
                        The antihypertensive effect of ACE inhibitors, including quinapril may be attenuated by NSAIDs.
                        
                        
                           Agents that inhibit mTOR: Patients taking concomitant mTOR inhibitor (e.g. temsirolimus) therapy may be at increased risk for angioedema.
                        
                        
                           Other Agents: 
                        
                        Drug interaction studies of quinapril and other agents showed:
                        
                           Multiple dose therapy with propranolol or cimetidine has no effect on the pharmacokinetics of single doses of quinapril.
                           The anticoagulant effect of a single dose of warfarin (measured by prothrombin time) was not significantly changed by quinapril coadministration twice daily.
                           No pharmacokinetic interaction was observed when single doses of quinapril and hydrochlorothiazide were administered concomitantly.
                        
                        
                           Digoxin: Thiazide-induced electrolyte disturbances, i.e. hypokalemia, hypomagnesemia, increase the risk of digoxin toxicity, which may lead to fatal arrhythmic events (See PRECAUTIONS).
                        
                        When administered concurrently, the following drugs may interact with thiazide diuretics.
                        
                           Alcohol, Barbiturates, or Narcotics—potentiation of orthostatic hypotension may occur.
                           Antidiabetic Drugs (oral hypoglycemic agents and insulin)—dosage adjustments of the antidiabetic drug may be required (See PRECAUTIONS).
                           Cholestyramine and Colestipol Resin—absorption of hydrochlorothiazide is impaired in the presence of anionic exchange resins. Single doses of either cholestyramine or colestipol resins bind the hydrochlorothiazide and reduce its absorption from the gastrointestinal tract by up to 85% and 43%, respectively.
                           Corticosteroids, ACTH—intensified electrolyte depletion, particularly hypokalemia.
                           Pressor Amines (e.g., norepinephrine)—possible decreased response to pressor amines, but not sufficient to preclude their therapeutic use.
                           Skeletal Muscle Relaxants, Nondepolarizing (e.g., tubocurarine)—possible increased responsiveness to the muscle relaxant.
                        
                        
                           Non-steroidal Anti-inflammatory Drugs—the diuretic, natriuretic, and antihypertensive effects of thiazide diuretics may be reduced by concurrent administration of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory agents.
                        
                        
                        
                     
                     
                  
               