
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        Etodolac extended-release tablets are a non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID) that exhibits anti-inflammatory, analgesic, and antipyretic activities in animal models. The mechanism of action of etodolac extended-release tablets, like that of other NSAIDs, is not completely understood, but may be related to prostaglandin synthetase inhibition.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        
                           Absorption
                        
                        Etodolac extended-release tablets and etodolac tablets both contain etodolac, but differ in their release characteristics. The systemic availability of etodolac from etodolac extended-release tablets is generally greater than 80%. Etodolac does not undergo significant first-pass metabolism following oral administration. After oral administration of etodolac extended-release tablets in doses up to 800 mg once daily, peak concentrations occur approximately 6 hours after dosing and are dose proportional for both total and free etodolac.
                        
                           Table 1 shows the comparison of etodolac pharmacokinetic parameters after the administration of etodolac tablets and etodolac extended-release tablets.
                        
                           Table 2 shows the etodolac pharmacokinetic parameters in various populations. The data from patients with renal and hepatic impairment were obtained following administration of (immediate-release) etodolac tablets.
                        



                     



                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     Food/Antacid Effects
                     
                        Food has no significant effect on the extent of etodolac extended-release tablets absorption, however, food significantly increased Cmax (54%) following a 600 mg dose.
                        The extent of absorption of etodolac is not affected when etodolac is administered with antacid. Coadministration, with an antacid, decreases the peak concentration reached by about 15 to 20% with no measurable effect on time-to-peak.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     Distribution
                     
                        The mean apparent volume of distribution (Vd/F) of etodolac following administration of etodolac extended-release tablets is 566 mL/kg. Etodolac is more than 99% bound to plasma proteins, primarily to albumin, and is independent of etodolac concentration over the dose range studied. It is not known whether etodolac is excreted in human milk. However, based on its physical-chemical properties, excretion into breastmilk is expected.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     Metabolism
                     
                        Etodolac metabolites do not contribute significantly to the pharmacological activity of etodolac extended-release tablets.
                        Following administration of immediate-release etodolac, several metabolites have been identified in human plasma and urine. Other metabolites remain to be identified. The metabolites include 6-, 7-, and 8-hydroxylated etodolac and etodolac glucuronide. After a single dose of 14C-etodolac, hydroxylated metabolites accounted for less than 10% of total drug in serum. On chronic dosing, hydroxylated-etodolac metabolites do not accumulate in the plasma of patients with normal renal function. The extent of accumulation of hydroxylated-etodolac metabolites in patients with renal dysfunction has not been studied. The role, if any, of a specific cytochrome P450 system in the metabolism of etodolac is unknown. The hydroxylated-etodolac metabolites undergo further glucuronidation followed by renal excretion and partial elimination in the feces.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     Excretion
                     
                        The mean oral clearance of etodolac following oral etodolac extended-release tablets dosing is 47 (±17) mL/h/kg. The terminal half-life (t1/2) of etodolac after etodolac extended-release tablets administration is 8.4 hours compared to 6.4 hours for etodolac tablets. Approximately 1% of an etodolac tablet dose is excreted unchanged in the urine, with 72% of the dose excreted into the urine as parent drug plus metabolites:
                        


                        


Fecal excretion accounted for 16% of the dose.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     Special Populations
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     Geriatric
                     
                        In clinical studies, age was not shown to have any effect on half-life or protein binding, and demonstrated no change in expected drug accumulation. No dosage adjustment is generally necessary in the elderly on the basis of pharmacokinetics. The elderly may need dosage adjustment, however, as they may be more sensitive to antiprostaglandin effects than younger patients (see 
                              PRECAUTIONS, Geriatric Use).
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     Pediatric
                     
                        The pharmacokinetics of etodolac extended-release tablets were assessed in an open-label, 12 week clinical trial which included plasma sampling for population pharmacokinetics. Seventy-two (72) patients, 6 to 16 years of age, with juvenile rheumatoid arthritis, received etodolac extended-release tablets in doses of 13.3 to 21.3 mg/kg given as 400 to 1000 mg once daily. The results from a population pharmacokinetic analysis based on the 59 subjects who completed the trial are as follows:
                        


                        


While similar, the pharmacokinetic parameters for children with juvenile rheumatoid arthritis did not directly correlate with adult pharmacokinetic data in rheumatoid arthritis. In the population pharmacokinetic analysis, body weights below 50 kg were found to correlate with CL/F (see 
                              DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION).
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     Race
                     
                        Pharmacokinetic differences due to race have not been identified. Clinical studies included patients of many races, all of whom responded in a similar fashion.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     Hepatic Insufficiency
                     
                        The pharmacokinetics of etodolac following administration of etodolac extended-release tablets have not been investigated in subjects with hepatic insufficiency. Following administration of etodolac tablets, the plasma protein binding and disposition of total and free etodolac were unchanged in the presence of compensated hepatic cirrhosis. Although no dosage adjustment is generally required in patients with chronic hepatic diseases, etodolac clearance is dependent on liver function and could be reduced in patients with severe hepatic failure.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     Renal Insufficiency
                     
                        The pharmacokinetics of etodolac following administration of etodolac extended-release tablets have not been investigated in subjects with renal insufficiency. Etodolac renal clearance following administration of etodolac tablets was unchanged in the presence of mild-to-moderate renal failure (creatinine clearance, 37 to 88 mL/min). Although renal elimination is a significant pathway of excretion for etodolac metabolites, no dosing adjustment in patients with mild to moderate renal dysfunction is generally necessary. Etodolac plasma protein binding decreases in patients with severe renal deficiency. Etodolac should be used with caution in such patients because, as with other NSAIDs, it may further decrease renal function in some patients. Etodolac is not significantly removed from the blood in patients undergoing hemodialysis.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         