
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  Endogenous pulmonary surfactant lowers surface tension on alveolar
surfaces during respiration and stabilizes the alveoli against collapse
at resting transpulmonary pressures.  Deficiency of pulmonary surfactant
causes Respiratory Distress Syndrome (RDS) in premature infants. 
SURVANTA replenishes surfactant and restores surface activity to the
lungs of these infants.
               
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Activity
                     
                        
                           In vitro, SURVANTA reproducibly
lowers minimum surface tension to less than 8 dynes/cm as measured
by the pulsating bubble surfactometer and Wilhelmy Surface Balance. In situ, SURVANTA restores pulmonary compliance to excised
rat lungs artificially made surfactant-deficient.  In vivo, single SURVANTA doses improve lung pressure-volume measurements,
lung compliance, and oxygenation in premature rabbits and sheep.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Animal Metabolism
                     
                        SURVANTA is administered directly to the
target organ, the lungs, where biophysical effects occur at the alveolar
surface. In surfactant-deficient premature rabbits and lambs, alveolar
clearance of radio-labelled lipid components of SURVANTA is rapid.
 Most of the dose becomes lung-associated within hours of administration,
and the lipids enter endogenous surfactant pathways of reutilization
and recycling. In surfactant-sufficient adult animals, SURVANTA clearance
is more rapid than in premature and young animals.  There is less
reutilization and recycling of surfactant in adult animals.
                        Limited animal experiments have not found
effects of SURVANTA on endogenous surfactant metabolism.  Precursor
incorporation and subsequent secretion of saturated phosphatidylcholine
in premature sheep are not changed by SURVANTA treatments.
                        No information is available about the metabolic
fate of the surfactant-associated proteins in SURVANTA. The metabolic
disposition in humans has not been studied.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         