
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Naratriptan binds with high affinity to human cloned 5-HT1B/1D receptors. Migraines are likely due to local cranial vasodilatation and/or to the release of sensory neuropeptides (including substance P and calcitonin gene-related peptide) through nerve endings in the trigeminal system. The therapeutic activity of naratriptan for the treatment of migraine headache is thought to be due to the agonist effects at the 5-HT1B/1D receptors on intracranial blood vessels (including the arterio-venous anastomoses) and sensory nerves of the trigeminal system, which result in cranial vessel constriction and inhibition of pro-inflammatory neuropeptide release.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        In the anesthetized dog, naratriptan has been shown to reduce the carotid arterial blood flow with little or no effect on arterial blood pressure or total peripheral resistance. While the effect on blood flow was selective for the carotid arterial bed, increases in vascular resistance of up to 30% were seen in the coronary arterial bed. Naratriptan has also been shown to inhibit trigeminal nerve activity in rat and cat.
                        In ten subjects with suspected CAD undergoing coronary artery catheterization, there was a 1% to 10% reduction in coronary artery diameter following subcutaneous injection of 1.5 mg of naratriptan [see Contraindications (4)].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Absorption
                              
                           
                           
                              Naratriptan is well absorbed, with about 70% oral bioavailability. Following administration of a 2.5 mg tablet, the peak concentrations are obtained in 2 to 3 hours. After administration of 1 mg or 2.5 mg tablets, the Cmax is somewhat (about 50%) higher in women (not corrected for milligram-per-kilogram dose) than in men. During a migraine attack, absorption is slower, with a Tmax of 3 to 4 hours. Food does not affect the pharmacokinetics of naratriptan. Naratriptan displays linear kinetics over the therapeutic dose range.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Distribution
                              
                           
                           
                              The steady-state volume of distribution of naratriptan is 170 L. Plasma protein binding is 28% to 31% over the concentration range of 50 to 1,000 ng/mL. 
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Metabolism
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 In vitro, naratriptan is metabolized by a wide range of cytochrome P450 isoenzymes into a number of inactive metabolites.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Elimination
                              
                           
                           
                              Naratriptan is predominantly eliminated in urine, with 50% of the dose recovered unchanged and 30% as metabolites in urine. The mean elimination half-life of naratriptan is 6 hours. The systemic clearance of naratriptan is 6.6 mL/min/kg. The renal clearance (220 mL/min) exceeds glomerular filtration rate, indicating active tubular secretion. Repeat administration of naratriptan tablets does not result in drug accumulation.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Special Populations
                              
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Age
                                 
                                    A small decrease in clearance (approximately 26%) was observed in healthy elderly subjects (65 to 77 years) compared with younger subjects, resulting in slightly higher exposure [see Use in Specific Populations (8.5)].
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Race
                                 
                                    The effect of race on the pharmacokinetics of naratriptan has not been examined.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Renal Impairment
                                 
                                    Clearance of naratriptan was reduced by 50% in subjects with moderate renal impairment (creatinine clearance: 18 to 39 mL/min) compared with the normal group. Decrease in clearances resulted in an increase of mean half-life from 6 hours (healthy) to 11 hours (range: 7 to 20 hours). The mean Cmax increased by approximately 40%. The effects of severe renal impairment (creatinine clearance: ≤ 15 mL/min) on the pharmacokinetics of naratriptan have not been assessed [see Contraindications (4)].
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Hepatic Impairment
                                 
                                    Clearance of naratriptan was decreased by 30% in subjects with moderate hepatic impairment (Child-Pugh grade A or B). This resulted in an approximately 40% increase in the half-life (range: 8 to 16 hours). The effects of severe hepatic impairment (Child-Pugh grade C) on the pharmacokinetics of naratriptan have not been assessed [see Contraindications (4)].
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Drug Interaction Studies
                              
                           
                           
                              From population pharmacokinetic analyses, co-administration of naratriptan and fluoxetine, beta-blockers, or tricyclic antidepressants did not affect the clearance of naratriptan.
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Oral Contraceptives
                                 
                                    Oral contraceptives reduced clearance by 32% and volume of distribution by 22%, resulting in slightly higher concentrations of naratriptan. Hormone replacement therapy had no effect on pharmacokinetics in older female patients.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Monoamine Oxidase and P450 Inhibitors
                                 
                                    Naratriptan does not inhibit monoamine oxidase (MAO) enzymes and is a poor inhibitor of P450; metabolic interactions between naratriptan and drugs metabolized by P450 or MAO are therefore unlikely.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Smoking
                                 
                                    Smoking increased the clearance of naratriptan by 30%. 
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Alcohol
                                 
                                    In normal volunteers, co-administration of single doses of naratriptan tablets and alcohol did not result in substantial modification of naratriptan pharmacokinetic parameters.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         