
               
               
               12	CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1	Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Like other topical corticosteroids, mometasone furoate has anti-inflammatory, antipruritic, and vasoconstrictive properties. The mechanism of the anti-inflammatory activity of the topical steroids, in general, is unclear. However, corticosteroids are thought to act by the induction of phospholipase A2 inhibitory proteins, collectively called lipocortins. It is postulated that these proteins control the biosynthesis of potent mediators of inflammation such as prostaglandins and leukotrienes by inhibiting the release of their common precursor arachidonic acid. Arachidonic acid is released from membrane phospholipids by phospholipase A2.
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2	Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        Studies performed with mometasone furoate ointment 0.1% indicate that it is in the medium range of potency as compared with other topical corticosteroids.
                        In a study evaluating the effects of mometasone furoate ointment on the HPA axis, 15 grams were applied twice daily for 7 days to 6 adult subjects with psoriasis or atopic dermatitis. The ointment was applied without occlusion to at least 30% of the body surface. The results showed that the drug caused a slight lowering of adrenal corticosteroid secretion [see
                              
                                  Warnings and Precautions (5.1)
                              
                           ].
                        Sixty-three pediatric subjects ages 6 to 23 months, with atopic dermatitis, were enrolled in an open-label HPA axis safety study. Mometasone furoate ointment 0.1% was applied once daily for approximately 3 weeks over a mean body surface area of 39% (range 15% to 99%). In approximately 27% of subjects who showed normal adrenal function by Cortrosyn test before starting treatment, adrenal suppression was observed at the end of treatment with mometasone furoate ointment 0.1% . The criteria for suppression were: basal cortisol level of ≤5 mcg/dL, 30-minute post-stimulation level of ≤18 mcg/dL, or an increase of <7 mcg/dL. Follow-up testing 2 to 4 weeks after stopping treatment, available for 8 of the subjects, demonstrated suppressed HPA axis function in 3 subject, using these same criteria [see
                              
                                  Use in Specific Populations (8.4)
                              
                           ].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3	Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        The extent of percutaneous absorption of topical corticosteroids is determined by many factors including the vehicle and the integrity of the epidermal barrier. Studies in humans indicate that approximately 0.7% of the applied dose of mometasone furoate ointment 0.1% enters the circulation after 8 hours of contact on normal skin without occlusion. Inflammation and/or other disease processes in the skin may increase percutaneous absorption.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         