
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  
                     
                        Dronedarone is metabolized by CYP 3A and is a moderate inhibitor of CYP 3A and CYP 2D6 and has potentially important pharmacodynamic interactions (7)
                        
                           Class I or III Antiarrhythmics: contraindicated (4, 7.1)
                           Digoxin: Consider discontinuation or halve dose of digoxin before treatment and monitor digoxin levels (7.1, 7.3)
                           Calcium channel blockers (CCB): Initiate CCB with low dose and increase after ECG verification of tolerability (7.1,7.2, 7.3)
                           Beta-blockers: May provoke excessive bradycardia, Initiate with low dose and increase after ECG verification of tolerability (7.1, 7.3)
                           CYP 3A inducers: Avoid concomitant use (7.2)
                           Grapefruit juice: Avoid concomitant use (7.2)
                           Statins: Avoid simvastatin doses greater than 10 mg daily. Follow label recommendations for concomitant use of other statins with a CYP 3A and P-gp inhibitor like dronedarone (7.3)
                           CYP 3A substrates with a narrow therapeutic index (e.g., sirolimus and tacrolimus): Monitor and adjust dosage of concomitant drug as needed when used with MULTAQ (7.3)
                           Warfarin: Monitor INR after initiating dronedarone in patients taking warfarin. (7.3)
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 Pharmacodynamic Interactions
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Drugs prolonging the QT interval (inducing Torsade de Pointes) 
                              Co-administration of drugs prolonging the QT interval (such as certain phenothiazines, tricyclic antidepressants, certain macrolide antibiotics, and Class I and III antiarrhythmics) is contraindicated because of the potential risk of Torsade de Pointes-type ventricular tachycardia [see Contraindications (4), Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Digoxin
                              In the ANDROMEDA (patients with recently decompensated heart failure) and PALLAS (patients with permanent AF) trials baseline use of digoxin was associated with an increased risk of arrhythmic or sudden death in dronedarone-treated patients compared to placebo. In patients not taking digoxin, no difference in risk of sudden death was observed in the dronedarone vs. placebo groups. [See Clinical Trials (14.3)].
                              
                              Digoxin can potentiate the electrophysiologic effects of dronedarone (such as decreased AV-node conduction). Dronedarone increases exposure to digoxin  [see Drug Interactions (7.3), Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                              
                              Consider discontinuing digoxin. If digoxin treatment is continued, halve the dose of digoxin, monitor serum levels closely, and observe for toxicity.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Calcium channel blockers
                              Calcium channel blockers with depressant effects on the sinus and AV nodes could potentiate dronedarone's effects on conduction.
                              Give a low dose of calcium channel blockers initially and increase only after ECG verification of good tolerability [see Drug Interactions (7.3), Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Beta-blockers 
                              In clinical trials, bradycardia was more frequently observed when dronedarone was given in combination with beta-blockers.
                              Give a low dose of beta-blockers initially, and increase only after ECG verification of good tolerability [see Drug Interactions (7.3), Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 Effects of Other Drugs on Dronedarone
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Ketoconazole and other potent CYP 3A inhibitors
                              Concomitant use of ketoconazole as well as other potent CYP 3A inhibitors such as itraconazole, voriconazole, ritonavir, clarithromycin, and nefazodone is contraindicated because exposure to dronedarone is significantly increased [see Contraindications (4), Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Grapefruit juice
                              Patients should avoid grapefruit juice beverages while taking MULTAQ because exposure to dronedarone is significantly increased [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Rifampin and other CYP 3A inducers
                              Avoid rifampin or other CYP 3A inducers such as phenobarbital, carbamazepine, phenytoin, and St John's wort because they decrease exposure to dronedarone significantly [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Calcium channel blockers
                              Verapamil and diltiazem are moderate CYP 3A inhibitors and increase dronedarone exposure.  Give a low dose of calcium channel blockers initially and increase only after ECG verification of good tolerability [see Drug Interactions (7.3), Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3 Effects of Dronedarone on Other Drugs
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Simvastatin
                              Dronedarone increased simvastatin/simvastatin acid exposure. Avoid doses greater than 10 mg once daily of simvastatin [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Other statins
                           
                              Because of multiple mechanisms of interaction with statins (CYPs and transporters), follow statin label recommendations for use with CYP 3A and P-gp inhibitors such as dronedarone.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Calcium channel blockers
                              Dronedarone increased the exposure of calcium channel blockers (verapamil, diltiazem or nifedipine). Give a low dose of calcium channel blockers initially and increase only after ECG verification of good tolerability [see Drug Interactions (7.1), Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Sirolimus, tacrolimus, and other CYP3A substrates with narrow therapeutic range 
                              Dronedarone can increase plasma concentrations of tacrolimus, sirolimus, and other CYP 3A substrates with a narrow therapeutic range when given orally. Monitor plasma concentrations and adjust dosage appropriately.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Beta-blockers and other CYP 2D6 substrates
                              Dronedarone increased the exposure of propranolol and metoprolol. Give low doses of beta-blockers initially, and increase only after ECG verification of good tolerability. Other CYP 2D6 substrates, including other beta-blockers, tricyclic antidepressants, and selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) may have increased exposure upon co-administration with dronedarone [see Drug Interactions (7.1), Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              P-glycoprotein substrates
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Digoxin
                                    
                                    Dronedarone increased digoxin exposure by inhibiting the P-gp transporter. Consider discontinuing digoxin. If digoxin treatment is continued, halve the dose of digoxin, monitor serum levels closely, and observe for toxicity [see Drug Interactions (7.1), Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Dabigatran
                                    
                                    Exposure to dabigatran is higher when it is administered with dronedarone than when it is administered alone.
                                    Other P-gp substrates are expected to have increased exposure when co-administered with dronedarone.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Warfarin
                              When co-administered with dronedarone exposure to S-warfarin was slightly higher than when warfarin was administered alone. There were no clinically significant increases in INR [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                              More patients experienced clinically significant INR elevations (≥ 5) usually within 1 week after starting dronedarone vs. placebo in patients taking oral anticoagulants in ATHENA. However, no excess risk of bleeding was observed in the dronedarone group.
                              Postmarketing cases of increased INR with or without bleeding events have been reported in warfarin-treated patients initiated on dronedarone. Monitor INR after initiating dronedarone in patients taking warfarin.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         