
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        The mechanism of action of dronedarone is unknown. Dronedarone has antiarrhythmic properties belonging to all four Vaughan-Williams classes, but the contribution of each of these activities to the clinical effect is unknown.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Electrophysiological effects
                              Dronedarone exhibits properties of all four Vaughn-Williams antiarrhythmic classes, although it is unclear which of these are important in producing dronedarone's clinical effects. The effect of dronedarone on 12-lead ECG parameters (heart rate, PR, and QTc) was investigated in healthy subjects following repeated oral doses up to 1600 mg once daily or 800 mg twice daily for 14 days and 1600 mg twice daily for 10 days. In the dronedarone 400 mg twice daily group, there was no apparent effect on heart rate; a moderate heart rate lowering effect (about 4 bpm) was noted at 800 mg twice daily. There was a clear dose-dependent effect on PR-interval with an increase of +5 ms at 400 mg twice daily and up to +50 ms at 1600 mg twice daily. There was a moderate dose related effect on the QTc-interval with an increase of +10 ms at 400 mg twice daily and up to +25 ms with 1600 mg twice daily.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              DAFNE study
                              DAFNE was a dose-response study in patients with recurrent AF, evaluating the effect of dronedarone in comparison with placebo in maintaining sinus rhythm. The doses of dronedarone in this study were 400, 600, and 800 mg twice a day. In this small study, doses above 400 mg were not more effective and were less well tolerated.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        Dronedarone is extensively metabolized and has low systemic bioavailability; its bioavailability is increased by meals. Its elimination half life is 13–19 hours.
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Absorption
                              Because of presystemic first pass metabolism the absolute bioavailability of dronedarone without food is low, about 4%. It increases to approximately 15% when dronedarone is administered with a high fat meal. After oral administration in fed conditions, peak plasma concentrations of dronedarone and the main circulating active metabolite (N-debutyl metabolite) are reached within 3 to 6 hours. After repeated administration of 400 mg twice daily, steady state is reached within 4 to 8 days of treatment and the mean accumulation ratio for dronedarone ranges from 2.6 to 4.5. The steady state Cmax and exposure of the main N-debutyl metabolite is similar to that of the parent compound. The pharmacokinetics of dronedarone and its N-debutyl metabolite both deviate moderately from dose proportionality: a 2-fold increase in dose results in an approximate 2.5- to 3.0- fold increase with respect to Cmax and AUC.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Distribution
                              The in vitro plasma protein binding of dronedarone and its N-debutyl metabolite is >98 % and not saturable. Both compounds bind mainly to albumin. After intravenous (IV) administration the volume of distribution at steady state is about 1400 L. 
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Metabolism
                              Dronedarone is extensively metabolized, mainly by CYP 3A. The initial metabolic pathway includes N-debutylation to form the active N-debutyl metabolite, oxidative deamination to form the inactive propanoic acid metabolite, and direct oxidation. The metabolites undergo further metabolism to yield over 30 uncharacterized metabolites. The N-debutyl metabolite exhibits pharmacodynamic activity but is 1/10 to 1/3 as potent as dronedarone. Monoamine oxidases contribute partially to the metabolism of the active metabolite of dronedarone.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Excretion/Elimination
                              In a mass balance study with orally administered dronedarone (14C-labeled) approximately 6% of the labeled dose was excreted in urine, mainly as metabolites (no unchanged compound excreted in urine), and 84% was excreted in feces, mainly as metabolites. Dronedarone and its N-debutyl active metabolite accounted for less than 15% of the resultant radioactivity in the plasma.
                              After IV administration the plasma clearance of dronedarone ranges from 130 to 150 L/h. The elimination half-life of dronedarone ranges from 13 to 19 hours. 
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Special populations
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Gender
                                    
                                    Dronedarone exposures are on average 30% higher in females than in males.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Race
                                    
                                    Pharmacokinetic differences related to race were not formally assessed. However, based on a cross study comparison, following single dose administration (400 mg), Asian males (Japanese) have about a 2-fold higher exposure than Caucasian males. The pharmacokinetics of dronedarone in other races has not been assessed.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Elderly 
                                    
                                    Of the total number of subjects in clinical studies of dronedarone, 73% were 65 years of age and over and 34% were 75 and over. In patients aged 65 years old and above, dronedarone exposures are 23% higher than in patients less than 65 years old [see Use in Specific Populations (8.5)].
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Hepatic impairment
                                    
                                    In subjects with moderate hepatic impairment, the mean dronedarone exposure increased by 1.3-fold relative to subjects with normal hepatic function and the mean exposure of the N-debutyl metabolite decreased by about 50%. Pharmacokinetic data were significantly more variable in subjects with moderate hepatic impairment.
                                    The effect of severe hepatic impairment on the pharmacokinetics of dronedarone was not assessed [see Contraindications (4)].
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Renal impairment
                                    
                                    Consistent with the low renal excretion of dronedarone, no pharmacokinetic difference was observed in subjects with mild or moderate renal impairment compared to subjects with normal renal function [see Use in Specific Populations (8.6)]. No pharmacokinetic difference was observed in patients with mild to severe renal impairment in comparison with patients with normal renal function.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Drug Interactions
                                 
                                    Dronedarone is metabolized primarily by CYP 3A and is a moderate inhibitor of CYP 3A and CYP 2D6.  Dronedarone has no significant potential to inhibit CYP 1A2, CYP 2C9, CYP 2C19, CYP 2C8 and CYP 2B6. It has the potential to inhibit P-glycoprotein (P-gp) transport. Dronedarone inhibits in vivo the tubular secretion of creatinine a substrate of the organic cation transporter (OCT2) [see Warnings and Precautions (5.9)].
                                    
                                    
                                       In vitro dronedarone and the metabolites SR35021 and SR90154 show no significant potential to inhibit the organic anion transporters OAT1 and OAT3 or the organic cation transporter OCT1. However, in vitro data indicate that SR90154 is likely to inhibit the organic anion transporting polypeptides (OATP1B1, OATP1B3)  in vivo.
                                    
                                    Pharmacokinetic measures indicating the magnitude of these interactions are presented in Figure 1 (impact of co-administered drugs on dronedarone) and Figure 2 (impact of dronedarone on co-administered drugs).
                                    
                                       Figure 1: The impact of co-administered drugs on the pharmacokinetics of dronedarone and recommendations for dronedarone coadministration or dose adjustment.
                                    
                                       
                                    
                                    
                                       Figure 2: The impact of dronedarone on co-administered drugs and recommendations for dose adjustment of co-administered drug.
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Figure 1
                                       
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Figure 2
                                       
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         