
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  Amoxicillin and clavulanate potassium are well absorbed from the 
gastrointestinal tract after oral administration of amoxicillin/clavulanate 
potassium. Dosing in the fasted or fed state has minimal effect on the 
pharmacokinetics of amoxicillin. While amoxicillin/clavulanate potassium can be 
given without regard to meals, absorption of clavulanate potassium when taken 
with food is greater relative to the fasted state. In 1 study, the relative 
bioavailability of clavulanate was reduced when amoxicillin/clavulanate 
potassium was dosed at 30 and 150 minutes after the start of a high-fat 
breakfast. The safety and efficacy of amoxicillin/clavulanate potassium have 
been established in clinical trials where amoxicillin/clavulanate potassium was 
taken without regard to meals.
                  Mean* amoxicillin and clavulanate potassium pharmacokinetic parameters are 
shown in the table below:
                  
                  


                  


*Mean values of 14 normal volunteers (n=15 for clavulanate potassium in the 
low-dose regimens). Peak concentrations occurred approximately 1.5 hours after 
the dose.
                  
                     †  Administered at the start of a light meal.
                  Amoxicillin serum concentrations achieved with amoxicillin/clavulanate 
potassium are similar to those produced by the oral administration of equivalent 
doses of amoxicillin alone. The half-life of amoxicillin after the oral 
administration of amoxicillin/clavulanate potassium is 1.3 hours and that of 
clavulanic acid is 1.0 hour.
                  Approximately 50% to 70% of the amoxicillin and approximately 25% to 40% of 
the clavulanic acid are excreted unchanged in urine during the first 6 hours 
after administration of a single 250-mg or 500-mg tablet of 
amoxicillin/clavulanate potassium. 
                  Concurrent administration of probenecid delays amoxicillin excretion but does 
not delay renal excretion of clavulanic acid.
                  Neither component in amoxicillin/clavulanate potassium is highly 
protein-bound; clavulanic acid has been found to be approximately 25% bound to 
human serum and amoxicillin approximately 18% bound.
                  Amoxicillin diffuses readily into most body tissues and fluids with the 
exception of the brain and spinal fluid. The results of experiments involving 
the administration of clavulanic acid to animals suggest that this compound, 
like amoxicillin, is well distributed in body tissues.
               
               
            
         