
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           Mixed      agonist/antagonist and partial agonist opioid analgesics: Avoid use with      morphine sulfate extended-release tablets because they may reduce      analgesic effect of morphine sulfate extended-release tablets or      precipitate withdrawal symptoms. (5.11, 7.2)
                           Monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs):      Avoid morphine sulfate extended-release tablets in patients taking MAOIs      or within 14 days of stopping such treatment. (7.4)
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     7.1 CNS Depressants
                     
                        The concomitant use of morphine sulfate extended-release tablets with other CNS depressants including sedatives, hypnotics, tranquilizers, general anesthetics, phenothiazines, , other opioids, and alcohol can increase the risk of respiratory depression,  profound sedation, coma, and death.  Monitor patients receiving CNS depressants and morphine sulfate extended-release tablets for signs of respiratory depression, sedation, and hypotension.  
                        When combined therapy with any of the above medications is considered, the dose of one or both agents should be reduced [see Dosage and Administration (2.2) and Warnings and Precautions (5.4)].  
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     7.2 Interactions with Mixed Agonist/Antagonist and Partial Agonist Opioid Analgesics
                     
                        Mixed agonist/antagonist (i.e., pentazocine, nalbuphine, and butorphanol) and partial agonist (buprenorphine) analgesics may reduce the analgesic effect of morphine sulfate extended-release tablets or precipitate withdrawal symptoms.  Avoid the use of agonist/antagonist and partial agonist analgesics in patients receiving morphine sulfate extended-release tablets.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     7.3 Muscle Relaxants
                     
                        Morphine may enhance the neuromuscular blocking action of skeletal muscle relaxants and produce an increased degree of respiratory depression.  Monitor patients receiving muscle relaxants and morphine sulfate extended-release tablets for signs of respiratory depression that may be greater than otherwise expected.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     7.4 Monoamine Oxidase Inhibitors (MAOIs)
                     
                        The effects of morphine may be potentiated by MAOIs.  Monitor patients on concurrent therapy with an MAOI and morphine sulfate extended-release tablets for increased respiratory and central nervous system depression. MAOIs have been reported to potentiate the effects of morphine anxiety, confusion, and significant depression of respiration or coma.  Morphine sulfate extended-release tablets should not be used in patients taking MAOIs or within 14 days of stopping such treatment. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     7.5 Cimetidine
                     
                        Cimetidine can potentiate morphine-induced respiratory depression. There is a report of confusion and severe respiratory depression when a patient undergoing hemodialysis was concurrently administered morphine and cimetidine.  Monitor patients for respiratory depression when morphine sulfate extended-release tablets and cimetidine are used concurrently.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     7.6 Diuretics
                     
                        Morphine can reduce the efficacy of diuretics by inducing the release of antidiuretic hormone. Morphine may also lead to acute retention of urine by causing spasm of the sphincter of the bladder, particularly in men with enlarged prostates.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     7.7 Anticholinergics
                     
                        Anticholinergics or other medications with anticholinergic activity when used concurrently with opioid analgesics may result in increased risk of urinary retention and/or severe constipation, which may lead to paralytic ileus. Monitor patients for signs of urinary retention or reduced gastric motility when morphine sulfate extended-release tablets are used concurrently with anticholinergic drugs.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     7.8 P-Glycoprotein (PGP) Inhibitors
                     
                        PGP-inhibitors (e.g., quinidine) may increase the absorption/exposure of morphine sulfate by about two-fold. Therefore, monitor patients for signs of respiratory and central nervous system depression when morphine sulfate extended-release tablets are used concurrently with PGP inhibitors.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         