
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              •CYP3A4 Inducers: Increased risk of more rapid metabolism and decreased effects of methadone. (7.2)
                           
                              •CYP3A4 Inhibitors: Increased risk of reduced metabolism and methadone toxicity. (7.2)
                           
                              •Anti-retroviral Agents: May result in increased clearance and decreased plasma levels of methadone or in certain cases, increased plasma levels and risk of toxicity. (7.2)
                           
                              •Potentially Arrhythmogenic Agents: Extreme caution is necessary when any drug known to have the potential to prolong the QT interval is prescribed in conjunction with methadone. (7.3)
                           
                              •Mixed Agonist/Antagonist and Partial Agonist Opioid Analgesics: Avoid use with methadone hydrochloride because they may reduce analgesic effect of methadone hydrochloride or precipitate withdrawal symptoms. (5.12, 7.4)
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 CNS Depressants 
                     
                        The concomitant use of methadone hydrochloride with other CNS depressants including sedatives, hypnotics, tranquilizers, general anesthetics, phenothiazines, other opioids, and alcohol can increase the risk of respiratory depression, profound sedation, coma and death. Monitor patients receiving CNS depressants and methadone hydrochloride for signs of respiratory depression, sedation and hypotension.
                        When combined therapy with any of the above medications is considered, the dose of one or both agents should be reduced 
                              [Warnings and Precautions (5.5)]
                           .
                        Deaths have been reported when methadone has been abused in conjunction with benzodiazepines.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 Drugs Affecting Cytochrome P450 Isoenzymes
                     
                        Methadone undergoes hepatic N-demethylation by cytochrome P450 (CYP) isoforms, principally CYP3A4, CYP2B6, CYP2C19, and to a lesser extent by CYP2C9 and CYP2D6 
                              [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)]
                           .
                        
                           Inhibitors of CYP3A4 and 2C9: Because the CYP3A4 isoenzyme plays a major role in the metabolism of methadone, drugs that inhibit CYP3A4 activity may cause decreased clearance of methadone which could lead to an increase in methadone plasma concentrations and result in increased or prolonged opioid effects. These effects could be more pronounced with concomitant use of CYP 2C9 and 3A4 inhibitors. If co-administration with methadone hydrochloride is necessary, monitor patients for respiratory depression and sedation at frequent intervals and consider dose adjustments until stable drug effects are achieved 
                              [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                        
                        
                           Inducers of CYP3A4: CYP450 3A4 inducers may induce the metabolism of methadone and, therefore, may cause increased clearance of the drug which could lead to a decrease in methadone plasma concentrations, lack of efficacy or, possibly, development of a withdrawal syndrome in a patient who had developed physical dependence to methadone. If co-administration with methadone hydrochloride is necessary, monitor for signs of opioid withdrawal and consider dose adjustments until stable drug effects are achieved 
                              [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)]
                           .
                        After stopping the treatment of a CYP3A4 inducer, as the effects of the inducer decline, methadone plasma concentration will increase which could increase or prolong both the therapeutic and adverse effects, and may cause serious respiratory depression. If co-administration or discontinuation of a CYP3A4 inducer with methadone hydrochloride is necessary, monitor for signs of opioid withdrawal and consider dose adjustments until stable drug effects are achieved 
                              [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)]
                           .
                        
                           Paradoxical Effects of Antiretroviral Agents on Methadone Hydrochloride: Concurrent use of certain antiretroviral agents with CYP3A4 inhibitory activity, alone and in combination, such as abacavir, amprenavir, darunavir+ritonavir, efavirenz, nelfinavir, nevirapine, ritonavir, telaprevir, lopinavir+ritonavir, saquinavir+ritonavir, and tipranvir+ritonavir, has resulted in increased clearance or decreased plasma levels of methadone. This may result in reduced efficacy of methadone hydrochloride and could precipitate a withdrawal syndrome. Monitor methadone-maintained patients receiving any of these anti-retroviral therapies closely for evidence of withdrawal effects and adjust the methadone dose accordingly.
                        
                           Effects of Methadone Hydrochloride on Antiretroviral Agents: Didanosine and Stavudine: Experimental evidence demonstrated that methadone decreased the area under the concentration-time curve (AUC) and peak levels for didanosine and stavudine, with a more significant decrease for didanosine. Methadone disposition was not substantially altered.
                        
                           Zidovudine: Experimental evidence demonstrated that methadone increased the AUC of zidovudine, which could result in toxic effects.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3 Potentially Arrhythmogenic Agents
                     
                        Monitor patients closely for cardiac conduction changes when any drug known to have the potential to prolong the QT interval is prescribed in conjunction with methadone. Pharmacodynamic interactions may occur with concomitant use of methadone and potentially arrhythmogenic agents such as class I and III antiarrhythmics, some neuroleptics and tricyclic antidepressants, and calcium channel blockers.
                        Similarly, monitor patients closely when prescribing methadone concomitantly with drugs capable of inducing electrolyte disturbances (hypomagnesemia, hypokalemia) that may prolong the QT interval, including diuretics, laxatives, and, in rare cases, mineralocorticoid hormones.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4 Mixed Agonist/Antagonist and Partial Agonist Opioid Analgesics
                     
                        Mixed agonist/antagonist (i.e., pentazocine, nalbuphine and butorphanol) and partial agonist (buprenorphine) analgesics may reduce the analgesic effect of methadone hydrochloride or precipitate withdrawal symptoms. Avoid the use of mixed agonist/antagonist and partial agonist analgesics in patients receiving methadone hydrochloride.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.5 Antidepressants
                     
                        
                           Monoamine Oxidase (MAO) Inhibitors: Therapeutic doses of meperidine have precipitated severe reactions in patients concurrently receiving monoamine oxidase inhibitors or those who have received such agents within 14 days. Similar reactions thus far have not been reported with methadone. However, if the use of methadone is necessary in such patients, a sensitivity test should be performed in which repeated small, incremental doses of methadone are administered over the course of several hours while the patient’s condition and vital signs are carefully observed.
                        
                           Desipramine: Blood levels of desipramine have increased with concurrent methadone administration.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.6 Anticholinergics
                     
                        Anticholinergics or other drugs with anticholinergic activity when used concurrently with opioids may result in increased risk of urinary retention and/or severe constipation, which may lead to paralytic ileus. Monitor patients for signs of urinary retention or reduced gastric motility when methadone hydrochloride is used concurrently with anticholinergic drugs.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.7 Laboratory Test Interactions
                     
                        False positive urine drug screens for methadone have been reported for several drugs including diphenhydramine, doxylamine, clomipramine, chlorpromazine, thioridazine, quetiapine, and verapamil.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         