
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Dabrafenib is an inhibitor of some mutated forms of BRAF kinases with in vitro IC50 values of 0.65, 0.5, and 1.84 nM for BRAF V600E, BRAF V600K, and BRAF V600D enzymes, respectively. Dabrafenib also inhibits wild-type BRAF and CRAF kinases with IC50 values of 3.2 and 5.0 nM, respectively, and other kinases such as SIK1, NEK11, and LIMK1 at higher concentrations. Some mutations in the BRAF gene, including those that result in BRAF V600E, can result in constitutively activated BRAF kinases that may stimulate tumor cell growth [see Indications and Usage (1)]. Dabrafenib inhibits BRAF V600 mutation-positive melanoma cell growth in vitro and in vivo.
                        Dabrafenib and trametinib target two different tyrosine kinases in the RAS/RAF/MEK/ERK pathway. Use of dabrafenib and trametinib in combination resulted in greater growth inhibition of BRAF V600 mutation-positive melanoma cell lines in vitro and prolonged inhibition of tumor growth in BRAF V600 mutation positive melanoma xenografts compared with either drug alone.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        
                           Absorption: After oral administration, median time to achieve peak plasma concentration (Tmax) is 2 hours. Mean absolute bioavailability of oral dabrafenib is 95%. Following a single dose, dabrafenib exposure (Cmax and AUC) increased in a dose-proportional manner across the dose range of 12 to 300 mg, but the increase was less than dose-proportional after repeat twice-daily dosing. After repeat twice-daily dosing of 150 mg, the mean accumulation ratio was 0.73 and the inter-subject variability (CV%) of AUC at steady-state was 38%.
                        Administration of dabrafenib with a high-fat meal decreased Cmax by 51%, decreased AUC by 31%, and delayed median Tmax by 3.6 hours as compared with the fasted state [see Dosage and Administration (2.2)].
                        
                           Distribution: Dabrafenib is 99.7% bound to human plasma proteins. The apparent volume of distribution (Vc/F) is 70.3 L.
                        
                           Metabolism: The metabolism of dabrafenib is primarily mediated by CYP2C8 and CYP3A4 to form hydroxy-dabrafenib. Hydroxy-dabrafenib is further oxidized via CYP3A4 to form carboxy-dabrafenib and subsequently excreted in bile and urine. Carboxy-dabrafenib is decarboxylated to form desmethyl-dabrafenib; desmethyl-dabrafenib may be reabsorbed from the gut. Desmethyl-dabrafenib is further metabolized by CYP3A4 to oxidative metabolites. Hydroxy-dabrafenib terminal half-life (10 hours) parallels that of dabrafenib while the carboxy- and desmethyl-dabrafenib metabolites exhibited longer half-lives (21 to 22 hours). Mean metabolite-to-parent AUC ratios following repeat-dose administration are 0.9, 11, and 0.7 for hydroxy-, carboxy-, and desmethyl-dabrafenib, respectively. Based on systemic exposure, relative potency, and pharmacokinetic properties, both hydroxy- and desmethyl-dabrafenib are likely to contribute to the clinical activity of dabrafenib.
                        
                           Elimination: The mean terminal half-life of dabrafenib is 8 hours after oral administration. The apparent clearance of dabrafenib is 17.0 L/h after single dosing and 34.4 L/h after 2 weeks of twice-daily dosing.
                        Fecal excretion is the major route of elimination accounting for 71% of radioactive dose while urinary excretion accounted for 23% of total radioactivity as metabolites only.
                        
                           Specific Populations: 
                        
                        
                           Age, Body Weight, and Gender: Based on the population pharmacokinetics analysis, age has no effect on dabrafenib pharmacokinetics. Pharmacokinetic differences based on gender and on weight are not clinically relevant.
                        
                           Pediatric: Pharmacokinetics of dabrafenib has not been studied in pediatric patients.
                        
                        
                           Renal: No formal pharmacokinetic trial in patients with renal impairment has been conducted. The pharmacokinetics of dabrafenib were evaluated using a population analysis in 233 patients with mild renal impairment (GFR 60 to 89 mL/min/1.73 m2) and 30 patients with moderate renal impairment (GFR 30 to 59 mL/min/1.73 m2) enrolled in clinical trials. Mild or moderate renal impairment has no effect on systemic exposure to dabrafenib and its metabolites. No data are available in patients with severe renal impairment.
                        
                           Hepatic: No formal pharmacokinetic trial in patients with hepatic impairment has been conducted. The pharmacokinetics of dabrafenib was evaluated using a population analysis in 65 patients with mild hepatic impairment enrolled in clinical trials. Mild hepatic impairment has no effect on systemic exposure to dabrafenib and its metabolites. No data are available in patients with moderate to severe hepatic impairment.
                        
                           Drug Interactions:
                        
                        In vitro studies show that dabrafenib is a substrate of CYP3A4 and CYP2C8 while hydroxy-dabrafenib and desmethyl-dabrafenib are CYP3A4 substrates. Coadministration of dabrafenib 75 mg twice daily and ketoconazole 400 mg once daily (a strong CYP3A4 inhibitor) for 4 days increased dabrafenib AUC by 71%, hydroxy-dabrafenib AUC by 82%, and desmethyl-dabrafenib AUC by 68%. Coadministration of dabrafenib 75 mg twice daily and gemfibrozil 600 mg twice daily (a strong CYP2C8 inhibitor) for 4 days increased dabrafenib AUC by 47%, with no change in the AUC of dabrafenib metabolites. Dabrafenib is a substrate of human P-glycoprotein (P-gp) and breast cancer resistance protein (BCRP) in vitro.
                        In vitro data demonstrate that dabrafenib is an inducer of CYP3A4 and CYP2B6 via activation of the pregnane X receptor (PXR) and constitutive androstane receptor (CAR) nuclear receptors. Dabrafenib may also induce CYP2C enzymes via the same mechanism. Coadministration of dabrafenib 150 mg twice daily for 15 days and a single dose of midazolam 3 mg (a CYP3A4 substrate) decreased midazolam AUC by 74%. Coadministration of dabrafenib 150 mg twice daily for 15 days and a single dose of warfarin 15 mg decreased the AUC of S-warfarin (a CYP2C9 substrate) by 37% and the AUC of R-warfarin (a CYP3A4/CYP1A2 substrate) by 33% [see Drug Interactions (7.2)].
                        Dabrafenib and its metabolites, hydroxy-dabrafenib, carboxy-dabrafenib, and desmethyl-dabrafenib, are inhibitors of human organic anion transporting polypeptide OATP1B1, OATP1B3 and organic anion transporter OAT1 and OAT3 in vitro. Dabrafenib and desmethyl-dabrafenib are inhibitors of BCRP in vitro.
                        Coadministration of trametinib 2 mg daily with dabrafenib 150 mg twice daily resulted in a 23% increase in AUC of dabrafenib, a 33% increase in AUC of desmethyl-dabrafenib, and no change in AUC of trametinib or hydroxy-dabrafenib as compared with administration of either drug alone.
                        Drugs that alter the pH of the upper GI tract (e.g., proton pump inhibitors, H2-receptor antagonists, antacids) may alter the solubility of dabrafenib and reduce its bioavailability. However, no formal clinical trial has been conducted to evaluate the effect of gastric pH-altering agents on the systemic exposure of dabrafenib. When TAFINLAR is coadministered with a proton pump inhibitor, H2-receptor antagonist, or antacid, systemic exposure of dabrafenib may be decreased and the effect on efficacy of TAFINLAR is unknown.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         