
               
               
               12  CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1  Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Collagenases are proteinases that hydrolyze collagen in its native triple helical conformation under physiological conditions, resulting in lysis of collagen deposits.
                        Injection of XIAFLEX into a Dupuytren’s cord, which is comprised mostly of collagen, may result in enzymatic disruption of the cord.
                        The signs and symptoms of Peyronie’s disease are caused by a collagen plaque. Injection of XIAFLEX into a Peyronie’s plaque, which is comprised mostly of collagen, may result in enzymatic disruption of the plaque. Following this disruption of the plaque, penile curvature deformity and patient bother caused by Peyronie’s disease are reduced 
                              [see Clinical Studies (14.2)].
                           
                        
                        Results of in vitro studies, including those of explant tissues containing Peyronie’s plaques, suggest that XIAFLEX disrupts the predominant collagen found in plaques (Types I and III). At higher doses and longer incubation times, non-fibrillar Type IV collagen was affected causing collagen lysis in small veins, but did not cause structural damage to arteries, nerves or large veins which contain Type IV collagen in in vitro or in vivo studies. 
                        Results of in vitro studies suggest that the collagenases (AUX-I and AUX-II) worked synergistically to provide hydrolyzing activity towards collagen. However, there are no clinical data regarding the relative contributions of the individual collagenases (AUX-I or AUX-II) to the efficacy of XIAFLEX in the treatment of Dupuytren’s contracture or Peyronie’s disease.
                        Collagen fragments generated from clostridial collagenase have been shown to generate increased vascular permeability, inflammatory responses, and regenerative changes. However, the effects of the formation of the collagen fragments derived from the collagen plaque are unknown. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3  Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        Following administration of either a single injection of XIAFLEX 0.58 mg into a Dupuytren’s cord in 20 patients or two concurrent injections of XIAFLEX 0.58 mg into Dupuytren’s cords of 12 patients, no quantifiable levels of XIAFLEX (AUX-I or AUX-II) were detected in plasma up to 30 days post injection.
                        Following each of two intralesional administrations, separated by 24 hours, of XIAFLEX 0.58 mg into the penile plaque of 19 subjects with Peyronie’s disease, plasma levels of AUX-I and AUX-II in subjects with quantifiable levels (79% and 40% for AUX-I and AUX-II, respectively) were minimal and short-lived. The maximal plasma concentrations of AUX-I and AUX-II were <29 ng/mL and <71 ng/mL, respectively, and were observed approximately within 10 minutes after injection. All plasma levels were below the limits of quantification within 30 minutes following dosing. There was no evidence of accumulation following two sequential injections of XIAFLEX administered 24 hours apart. No subject had quantifiable plasma levels 15 minutes after modeling of plaque on Day 3 (i.e., 24 hours after Injection 2 on Day 2).
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         