
               
               
               12	CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 	Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Ponatinib is a kinase inhibitor. Ponatinib inhibited the in vitro tyrosine kinase activity of ABL and T315I mutant ABL with IC50 concentrations of 0.4 and 2.0 nM, respectively. Ponatinib inhibited the in vitro activity of additional kinases with IC50 concentrations between 0.1 and 20 nM, including members of the VEGFR, PDGFR, FGFR, EPH receptors and SRC families of kinases, and KIT, RET, TIE2, and FLT3. Ponatinib inhibited the in vitro viability of cells expressing native or mutant BCR-ABL, including T315I. In mice, treatment with ponatinib reduced the size of tumors expressing native or T315I mutant BCR-ABL when compared to controls.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 	Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        In a cell-based assay, ponatinib concentrations of 20 nM (10.65 ng/mL) were sufficient to suppress most BCR-ABL mutant clones. However, ponatinib concentrations of 40 nM (21.3 ng/mL) were required to suppress T315I mutants.  The median and range of steady-state Cmax and trough (Cmin) concentrations of ponatinib following 29 days of once-daily dosing of 15 mg, 30 mg and 45 mg are listed in Table 9.
                        


                        


Concentrations of ponatinib shown in cell-based assays to suppress unmutated BCR-ABL and most mutant BCR-ABL clones may be achieved at once daily dosing of 15 mg or 30 mg.  
                        The dose intensity-safety relationship indicated that there are significant increases in grade ≥ 3 adverse events (hypertension, thrombocytopenia, pancreatitis, neutropenia, rash, ALT increase, AST increase, lipase increase, myelosuppression) over the dose range of 15 to 45 mg once-daily.
                        In vitro, there was no significant inhibition of platelet aggregation with ponatinib at concentrations seen clinically and up to 0.7 μg/mL (1.23 μM).
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Cardiac Electrophysiology
                              
                              A QT assessment was performed in 39 patients with cancer who received 30 mg, 45 mg, or 60 mg Iclusig once daily.  No large changes in the mean QTc interval (i.e., > 20 ms) from baseline were detected in the study.  However, a small increase in the mean QTc interval (i.e., < 10 ms) cannot be excluded because of study design limitations.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3	Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        The geometric mean (CV%) Cmax and AUC(0-τ) of Iclusig 45 mg daily at presumed steady state in patients with advanced hematologic malignancies were 73 ng/mL (74%) and 1253 ng•hr/mL (73%), respectively. Ponatinib administered as an investigational capsule formulation to patients with cancer exhibited approximately dose proportional increases in both Cmax and AUC over the dose range of 15 to 60 mg.  A dose intensity safety analysis showed a significant increase in grade 3 or higher adverse reactions (i.e., thrombocytopenia, neutropenia, rash, ALT elevation, AST elevation, pancreatitis, and lipase elevation) with an increase in dose intensity.
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Absorption
                              
                              The absolute bioavailability of ponatinib is unknown. Peak concentrations of ponatinib are observed within 6 hours after Iclusig oral administration. Following ingestion of either a high-fat or low-fat meal by 22 healthy volunteers, plasma ponatinib exposures (AUC and Cmax) were not different when compared to fasting conditions.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Distribution
                              
                              Ponatinib is greater than 99% bound to plasma proteins in vitro. There was no plasma protein binding displacement of ponatinib (145 nM) in vitro by other highly protein bound medications (ibuprofen, nifedipine, propranolol, salicylic acid, and warfarin).  The geometric mean (CV%) apparent steady state volume of distribution is 1223 liters (102%) following oral administration of Iclusig 45 mg once daily for 28 days in patients with cancer. Ponatinib is a weak substrate for both P-gp and ABCG2 in vitro. Ponatinib is not a substrate for organic anion transporting polypeptides (OATP1B1, OATP1B3) and organic cation transporter 1 (OCT1) in vitro.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Metabolism
                              
                              At least 64% of a ponatinib dose undergoes phase I and phase II metabolism. CYP3A4 and to a lesser extent CYP2C8, CYP2D6 and CYP3A5 are involved in the phase I metabolism of ponatinib in vitro. Ponatinib is also metabolized by esterases and/or amidases.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Elimination
                              
                              The geometric mean (range) terminal elimination half-life of ponatinib was approximately 24 (12 to 66) hours following Iclusig 45 mg oral administration once daily for 28 days in patients with cancer. Exposure increased by approximately 90% (median) [range: 20% to 440%] between the first dose and presumed steady state. Ponatinib is mainly eliminated via feces. Following a single oral dose of [14C]-labeled ponatinib, approximately 87% of the radioactive dose is recovered in the feces and approximately 5% in the urine.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Drug Interactions
                              
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Coadministration of Ponatinib and CYP3A Inhibitors
                                    
                                    Coadministration of a single 15 mg oral dose of ponatinib in the presence of ketoconazole (400 mg daily), a strong CYP3A inhibitor, to 22 healthy volunteers, increased the AUC0-inf and Cmax of ponatinib by 78% and 47%, respectively, when compared to administration of ponatinib alone [see Drug Interactions (7.1)].
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Coadministration of Ponatinib and CYP3A Inducers
                                    
                                    Co-administration of a single 45 mg dose of ponatinib in the presence of rifampin (600 mg daily), a strong CYP3A inducer, to 19 healthy volunteers, decreased the AUC0-inf and Cmax of ponatinib by 62% and 42%, respectively, when compared to administration of ponatinib alone 
                                          [see Drug Interactions (7.2)]
                                       .
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Coadministration With Other CYP Substrates
                                    
                                    
                                       In vitro studies indicate that ponatinib does not inhibit the metabolism of substrates for CYP1A2, CYP2B6, CYP2C8, CYP2C9, CYP2C19, CYP3A, or CYP2D6 and does not induce the metabolism of substrates for CYP1A2, CYP2B6, or CYP3A.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Coadministration With Substrates of Transporters
                                    
                                    
                                       In vitro, ponatinib is an inhibitor of P-gp and ABCG2, and BSEP [see Drug Interactions (7.4)].
                                    
                                       In vitro, ponatinib did not inhibit the human organic anion transporting polypeptides OATP1B1 or OATP1B3, or the organic cation transporters OCT1, OCT2, OAT1, and OAT3.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Coadministration of Ponatinib and Gastric pH elevating Medications
                                    
                                    The aqueous solubility of ponatinib is pH dependent, with higher pH resulting in lower solubility [see Description (11)]. Co-administration of a single 45 mg dose of ponatinib in the presence of lansoprazole (60 mg daily), a proton pump inhibitor, to 18 healthy volunteers decreased the AUC0-inf and Cmax of ponatinib by 6% and 25%, respectively, when compared to administration of ponatinib alone [see Drug Interactions (7.3)].
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Pharmacokinetics in Specific Populations
                              
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Hepatic Impairment
                                    
                                    A single 30 mg oral dose of ponatinib was administered to subjects with normal liver function (N=8) and to subjects with mild [Child-Pugh A (N=6)], moderate [Child-Pugh B (N=6)], and severe [Child-Pugh C (N=4)] hepatic impairment. Compared to subjects with normal liver function,  there was no trend of increased ponatinib exposure in subjects with hepatic impairment. There was an increased incidence of adverse reactions in patients with hepatic impairment compared to subjects with normal liver function 
                                          [see Dosage and Administration (2.5) and Use in Specific Populations (8.6)].
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Renal Impairment
                                    
                                    Iclusig has not been studied in patients with renal impairment. Although renal excretion is not a major route of ponatinib elimination, the potential for moderate or severe renal impairment to affect hepatic elimination has not been determined [see Use in Specific Populations (8.7)].
                                    
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         