
               
               
               7	DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
                  Based on in vitro studies, ponatinib is a substrate of CYP3A and to a lesser extent CYP2C8 and CYP2D6. Ponatinib also inhibits the P-glycoprotein (P-gp), ATP-binding cassette G2 (ABCG2) [also known as BCRP], and bile salt export pump (BSEP) transporter systems in vitro 
                     [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
               
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           Strong CYP3A Inhibitors: Avoid concurrent use, or reduce Iclusig dose if co-administration cannot be avoided (2.4, 7.1)
                           Strong CYP3A Inducers: Avoid concurrent use (7.2)
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1	Drugs That Are Strong Inhibitors of CYP3A Enzymes
                     
                        In a drug interaction study in healthy volunteers, co-administration of Iclusig with ketoconazole increased plasma ponatinib AUC0-inf and Cmax by 78% and 47%, respectively [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)]. When administering Iclusig with strong CYP3A inhibitors (e.g., boceprevir, clarithromycin, conivaptan, grapefruit juice, indinavir, itraconazole, ketoconazole, lopinavir/ritonavir, nefazodone, nelfinavir, posaconazole, ritonavir, saquinavir, telaprevir, telithromycin, voriconazole), the recommended starting dose should be reduced  [see Dosage and Administration (2.4)]. Patients taking concomitant strong CYP3A inhibitors may be at increased risk for adverse reactions [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2	Drugs That Are Strong Inducers of CYP3A Enzymes
                     
                        Coadministration of strong CYP3A inducers (e.g., carbamazepine, phenytoin, rifampin, and St. John's Wort) with Iclusig should be avoided unless the benefit outweighs the risk of decreased ponatinib exposure.  Monitor patients for reduced efficacy. Selection of concomitant medication with no or minimal CYP3A induction potential is recommended. In a drug interaction study in healthy volunteers, co-administration of Iclusig following multiple doses of rifampin resulted in decreased ponatinib AUC0-inf and Cmax values by 62% and 42%, respectively  [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].  
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3	Drugs That Elevate Gastric pH
                     
                        Iclusig may be co-administered with gastric pH-elevating medications. In a drug interaction study in healthy volunteers, co-administration of Iclusig following multiple doses of lansoprazole resulted in a minimal (6%) decrease in ponatinib exposure. [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4		Drugs That Are Substrates of the P-gp or ABCG2 Transporter Systems
                     
                        
                           In vitro studies demonstrate that Iclusig inhibits the P-gp and ABCG2 transporter systems. The effect of coadministration of Iclusig with sensitive substrates of the P-gp (e.g., aliskiren, ambrisentan, colchicine, dabigatran etexilate, digoxin, everolimus, fexofenadine, imatinib, lapatinib, maraviroc, nilotinib, posaconazole, ranolazine, saxagliptin, sirolimus, sitagliptin, tolvaptan, topotecan) and ABCG2 (e.g., methotrexate, mitoxantrone, imatinib, irinotecan, lapatinib, rosuvastatin, sulfasalazine, topotecan) transporter systems on exposure of these substrates has not been evaluated in clinical studies.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         