
               
               
               7	DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           Coadministration of amiodarone with SOVALDI in combination with another DAA may result in serious symptomatic bradycardia. (5.1, 6.2, 7.1)
                           Drugs that are intestinal P-gp inducers (e.g., rifampin, St. John's wort) may alter the concentrations of sofosbuvir. (5.2, 7, 12.3)
                           Consult the full prescribing information prior to use for potential drug-drug interactions. (5.1, 5.2, 7, 12.3)
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1	Potentially Significant Drug Interactions
                     
                        Sofosbuvir is a substrate of drug transporter P-gp and breast cancer resistance protein (BCRP) while the predominant circulating metabolite GS-331007 is not. Drugs that are P-gp inducers in the intestine (e.g., rifampin or St. John's wort) may decrease sofosbuvir plasma concentration, leading to reduced therapeutic effect of SOVALDI, and thus concomitant use with SOVALDI is not recommended  [see Warnings and Precautions (5.2)].
                        Information on potential drug interactions with SOVALDI is summarized in Table 4. The table is not all-inclusive [see Warnings and Precautions (5.1, 5.2) and Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                        
                        


                     



                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2	Drugs without Clinically Significant Interactions with SOVALDI
                     
                        In addition to the drugs included in Table 4, the interaction between SOVALDI and the following drugs was evaluated in clinical trials and no dose adjustment is needed for either drug  [See Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)]:  cyclosporine, darunavir/ritonavir, efavirenz, emtricitabine, methadone, oral contraceptives, raltegravir, rilpivirine, tacrolimus, or tenofovir disoproxil fumarate.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         