
                           
                           
                           Drug Interactions
                           
                              
                                 Losartan Potassium
                              
                                   No significant drug-drug pharmacokinetic interactions have been found in interaction studies with hydrochlorothiazide, digoxin, warfarin, cimetidine and phenobarbital. Rifampin, an inducer of drug metabolism, decreased the concentrations of losartan and its active metabolite. (See CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY, 
                                    Drug Interactions
                                 ).In humans, two inhibitors of P450 3A4 have been studied. Ketoconazole did not affect the conversion of losartan to the active metabolite after intravenous administration of losartan, and erythromycin had no clinically significant effect after oral administration. Fluconazole, an inhibitor of P450 2C9, decreased active metabolite concentration and increased losartan concentration. The pharmacodynamic consequences of concomitant use of losartan and inhibitors of P450 2C9 have not been examined. Subjects who do not metabolize losartan to active metabolite have been shown to have a specific, rare defect in cytochrome P450 2C9. These data suggest that the conversion of losartan to its active metabolite is mediated primarily by P450 2C9 and not P450 3A4. 
                                   As with other drugs that block angiotensin II or its effects, concomitant use of potassium-sparing diuretics (e.g., spironolactone, triamterene, amiloride), potassium supplements, or salt substitutes containing potassium may lead to increases in serum potassium (see PRECAUTIONS, 
                                    Information for Patients, Potassium Supplements). 
                              
                              
                                      Lithium: As with other drugs which affect the excretion of sodium, lithium excretion may be reduced. Therefore, serum lithium levels should be monitored carefully if lithium salts are to be co-administered with angiotensin II receptor antagonists. 
                              
                                 Non-Steroidal Anti-Inflammatory Drugs (NSAIDs) Including Selective Cyclooxygenase-2 Inhibitors (COX-2 Inhibitors): In patients who are elderly, volume-depleted (including those on diuretic therapy), or with compromised renal function, co-administration of NSAIDs, including selective COX-2 inhibitors, with angiotensin II receptor antagonists (including losartan) may result in deterioration of renal function, including possible acute renal failure. These effects are usually reversible. Monitor renal function periodically in patients receiving losartan and NSAID therapy. 
                              The antihypertensive effect of angiotensin II receptor antagonists, including losartan, may be attenuated by NSAIDs, including selective COX-2 inhibitors.
                              
                                      Dual blockade of the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system: It has been reported in the literature that in patients with established atherosclerotic disease, heart failure, or with diabetes with end organ damage, dual blockade of the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system is associated with a higher frequency of hypotension, syncope, hyperkalemia, and changes in renal function (including acute renal failure) as compared to use of a single renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system agent. Dual blockade (e.g., by adding an ACE inhibitor to an angiotensin II receptor antagonist) should be limited to individually defined cases with close monitoring of renal function.
                              
                                 Hydrochlorothiazide 
                              
                                   When administered concurrently, the following drugs may interact with thiazide diuretics:   
                                   Alcohol, barbiturates, or narcotics ─ potentiation of orthostatic hypotension may occur.    
                                   Antidiabetic drugs (oral agents and insulin) ─ dosage adjustment of the antidiabetic drug may be required.
                              
                                      Other antihypertensive drugs ─ additive effect or potentiation.
                              
                                      Cholestyramine and colestipol resins ─ Absorption of hydrochlorothiazide is impaired in the presence of anionic exchange resins. Single doses of either cholestyramine or colestipol resins bind the hydrochlorothiazide and reduce its absorption from the gastrointestinal tract by up to 85 and 43 percent, respectively.
                              
                                 Corticosteroids, ACTH, or glycyrrhizin (found in liquorice) — intensified electrolyte depletion, particularly hypokalemia.
                              
                                      Pressor amines (e.g., norepinephrine) ─ possible decreased response to pressor amines but not sufficient to preclude their use.
                              
                                      Skeletal muscle relaxants, nondepolarizing (e.g., tubocurarine) ─ possible increased responsiveness to the muscle relaxant.
                              
                                       Lithium ─ should not generally be given with diuretics. Diuretic agents reduce the renal clearance of lithium and add a high risk of lithium toxicity. Refer to the package insert for lithium preparations before use of such preparations with Losartan Potassium and Hydrochlorothiazide Tablets. 
                                   Non-Steroidal Anti-Inflammatory Drugs (NSAIDs) Including Selective Cyclooxygenase-2 Inhibitors (COX-2 Inhibitors) - The administration of a non-steroidal anti-inflammatory agent, including a selective cyclooxygenase-2 inhibitor, can reduce the diuretic, natriuretic, and antihypertensive effects of loop, potassium-sparing and thiazide diuretics. Therefore, when Losartan Potassium and Hydrochlorothiazide Tablets and non-steroidal anti-inflammatory agents, including selective cyclooxygenase-2 inhibitors, are used concomitantly, the patient should be observed closely to determine if the desired effect of the diuretic is obtained. 
                                   In patients receiving diuretic therapy, co-administration of NSAIDs with angiotensin receptor blockers, including losartan, may result in deterioration of renal function, including possible acute renal failure. These effects are usually reversible. Monitor renal function periodically in patients receiving hydrochlorothiazide, losartan, and NSAID therapy.
                           
                           
                        
                     