
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Mechanism of Action
                     
                        
Octagam 5% liquid supplies a broad spectrum of opsonic and neutralizing IgG antibodies against bacteria or their toxins. The mechanism of action in PI has not been fully elucidated.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        
Octagam 5% liquid contains mainly immunoglobulin G (IgG) with a broad spectrum of antibodies against various infectious agents reflecting the IgG activity found in the donor population. Octagam 5% liquid which is prepared from pooled material from not less than 1000 donors, has an IgG subclass distribution similar to that of native human plasma. Adequate doses of IGIV can restore abnormally low IgG level to the normal range. Standard pharmacodynamic studies were not performed.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        
Peak levels of IgG are reached immediately after infusion of Octagam 5% liquid. It has been shown that after infusion, exogenous IgG is distributed relatively rapidly between plasma and extravascular fluid until approximately half is partitioned in the extravascular space. Therefore a rapid initial drop in serum IgG is expected [
11
].
                        
Studies show that the apparent half-life of Octagam 5% liquid is approximately 40 days in immunodeficient patients.
                        
The main pharmacokinetic parameters of Octagam 5% liquid measured as total IgG in study OCTA-06 are displayed below:
                        
In the pharmacokinetic study, a subset of 14 patients aged between 10 and 70 years with PI underwent pharmacokinetic assessments. Patients received infusions of Octagam 5% liquid (300 to 600 mg/kg) every 3 (n=6) to 4 (n=8) weeks for 12 months. Pharmacokinetic samples were collected at baseline and after the 5
th
 month of treatment. After the infusion, blood samples were taken until day 28 (for patients on a 21 day schedule, the interval was extended to 4 weeks for the pharmacokinetic study).
                        

                        
                           
Table 9: PK Parameters of Octagam 5% liquid (Study OCTA-06) 
                        
                        

                        


                        



The half-life of IgG can vary considerably from person to person. In particular, high concentrations of lgG and hypermetabolism associated with fever and infection have been seen to coincide with a shortened half-life of IgG. Longer half-lives are often seen with immunodeficient patients [
12
].
                     
                  
               
            
         