
               
               
               7	DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
                  See also 
                        Contraindications (4)
                      and 
                        Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)
                     .
               
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           Co-administration of PREZISTA/cobicistat or PREZISTA/ritonavir with other drugs can alter the concentrations of other drugs and other drugs may alter the concentrations of darunavir. The potential drug-drug interactions must be considered prior to and during therapy. (4, 5.5, 7, 12.3).
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1	Potential for PREZISTA/Cobicistat or PREZISTA/Ritonavir to Affect Other Drugs
                     
                        PREZISTA co-administered with cobicistat or ritonavir is an inhibitor of CYP3A, CYP2D6, and P-gp. Co-administration of PREZISTA and cobicistat or ritonavir with drugs that are primarily metabolized by CYP3A and CYP2D6, or are transported by P-gp may result in increased plasma concentrations of such drugs, which could increase or prolong their therapeutic effect and adverse events (see Table 11).
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2	Potential for Other Drugs to Affect Darunavir
                     
                        Darunavir, cobicistat and ritonavir are metabolized by CYP3A. In vitro data indicate that darunavir may be a P-gp substrate. Drugs that induce CYP3A activity would be expected to increase the clearance of darunavir, cobicistat and ritonavir, resulting in lowered plasma concentrations of darunavir and cobicistat or ritonavir. Co-administration of darunavir and cobicistat or ritonavir and other drugs that inhibit CYP3A, or P-gp may decrease the clearance of darunavir and cobicistat or ritonavir and may result in increased plasma concentrations of darunavir, cobicistat or ritonavir (see Table 11).
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3	Established and Other Potentially Significant Drug Interactions
                     
                        Table 11 provides dosing recommendations as a result of drug interactions with PREZISTA/ritonavir. These recommendations are based on either drug interaction studies or predicted interactions due to the expected magnitude of interaction and potential for serious adverse events or loss of efficacy.
                        Complex or unknown mechanisms of drug interactions preclude extrapolation of ritonavir drug interactions to certain cobicistat interactions. Cobicistat and ritonavir when administered with darunavir may result in different drug interactions when used with concomitant medications. For information on cobicistat, please consult the cobicistat U.S. prescribing information. No interaction studies have been performed with darunavir/cobicistat.
                        


                        


In addition to the drugs included in Table 11, the interaction between PREZISTA/ritonavir and the following drugs were evaluated in clinical studies and no dose adjustments are needed for either drug [see 
                              Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)
                           ]: atazanavir, efavirenz, etravirine, nevirapine, omeprazole, ranitidine, and rilpivirine. Using cross-trial comparisons to historical pharmacokinetic data, dolutegravir did not appear to affect the pharmacokinetics of darunavir. Darunavir/ritonavir had no clinically significant effect on the pharmacokinetics of dolutegravir. Pitavastatin had no clinically significant effect on the pharmacokinetics of darunavir/ritonavir.
                        Acid modifying medications are not predicted to alter darunavir exposure.
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Other Nucleoside Reverse Transcriptase Inhibitors (NRTIs)
                              
                              Based on the different elimination pathways of the other NRTIs (abacavir, emtricitabine, lamivudine, stavudine, tenofovir disoproxil fumarate, zidovudine) that are primarily renally excreted, no drug interactions are expected for these drugs and PREZISTA/ritonavir.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Other PIs
                              
                              The co-administration of PREZISTA/ritonavir and PIs other than lopinavir/ritonavir, saquinavir, atazanavir, and indinavir has not been studied. Therefore, such co-administration is not recommended.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Integrase Strand Transfer Inhibitors
                              
                              No dose adjustments are needed for either raltegravir or darunavir based on pharmacokinetic data from literature references. Please refer to the elvitegravir/cobicistat/emtricitabine/tenofovir disoproxil fumarate U.S. prescribing information for information regarding concomitant use with other antiretroviral medications.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         