
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Gaucher disease is caused by a deficiency of the lysosomal enzyme acid β-glucosidase. Acid β-glucosidase catalyzes the conversion of the sphingolipid glucocerebroside into glucose and ceramide.  The enzymatic deficiency causes an accumulation of glucosylceramide (GL-1) primarily in the lysosomal compartment of macrophages, giving rise to foam cells or "Gaucher cells".  CERDELGA is a specific inhibitor of glucosylceramide synthase (IC50 = 10 ng/mL), and acts as a substrate reduction therapy for GD1.  In clinical trials CERDELGA reduced spleen and liver size, and improved anemia and thrombocytopenia.
                        In this lysosomal storage disorder (LSD), clinical features are reflective of the accumulation of Gaucher cells in the liver, spleen, bone marrow, and other organs.  The accumulation of Gaucher cells in the liver, spleen, and bone marrow leads to organomegaly and skeletal disease.  Presence of Gaucher cells in the bone marrow and spleen lead to clinically significant anemia and thrombocytopenia. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Electrocardiographic Evaluation
                              
                              QTc interval prolongation was studied in a double-blind, single dose, placebo- and positive-controlled crossover study in 42 healthy subjects.  Concentration-related increases were observed for the placebo-corrected change from baseline in the PR, QRS, and QTc intervals.  Based on PK/PD modeling, eliglustat plasma concentrations of 500 ng/mL are predicted to cause mean (upper bound of the 95% one-sided confidence interval) increases in the PR, QRS, and QTcF intervals of 22 (26), 7 (10), and 13 (19) msec, respectively.  At the highest geometric mean concentrations of 237 ng/mL following a single supratherapeutic dose tested in the thorough QT study, CERDELGA did not prolong the QT/QTc interval to any clinically relevant extent.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        At a given dose, the systemic exposure (Cmax and AUC) depends on the CYP2D6 phenotype.  In CYP2D6 EMs and IMs, the eliglustat pharmacokinetics is time-dependent and the systemic exposure increases in a more than dose proportional manner.  After multiple oral doses of 84 mg twice daily in EMs, eliglustat systemic exposure (AUC0-12) increased up to about 2-fold at steady state compared to after the first dose (AUC0-∞). The pharmacokinetics of eliglustat in CYP2D6 PMs is expected to be linear and time-independent.  Compared to EMs, the systemic exposure following 84 mg twice daily at steady state is 7- to 9-fold higher in PMs.
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Absorption
                              
                              In CYP2D6 EMs, median time to reach maximum plasma concentrations (tmax) occurs at 1.5 to 2 hours following multiple doses of CERDELGA 84 mg twice daily.  The corresponding mean Cmax values range from 12.1 to 25.0 ng/mL in EMs.  The mean AUCtau values range from 76.3 to 143 hr*ng/mL in EMs.  The Cmax and AUCtau in one IM subject receiving multiple doses of CERDELGA 84 mg two time daily was 44.6 ng/mL and 306 hr*ng/mL, respectively.  The oral bioavailability is low in EMs (<5%) following single dose of CERDELGA 84 mg due to significant first-pass metabolism.
                              In PMs, median tmax occurs at 3 hours following multiple doses of CERDELGA 84 mg twice daily.  The corresponding mean Cmax and AUCtau values range from 113 to 137 ng/mL and 922 to 1057 hr*ng/mL, respectively.
                              Oral dosing of CERDELGA 84 mg once daily has not been studied in PMs.  The predicted Cmax and AUC0-24hr in PMs using physiologically-based pharmacokinetic (PBPK) model with 84 mg once daily are 75 ng/mL and 956 hr*ng/mL, respectively.
                              Administration of CERDELGA with a high fat meal resulted in a 15% decrease in Cmax but no change in AUC.  Food does not have a clinically relevant effect on eliglustat pharmacokinetics.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Distribution
                              
                              Eliglustat is moderately bound to human plasma proteins (76 to 83%).  In the blood, it is mainly distributed in plasma and not red blood cells.  After intravenous (IV) administration, the volume of distribution of eliglustat was 835 L in CYP2D6 EMs, suggesting wide distribution to tissues (CERDELGA is only for oral use). 
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Metabolism and Elimination
                              
                              CERDELGA is extensively metabolized with high clearance, mainly by CYP2D6 and to a lesser extent CYP3A4.  Primary metabolic pathways of eliglustat involve sequential oxidation of the octanoyl moiety followed by oxidation of the 2,3-dihydro-1,4-benzodioxane moiety, or a combination of the two pathways, resulting in multiple oxidative metabolites.  No active metabolites have been identified.
                              After oral administration of 84 mg [14C]-eliglustat, the majority of the administered dose is excreted in urine (41.8%) and feces (51.4%), mainly as metabolites.  After 42 mg IV administration in healthy volunteers, mean (CV%) of eliglustat total body clearance was 88 L/h (8.8%) in CYP2D6 EMs (CERDELGA is only for oral use).  Following multiple oral doses of CERDELGA 84 mg twice daily, eliglustat terminal elimination half-life (T1/2) was approximately 6.5 hours in EMs and 8.9 hours in PMs. 
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Specific Populations
                              
                              Based on population PK analysis, there was no effect of mild renal impairment on eliglustat PK.  Furthermore, gender, body weight, age, and race had no clinically relevant impact on the pharmacokinetics of eliglustat.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Drug Interactions - Effect of Other Drugs on CERDELGA
                              
                              
                                 In vitro, eliglustat is metabolized primarily by CYP2D6 and to a lesser extent by CYP3A4.  Eliglustat is also a substrate of P-glycoprotein (P-gp).
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Co-administration of CERDELGA with CYP2D6 Inhibitors
                                    
                                    Systemic exposure (Cmax and AUCtau) of eliglustat increased 7.0-fold and 8.4-fold, respectively, following co-administration of CERDELGA 84 mg twice daily with paroxetine (a strong CYP2D6 inhibitor) 30 mg once daily in EMs (N=30), respectively. 
                                    Simulations using PBPK models suggested that paroxetine may increase the Cmax and AUCtau of eliglustat 2.1- and 2.3-fold in IMs, respectively.
                                    Compared to paroxetine, the effects of terbinafine (a moderate inhibitor of CYP2D6) on the exposure of eliglustat in EMs or IMs were predicted to be smaller.  Simulations using PBPK models suggested that terbinafine may increase the Cmax and AUCtau of eliglustat 3.8- and 4.5-fold in EMs, respectively.  Both Cmax and AUCtau increased 1.6-fold in IMs.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Co-administration of CERDELGA with CYP3A Inhibitors
                                    
                                    CYP2D6 EMs and IMs:
                                    Following co-administration of CERDELGA 84 mg twice daily with ketoconazole (a strong CYP3A inhibitor) 400 mg once daily, the systemic exposure (Cmax and AUCtau) of eliglustat increased 4.0-fold and 4.4-fold in EMs (N=31). 
                                    Simulations using PBPK models suggested that ketoconazole may increase the Cmax and AUCtau of eliglustat 4.4- and 5.4-fold in IMs, respectively.
                                    Compared to ketoconazole, the effects of fluconazole (a moderate inhibitor of CYP3A) on the exposure of eliglustat in EMs or IMs were predicted to be smaller.  Simulations using PBPK models suggested that fluconazole may increase the Cmax and AUCtau of eliglustat 2.8- and 3.2-fold in EMs, respectively, and 2.5- to 2.9-fold in IMs, respectively.
                                    CYP2D6 PMs:
                                    The effect of CYP3A inhibitors on the systemic exposure of eliglustat in PMs has not been evaluated in clinical studies.  Simulations using PBPK models suggest that ketoconazole may increase the Cmax and AUC0-24h of eliglustat 4.3- and 6.2-fold when co-administered with CERDELGA 84 mg once daily in PMs.  Simulations using PBPK models suggested that fluconazole may increase the Cmax and AUC0-24h of eliglustat 2.4- and 3.0-fold, respectively, when co-administered with CERDELGA 84 mg once daily.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Co-administration of CERDELGA with CYP2D6 and CYP3A inhibitors
                                    
                                    Simulations using PBPK models suggested that concomitant use of CERDELGA 84 mg twice daily with paroxetine and ketoconazole may increase the Cmax and AUCtau of eliglustat 16.7- and 24.2-fold in EMs, respectively.  The predicted Cmax and AUCtau of eliglustat increased 7.5- to 9.8-fold in IMs, respectively.
                                    Simulations using PBPK models suggested that concomitant use of CERDELGA 84 mg twice daily with terbinafine and fluconazole may increase the Cmax and AUCtau of eliglustat 10.2- and 13.6-fold in EMs.  The predicted Cmax and AUCtau of eliglustat increased 4.2- to 5.0-fold in IMs, respectively.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Effect of CYP3A inducers on Eliglustat PK
                                    
                                    Systemic exposures (Cmax and AUCtau) of eliglustat decreased by approximately 90% in EMs and IMs, following co-administration of CERDELGA 127 mg twice daily with rifampin (a strong CYP3A inducer) 600 mg PO once daily.  The only approved dose of CERDELGA is 84 mg.  Systemic exposures of eliglustat decreased by approximately 95% following co-administration of CERDELGA 84 mg twice daily with rifampin 600 mg PO once daily in PMs.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Effect of OATP (organic anion transporting polypeptide) Inhibitors on Eliglustat PK
                                    
                                    Systemic exposures of eliglustat were similar with or without co-administration of single 600 mg IV dose of rifampin (a potent OATP inhibitor) regardless of subjects' CYP2D6 phenotypes.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Effect of P-gp Inhibitors on Eliglustat PK
                                    
                                    The effect of P-gp inhibitors on the systemic exposure of eliglustat has not been studied clinically.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Effect of Gastric pH-Modifying Agents on Eliglustat PK
                                    
                                    Gastric pH-modifying agents (Maalox®, Tums®, Protonix®) did not have a clinically relevant effect on eliglustat exposure.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Drug Interactions - Effect of CERDELGA on the PK of Other Drugs
                              
                              Eliglustat is an inhibitor of P-gp and CYP2D6. 
                              Following multiple doses of CERDELGA 127 mg twice daily, systemic exposures (Cmax and AUC) to metoprolol (a CYP2D6 substrate) increased compared to metoprolol administration alone.  Mean Cmax and AUC increased by 1.7- and 2.3-fold, respectively, in EMs and by 1.2- and 1.6-fold, respectively in IMs. The only approved dose of CERDELGA is 84 mg.
                              Following multiple doses of CERDELGA 127 mg twice daily in EMs and IMs or 84 mg twice daily in PMs, systemic exposures (Cmax and AUC) to digoxin (a P-gp substrate, with narrow therapeutic index) increased compared to digoxin administration alone.  Mean Cmax and AUC increased by 1.7- and 1.5-fold, respectively.  The only approved dose of CERDELGA is 84 mg.
                              
                                 In vitro, eliglustat is a weak inhibitor of CYP3A.  Repeated doses of CERDELGA 84 mg twice daily did not change the exposures to norethindrone (1.0 mg) and ethinyl estradiol (0.035 mg).  Therefore, CERDELGA is not expected to impact the efficacy or safety of oral contraceptives containing norethindrone and ethinyl estradiol.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         