
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY

               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Mechanism of Action

                     
                        Cyclosporine is an immunosuppressive agent when administered systemically.

                        In patients whose tear production is presumed to be suppressed due to ocular inflammation associated with keratoconjunctivitis sicca, cyclosporine emulsion is thought to act as a partial immunomodulator. The exact mechanism of action is not known.

                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Pharmacokinetics

                     
                        Blood cyclosporin A concentrations were measured using a specific high pressure liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry assay. Blood concentrations of cyclosporine, in all the samples collected, after topical administration of RESTASIS
                           ® 0.05%, BID, in humans for up to 12 months, were below the quantitation limit of 0.1 ng/mL. There was no detectable drug accumulation in blood during 12 months of treatment with RESTASIS
                           ® ophthalmic emulsion.

                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Clinical Evaluations

                     
                        Four multicenter, randomized, adequate and well-controlled clinical studies were performed in approximately 1200 patients with moderate to severe keratoconjunctivitis sicca. RESTASIS
                           ® demonstrated statistically significant increases in Schirmer wetting of 10 mm versus vehicle at six months in patients whose tear production was presumed to be suppressed due to ocular inflammation. This effect was seen in approximately 15% of RESTASIS
                           ® ophthalmic emulsion treated patients versus approximately 5% of vehicle treated patients. Increased tear production was not seen in patients currently taking topical anti-inflammatory drugs or using punctal plugs.

                        No increase in bacterial or fungal ocular infections was reported following administration of RESTASIS
                           ®.

                     
                     
                  
               
            
         