
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  Lactate anion [CH3CH(OH)COO−]
serves the important purpose of providing “raw material” for
subsequent regeneration of bicarbonate (HCO3
                     −)
and thus acts as a source (alternate) of bicarbonate when normal production
and utilization of lactic acid is not impaired as a result of disordered lactate
metabolism. Lactate anion is usually present in extracellular fluid at a level
of less than 1 mEq/liter, but may attain a level of 10 mEq/liter during exercise.
It is seldom measured as such and thus is one of the “unmeasured anions”
(“anion gap”) in determinations of the ionic composition of
plasma.
                  	Since metabolic conversion of lactate to bicarbonate
is dependent on the integrity of cellular oxidative processes, lactate may
be inadequate or ineffective as a source of bicarbonate in patients suffering
from acidosis associated with shock or other disorders involving reduced perfusion
of body tissues. When oxidative activity is intact, one to two hours time
is required for conversion of lactate to bicarbonate.
                  	The
lactate anion is in equilibrium with pyruvate and has an alkalizing effect
resulting from simultaneous removal by the liver of lactate and hydrogen ions.
In the liver, lactate is metabolized to glycogen which is ultimately converted
to carbon dioxide and water by oxidative metabolism.
                  	The
sodium (Na+) ion combines with bicarbonate ion produced from carbon
dioxide of the body and thus retains bicarbonate to combat metabolic acidosis
(bicarbonate deficiency). The normal plasma level of lactate ranges from 0.9
to 1.9 mEq/liter.
                  	Sodium is the principal cation of
extracellular fluid. It comprises more than 90% of total cations at its normal
plasma concentration of approximately 140 mEq/liter. The sodium ion exerts
a primary role in controlling total body water and its distribution.
               
               
            
         