
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  
                     
                        Diuretics: Possibility of excessive hypotension ( ).
                                    7.1
                        
                        Lithium: Use with caution ( ).
                                    7.3
                        
                        Gold: Nitritoid reactions have been reported ( ).
                                    7.4
                        
                        NSAIDs use may lead to increased risk of renal impairment and loss of antihypertensive effect ( ).
                                    7.5
                        
                        mTOR inhibitor use may increase angioedema risk ( ).
                                    7.7
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 Diuretics
                     
                        Patients on diuretics, especially those in whom diuretic therapy was recently instituted, may occasionally experience an excessive reduction of blood pressure after initiation of therapy with ramipril. The possibility of hypotensive effects with ramipril can be minimized by either decreasing or discontinuing the diuretic or increasing the salt intake prior to initiation of treatment with ramipril. If this is not possible, reduce the starting dose [ ].
                                    see Dosage and Administration ( )
                                        2
                           
                        
                        Ramipril can attenuate potassium loss caused by thiazide diuretics. Potassium-sparing diuretics (spironolactone, amiloride, triamterene, and others) or potassium supplements can increase the risk of hyperkalemia. Therefore, if concomitant use of such agents is indicated, monitor the patient’s serum potassium frequently.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 Other Antihypertensive Agents
                     
                        Limited experience in controlled and uncontrolled trials combining ramipril with a calcium channel blocker, a loop diuretic, or triple therapy (beta-blocker, vasodilator, and a diuretic) indicate no unusual drug-drug interactions. Other ACE inhibitors have had less than additive effects with beta adrenergic blockers, presumably because both drug classes lower blood pressure by inhibiting parts of the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system.
                        The combination of ramipril and propranolol showed no adverse effects on dynamic parameters (blood pressure and heart rate).
                        In a large-scale, long-term clinical efficacy study, the combination of telmisartan and ramipril resulted in an increased incidence of clinically important renal dysfunction (death, doubling of serum creatinine, dialysis) compared with groups receiving either drug alone. Therefore, concomitant use of telmisartan and ramipril is not recommended [ ].
                                    see Dual Blockade of the Renin-Angiotensin-Aldosterone System ( )
                                        5.7
                           
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3 Lithium
                     
                        Increased serum lithium levels and symptoms of lithium toxicity have been reported in patients receiving ACE inhibitors during therapy with lithium; therefore, frequent monitoring of serum lithium levels is recommended. If a diuretic is also used, the risk of lithium toxicity may be increased.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4 Gold
                     
                        Nitritoid reactions (symptoms include facial flushing, nausea, vomiting and hypotension) have been reported rarely in patients on therapy with injectable gold (sodium aurothiomalate) and concomitant ACE inhibitor therapy including ramipril.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.5 Non-Steroidal Anti-Inflammatory Agents Including Selective Cyclooxygenase-2 Inhibitors (COX-2 Inhibitors)
                     
                        In patients who are elderly, volume-depleted (including those on diuretic therapy), or with compromised renal function, coadministration of NSAIDs, including selective COX-2 inhibitors, with ACE inhibitors, including ramipril, may result in deterioration of renal function, including possible acute renal failure. These effects are usually reversible. Monitor renal function periodically in patients receiving ramipril and NSAID therapy.
                        The antihypertensive effect of ACE inhibitors, including ramipril, may be attenuated by NSAIDs.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.6 Aliskiren
                     
                        Do not coadminister aliskiren with ramipril in patients with diabetes. Avoid concomitant use of aliskiren with ramipril in patients with renal impairment (GFR < 60 mL/min/1.73 m ) [ ].
                                    2
                           see Warnings and Precautions ( )
                                        5.7
                           
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.7 mTOR Inhibitors
                     
                        Patients taking concomitant mTOR inhibitor (e.g., temsirolimus) therapy may be at increased risk for angioedema [ ].
                                    see Warnings and Precautions ( )
                                        5.1
                           
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.8 Other
                     
                        Neither ramipril nor its metabolites have been found to interact with food, digoxin, antacid, furosemide, cimetidine, indomethacin, and simvastatin. The coadministration of ramipril and warfarin did not adversely affect the anticoagulation effects of the latter drug. Additionally, coadministration of ramipril with phenprocoumon did not affect minimum phenprocoumon levels or interfere with the patients’ state of anticoagulation.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         