
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  Calcitriol is the active form of vitamin D3 (cholecalciferol). The natural or endogenous supply of 
vitamin D in man mainly depends on ultraviolet light for conversion of 
7-dehydrocholesterol to vitamin D3 in the skin. Vitamin 
D3 must be metabolically activated in the liver and the 
kidney before it is fully active on its target tissues. The initial 
transformation is catalyzed by a vitamin D3-25-hydroxylase enzyme present in the liver, and the product 
of this reaction is 25-(OH)D3 (calcifediol). The latter 
undergoes hydroxylation in the mitochondria of kidney tissue, and this reaction 
is activated by the renal 25-hydroxyvitamin D3-1-α-hydroxylase to produce 1,25-(OH)2D3 (calcitriol), the active form of 
vitamin D3.
                  The known sites of action of calcitriol are intestine, bone, kidney and 
parathyroid gland. Calcitriol is the most active known form of vitamin D3 in stimulating intestinal calcium transport. In acutely 
uremic rats, calcitriol has been shown to stimulate intestinal calcium 
absorption. In bone, calcitriol, in conjunction with parathyroid hormone, 
stimulates resorption of calcium; and in the kidney, calcitriol increases the 
tubular reabsorption of calcium. In-vitro and in-vivo studies have shown that calcitriol directly 
suppresses secretion and synthesis of PTH. A vitamin D-resistant state may exist 
in uremic patients because of the failure of the kidney to adequately convert 
precursors to the active compound, calcitriol.
                  Calcitriol when administered by bolus injection is rapidly available in the 
blood stream. Vitamin D metabolites are known to be transported in blood, bound 
to specific plasma proteins. The pharmacologic activity of an administered dose 
of calcitriol is about 3 to 5 days. Two metabolic pathways for calcitriol have 
been identified, conversion to 1,24,25-(OH)3D3 and to calcitroic acid.
               
               
            
         