
                     
                     
                     Drug Interactions
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Use with Allopurinol
                           
                              One of the pathways for inactivation of azathioprine is inhibited by allopurinol. Patients receiving azathioprine and allopurinol concomitantly should have a dose reduction of azathioprine, to approximately 1/3 to 1/4 the usual dose. It is recommended that a further dose reduction or alternative therapies be considered for patients with low or absent TPMT activity receiving azathioprine and allopurinol because both TPMT and XO inactivation pathways are affected (see CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY, WARNINGS, PRECAUTIONS: Laboratory Tests and ADVERSE REACTIONS sections).
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Use with Aminosalicylates
                           
                              There is in vitro evidence that aminosalicylate derivatives (e.g., sulphasalazine, mesalazine, or olsalazine) inhibit the TPMT enzyme. Concomitant use of these agents with azathioprine should be done with caution.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Use with Other Agents Affecting Myelopoesis
                           
                              Drugs which may affect leukocyte production, including co-trimoxazole, may lead to exaggerated leukopenia, especially in renal transplant recipients.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Use with Angiotensin-Converting Enzyme Inhibitors
                           
                              The use of angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors to control hypertension in patients on azathioprine has been reported to induce anemia and severe leukopenia.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Use with Warfarin
                           
                              Azathioprine may inhibit the anticoagulant effect of warfarin.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Use with ribavirin  
                           
                           
                              The use of ribavirin for hepatitis C in patients receiving azathioprine has been reported to induce severe pancytopenia and may increase the risk of azathioprine-related myelotoxicity. Inosine monophosphate dehydrogenase (IMDH) is required for one of the metabolic pathways of azathioprine. Ribavirin is known to inhibit IMDH, thereby leading to accumulation of an azathioprine metabolite, 6-methylthioionosine monophosphate (6-MTITP), which is associated with myelotoxicity (neutropenia, thrombocytopenia, and anemia). Patients receiving azathioprine with ribavirin should have complete blood counts, including platelet counts, monitored weekly for the first month, twice monthly for the second and third months of treatment, then monthly or more frequently if dosage or other therapy changes are necessary. 
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               