


CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY:





Mechanism of Action: Lidocaine belongs to the amide class of local anesthetics. Lidocaine blocks sodium ion channels required for the initiation and conduction of nerve impulses resulting in local anesthesia. Epinephrine contributes to the analgesic effect of the LidoSite™ System, presumably because of its vasoconstrictor activity, which is thought to decrease the rate of removal of lidocaine from the site of administration.Mechanism of Action: Lidocaine belongs to the amide class of local anesthetics. Lidocaine blocks sodium ion channels required for the initiation and conduction of nerve impulses resulting in local anesthesia. Epinephrine contributes to the analgesic effect of the LidoSite™ System, presumably because of its vasoconstrictor activity, which is thought to decrease the rate of removal of lidocaine from the site of administration.







Hemodynamics: Epinephrine or excessive blood levels of lidocaine may cause changes in cardiac output, total peripheral resistance, and mean arterial pressure. However, doses delivered directly to the skin by iontophoresis when LidoSite™ System is used as directed are not expected to result in blood levels high enough to cause these hemodynamic effects. (See PHARMACOKINETICS).Hemodynamics: Epinephrine or excessive blood levels of lidocaine may cause changes in cardiac output, total peripheral resistance, and mean arterial pressure. However, doses delivered directly to the skin by iontophoresis when LidoSite™ System is used as directed are not expected to result in blood levels high enough to cause these hemodynamic effects. (See 







Pharmacodynamics: In a single-center, prospective, placebo-controlled double-blind study, 20 adult subjects were evaluated to quantify the depth of the anesthetic effect over time from both pain and sensory perspectives following treatment with the LidoSite™ System. The placebo was a LidoSite™ System utilizing a patch containing epinephrine only, but with application of current. An 18-gauge needle with constant 200-grams pressure was used to penetrate the skin at a rate of 0.2 mm/sec. Subjects indicated the points at which they felt pressure and pain, identified as the sensory penetration depth (SD) and the pain threshold depth (PD), respectively. Immediately following completion of a 10-minute iontophoretic treatment with LidoSite™ System, the average SD and the PD were 3.9 mm and 6.4 mm, respectively, compared to 1.4 mm and 3.0 mm, respectively, after placebo treatment. Sixty minutes after removal of the LidoSite™ System, the average SD and PD increased to 5.6 mm and 10.7 mm, respectively, compared to 1.4 mm and 3.4 mm, respectively, with placebo treatment.Pharmacodynamics: In a single-center, prospective, placebo-controlled double-blind study, 20 adult subjects were evaluated to quantify the depth of the anesthetic effect over time from both pain and sensory perspectives following treatment with the LidoSite™ System. The placebo was a LidoSite™ System utilizing a patch containing epinephrine only, but with application of current. An 18-gauge needle with constant 200-grams pressure was used to penetrate the skin at a rate of 0.2 mm/sec. Subjects indicated the points at which they felt pressure and pain, identified as the sensory penetration depth (SD) and the pain threshold depth (PD), respectively. Immediately following completion of a 10-minute iontophoretic treatment with LidoSite™ System, the average SD and the PD were 3.9 mm and 6.4 mm, respectively, compared to 1.4 mm and 3.0 mm, respectively, after placebo treatment. Sixty minutes after removal of the LidoSite™ System, the average SD and PD increased to 5.6 mm and 10.7 mm, respectively, compared to 1.4 mm and 3.4 mm, respectively, with placebo treatment.







Pharmacokinetics:





Absorption: Plasma levels of lidocaine were below the minimum level of quantitation, 5 ng/ml, in healthy adult or pediatric subjects after three sequential LidoSite™ System applications at different sites over a 3.5 hour period. Epinephrine levels did not exceed the normal physiologic range (10 - 50 pg/mL) in healthy adult subjects after a single standard LidoSite™ System application.Absorption: Plasma levels of lidocaine were below the minimum level of quantitation, 5 ng/ml, in healthy adult or pediatric subjects after three sequential LidoSite™ System applications at different sites over a 3.5 hour period. Epinephrine levels did not exceed the normal physiologic range (10 - 50 pg/mL) in healthy adult subjects after a single standard LidoSite™ System application.CNS toxicity may occur over a range of plasma concentrations of local anesthetics. CNS toxicity may typically be found around 5000 ng/mL of lidocaine. However a small number of patients reportedly may show signs of toxicity at approximately 1000 ng/mL.







Distribution: Lidocaine is 70% protein bound in plasma, mainly to α-1-acid glycoprotein. When administered intravenously, the mean volume of distribution for lidocaine (for a 60-kg person) was 90 L at steady state. Lidocaine crosses the placental and blood-brain barriers, presumably by passive diffusion.Distribution: Lidocaine is 70% protein bound in plasma, mainly to α-1-acid glycoprotein. When administered intravenously, the mean volume of distribution for lidocaine (for a 60-kg person) was 90 L at steady state. Lidocaine crosses the placental and blood-brain barriers, presumably by passive diffusion.







Metabolism: It is not known if lidocaine is metabolized in the skin. Lidocaine is metabolized by the liver, and metabolites and unchanged drug are excreted by the kidneys.Metabolism: It is not known if lidocaine is metabolized in the skin. Lidocaine is metabolized by the liver, and metabolites and unchanged drug are excreted by the kidneys.The predominant metabolism of lidocaine is through N-dealkylation to monoethylglycinexylidide (MEGX) and glycinexylidide (GX), and is mainly mediated by CYP3A4. These metabolites are hydrolyzed to 2,6-xylidine, which is converted to 4-hydroxy-2, 6-xylidine (mediated by CYP2A6), the major urinary metabolite in man. Following intravenous administration of lidocaine, MEGX and GX concentrations in serum range from 11 to 36 % and from 5 to 11 % of lidocaine concentrations, respectively. MEGX has an antiarrhythmic and convulsant activity similar to that of lidocaine and a somewhat longer half-life. GX has a weak antiarrhythmic effect but lacks convulsant activity and has a half-life of about 10 hours.







Elimination: Lidocaine and its metabolites are excreted by the kidneys. Following an intravenous bolus injection, the elimination half-life of lidocaine is typically 1.5 to 2.0 hours. Approximately 90% of administered lidocaine is excreted in the form of various metabolites, and less than 10% is excreted unchanged. Because of the rapid rate at which lidocaine is metabolized, any condition that affects liver function may alter lidocaine kinetics. The half-life may be prolonged two-fold or more in patients with liver dysfunction. Renal dysfunction does not affect lidocaine kinetics but may increase the accumulation of metabolites. During intravenous studies, the elimination half-life of lidocaine was statistically significantly longer in elderly subjects (2.5 hours) than in younger subjects (1.5 hours).Elimination: Lidocaine and its metabolites are excreted by the kidneys. Following an intravenous bolus injection, the elimination half-life of lidocaine is typically 1.5 to 2.0 hours. Approximately 90% of administered lidocaine is excreted in the form of various metabolites, and less than 10% is excreted unchanged. Because of the rapid rate at which lidocaine is metabolized, any condition that affects liver function may alter lidocaine kinetics. The half-life may be prolonged two-fold or more in patients with liver dysfunction. Renal dysfunction does not affect lidocaine kinetics but may increase the accumulation of metabolites. During intravenous studies, the elimination half-life of lidocaine was statistically significantly longer in elderly subjects (2.5 hours) than in younger subjects (1.5 hours).







Pediatrics: Plasma levels of lidocaine in pediatric subjects between 6 and 15 years of age were below the minimum level of quantitation, <5 ng/ml, after three sequential LidoSite™ System applications on different sites over a 3.5-hour period.Pediatrics: Plasma levels of lidocaine in pediatric subjects between 6 and 15 years of age were below the minimum level of quantitation, <5 ng/ml, after three sequential LidoSite™ System applications on different sites over a 3.5-hour period.







Geriatrics: The pharmacokinetics of lidocaine have not been specifically studied in geriatric subjects. However, during intravenous studies, the elimination half-life of lidocaine was statistically significantly longer in elderly subjects (2.5 hours) than in younger subjects (1.5 hours).Geriatrics: The pharmacokinetics of lidocaine have not been specifically studied in geriatric subjects. However, during intravenous studies, the elimination half-life of lidocaine was statistically significantly longer in elderly subjects (2.5 hours) than in younger subjects (1.5 hours).







Special populations: No pharmacokinetic studies were conducted to specifically address special populations.Special populations: No pharmacokinetic studies were conducted to specifically address special populations.







Renal Impairment: Lidocaine and its metabolites are known to be excreted by the kidney, and metabolites may accumulate in patients with impaired renal function.Renal Impairment: Lidocaine and its metabolites are known to be excreted by the kidney, and metabolites may accumulate in patients with impaired renal function.







Hepatic Impairment: The half-life of lidocaine may be prolonged two-fold or more in patients with liver dysfunction. Because of their inability to metabolize local anesthetics normally, patients with severe hepatic disease are at a greater risk of developing toxic plasma concentrations of lidocaine.Hepatic Impairment: The half-life of lidocaine may be prolonged two-fold or more in patients with liver dysfunction. Because of their inability to metabolize local anesthetics normally, patients with severe hepatic disease are at a greater risk of developing toxic plasma concentrations of lidocaine.






