
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  Oxybutynin chloride exerts a direct antispasmodic effect on 
smooth muscle and inhibits the muscarinic action of acetylcholine on smooth 
muscle. Oxybutynin chloride exhibits only one-fifth of the anticholinergic 
activity of atropine on the rabbit detrusor muscle, but four to ten times the 
antispasmodic activity. No blocking effects occur at skeletal neuromuscular 
junctions or autonomic ganglia (antinicotinic effects). 
                  Oxybutynin chloride relaxes bladder smooth muscle. In patients with 
conditions characterized by involuntary bladder contractions, cystometric 
studies have demonstrated that oxybutynin increases bladder (vesical) capacity, 
diminishes the frequency of uninhibited contractions of the detrusor muscle, and 
delays the initial desire to void. Oxybutynin thus decreases urgency and the 
frequency of both incontinent episodes and voluntary urination. 
                  Antimuscarinic activity resides predominantly in the R-isomer. A metabolite, 
desethyloxybutynin, has pharmacological activity similar to that of oxybutynin 
in in vitro studies. 
                  
                  
                  Pharmacokinetics
                  
                  AbsorptionFollowing the first dose of oxybutynin chloride extended-release 
tablets, oxybutynin plasma concentrations rise for 4 to 6 hours; thereafter 
steady concentrations are maintained for up to 24 hours, minimizing fluctuations 
between peak and trough concentrations associated with oxybutynin.
                  The relative bioavailabilities of R- and S-oxybutynin from oxybutynin 
chloride extended-release are 156% and 187%, respectively, compared with 
oxybutynin. The mean pharmacokinetic parameters for R- and S-oxybutynin are 
summarized in Table 1. The plasma concentration-time profiles for R- and 
S-oxybutynin are similar in shape; Figure 1 shows the profile for R-oxybutynin. 

                  


                  



                  
                     Figure 1. Mean R-oxybutynin plasma concentrations 
following a single dose of oxybutynin chloride ER 10 mg and oxybutynin 5 mg 
administered every 8 hours (n = 23 for each treatment).
                  
                  Steady-state oxybutynin plasma concentrations are achieved by Day 3 of 
repeated oxybutynin chloride extended-release dosing, with no observed drug 
accumulation or change in oxybutynin and desethyloxybutynin pharmacokinetic 
parameters. 
                  Pharmacokinetic information for pediatric patients 5 to 15 years of age with 
symptoms of detrusor overactivity associated with a neurological condition 
(e.g., spina bifida) is approved for Alza Corporation’s oxybutynin chloride 
extended-release tablets. However, due to Alza Corporation’s marketing 
exclusivity rights, this drug product is not labeled for pediatric use.
                  
                  
                  Food EffectsThe rate and extent of absorption and metabolism of oxybutynin 
are similar under fed and fasted conditions.
                  
                  
                  DistributionPlasma concentrations of oxybutynin decline biexponentially 
following intravenous or oral administration. The volume of distribution is 193 
L after intravenous administration of 5 mg oxybutynin chloride. 
                  
                  
                  MetabolismOxybutynin is metabolized primarily by the cytochrome P450 enzyme 
systems, particularly CYP3A4 found mostly in the liver and gut wall. Its 
metabolic products include phenylcyclohexylglycolic acid, which is 
pharmacologically inactive, and desethyloxybutynin, which is pharmacologically 
active. Following oxybutynin chloride extended-release administration, plasma 
concentrations of R- and S-desethyloxybutynin are 73% and 92%, respectively, of 
concentrations observed with oxybutynin.
                  
                  
                  ExcretionOxybutynin is extensively metabolized by the liver, with less 
than 0.1% of the administered dose excreted unchanged in the urine. Also, less 
than 0.1% of the administered dose is excreted as the metabolite 
desethyloxybutynin. 
                  
                  
                  Dose ProportionalityPharmacokinetic parameters of oxybutynin and desethyloxybutynin 
(Cmax and AUC) following administration of 5 mg to 20 mg 
of oxybutynin chloride extended-release tablets are dose proportional. 
                  
                  
                  Special Populations
                  
                  GeriatricThe pharmacokinetics of oxybutynin chloride extended-release were 
similar in all patients studied (up to 78 years of age).
                  
                  
                  PediatricPharmacokinetic information for pediatric patients 5 to 15 years 
of age with symptoms of detrusor overactivity associated with a neurological 
condition (e.g., spina bifida) is approved for Alza Corporation’s oxybutynin 
chloride extended-release tablets. However, due to Alza Corporation’s marketing 
exclusivity rights, this drug product is not labeled for pediatric use.
                  
                  
                  GenderThere are no significant differences in the pharmacokinetics of 
oxybutynin in healthy male and female volunteers following administration of 
oxybutynin chloride extended-release.
                  
                  
                  RaceAvailable data suggest that there are no significant differences 
in the pharmacokinetics of oxybutynin based on race in healthy volunteers 
following administration of oxybutynin chloride extended-release.
                  
                  
                  Renal InsufficiencyThere is no experience with the use of oxybutynin chloride 
extended-release in patients with renal insufficiency. 
                  
                  
                  Hepatic InsufficiencyThere is no experience with the use of oxybutynin chloride 
extended-release in patients with hepatic insufficiency. 
                  
                  
                  Drug-Drug InteractionsSee  PRECAUTIONS: Drug 
Interactions.
                  
                  
                  Clinical StudiesOxybutynin chloride extended-release was evaluated for the 
treatment of patients with overactive bladder with symptoms of urge urinary 
incontinence, urgency, and frequency in three controlled studies and one open 
label study. The majority of patients were Caucasian (89%) and female (91.9%) 
with a mean age of 59 years (range, 18 to 98 years). Entry criteria required 
that patients have urge or mixed incontinence (with a predominance of urge) as 
evidenced by ≥ 6 urge incontinence episodes per week and ≥ 10 micturitions per 
day. Study 1 was a fixed dose escalation design, whereas the other studies used 
a dose adjustment design in which each patient’s final dose was adjusted to a 
balance between improvement of incontinence symptoms and tolerability of side 
effects. Controlled studies included patients known to be responsive to 
oxybutynin or other anticholinergic medications, and these patients were 
maintained on a final dose for up to 2 weeks. 
                  The efficacy results for the three controlled trials are presented in the 
following tables and figures.
                  
                  

                  

               
               
               
                  
                     image of Figure 1. Mean R-oxybutynin graph
                     
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     image of Study 1, Study 2, Study 3 
                     
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         