


CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
Leuprolide acetate, an LH-RH agonist, acts as a potent inhibitor of gonadotropin secretion when given continuously and in therapeutic doses.  Animal and human studies indicate that after an initial stimulation, chronic administration of leuprolide acetate results in suppression of ovarian and testicular steroidogenesis.In humans, administration of leuprolide acetate results in an initial increase in circulating levels of luteinizing hormone (LH) and follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH), leading to a transient increase in concentrations of gonadal steroids (testosterone and dihydrotestosterone in males, and estrone and estradiol in premenopausal females).  However, continuous administration of leuprolide acetate results in decreased levels of LH and FSH.  In males, testosterone is reduced to castrate levels. These decreases occur within 2 to 4 weeks after initiation of treatment.One Viadur® Implant nominally delivers 120 micrograms of leuprolide acetate per day over 12 months. Leuprolide acetate is not active when given orally.® Implant nominally delivers 120 micrograms of leuprolide acetate per day over 12 months. Leuprolide acetate is not active when given orally.





PHARMACOKINETICS





Absorption
After insertion of Viadur®, mean serum leuprolide concentrations were 16.9 ng/mL at 4 hours and 2.4 ng/mL at 24 hours.  Thereafter, leuprolide was released at a constant rate.  Mean serum leuprolide concentrations were maintained at 0.9 ng/mL (0.3 to 3.1 ng/mL; SD = ±0.4) for 12 months.  Upon removal and insertion of a new Viadur® at 12 months, steady-state serum leuprolide concentrations were maintained.®, mean serum leuprolide concentrations were 16.9 ng/mL at 4 hours and 2.4 ng/mL at 24 hours.  Thereafter, leuprolide was released at a constant rate.  Mean serum leuprolide concentrations were maintained at 0.9 ng/mL (0.3 to 3.1 ng/mL; SD = ±0.4) for 12 months.  Upon removal and insertion of a new Viadur







Distribution
The mean steady-state volume of distribution of leuprolide following 1 mg intravenous (IV) bolus administration to healthy male volunteers was 27 L.  In vitro binding to human plasma proteins ranged from 43% to 49%.11







Metabolism
In healthy male volunteers administered a 1 mg IV bolus of leuprolide, the mean systemic clearance was 8.34 L/h, with a terminal elimination half-life of approximately 3 hours, based on a two-compartment model.11A pentapeptide (M-1) is the major leuprolide metabolite upon administration with different leuprolide acetate formulations.  No drug metabolism study was conducted with Viadur®.®.







Excretion
No drug excretion study was conducted with Viadur®.®.







Dose Proportionality
In a study comparing one Viadur® implant to two Viadur® implants, mean serum leuprolide concentrations were proportional to dose.® implant to two Viadur







Special Populations





Geriatrics
The majority (88%) of the 131 patients studied in clinical trials were age 65 and over.







Pediatrics
The safety and effectiveness of Viadur® in pediatric patients have not been established (see CONTRAINDICATIONS).® in pediatric patients have not been established (see 







Race
In the patients studied (80 Caucasian, 23 Black, 3 Hispanic), mean serum leuprolide concentrations were similar.







Renal and Hepatic Insufficiency
The pharmacokinetics of the drug in hepatically and renally impaired patients have not been determined.







Drug-Drug Interactions
No pharmacokinetic drug-drug interaction studies were conducted with Viadur®.®.








