


CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY





General:
Feridex I.V. is an intravenously injected colloidal superparamagnetic iron oxide associated with dextran. It is a magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) contrast agent and is taken up by cells of the reticuloendothelial system (RES).







Pharmacokinetics: 
Three healthy, adult male volunteers received a dose of Feridex I.V. 0.56 mg of Fe/kg (diluted in 100 mL of 5% dextrose and intravenously infused over 30 minutes). In these subjects, the mean ± SD peak serum iron concentration was 5.5 ± 0.6 μg/mL, elimination half-life was 2.4 ± 0.2 hours and total clearance 28.5 ± 1.6 mL/min. Feridex I.V. was completely cleared from the blood by 25 hours after administration. Less than 2% of the drug was excreted in the urine, as expected for iron.At 24 hours, serum iron increased and the percent saturation of iron binding capacity decreased in a dose-dependent fashion. By 7 days, serum iron returned to pre-administration levels, and serum ferritin increased. These results are consistent with the iron in Feridex I.V. entering the usual iron metabolism cycle. Animal pharmacokinetics studies were consistent with these results in humans.Imaging studies in rats showed a large decrease in liver signal intensity for the first 24 hours after dosing, followed by a gradual return to normal over 7 days. Radiotracer studies in rats were consistent with the iron in Feridex I.V. becoming part of the body iron pool. Histological studies in rats showed that the iron was in the RES and that it disappeared from the RES over 7 to 14 days with all evidence of iron gone by 14–28 days.In human clinical studies, there was no difference in loss of signal intensity on images obtained between 0–3.5 hours after infusion. Loss of signal intensity decreased at 1 and 2 days.







Metabolism:
The iron in Feridex I.V. enters the normal body iron metabolism cycle as evidenced by transient increases in serum iron values one day after administration and increase in serum ferritin values 7 days after administration. The amount of iron contained in a single dose is 39 mg for a 70 kg individual. This is less than 1/5 the amount of iron contained in one unit of whole blood.







Special Populations:





Geriatric/Pediatric:
Pharmacokinetics in these populations were not studied. Patients enrolled in clinical trials were between 11 and 89 years old.







Gender:
Women showed a higher pre-contrast signal intensity and hence a larger decrease in liver signal intensity in images. This is consistent with a lower baseline iron in women.







Race:
Differences due to race were not noted.







Renal Insufficiency:
Feridex I.V. is not renally cleared; no studies were performed in patients with renal insufficiency.







Hepatic Insufficiency:
Patients with cirrhosis had less of a decrease in liver signal intensity than other patients with known or suspected liver lesions. Patients with cirrhosis also had a higher incidence of back pain. (See ADVERSE REACTIONS section.) ADVERSE REACTIONS section.) 







Hemochromatosis:
Individuals with iron overload were not studied. Feridex I.V. contains iron. Literature reports suggested that Feridex I.V. will not add information to their MRI evaluations, since iron overload causes loss in liver signal intensity. 







Drug-Drug Interactions
In rats, the simultaneous administration of heparin was found to prolong the half-life of Feridex I.V. in the blood. The effects of Feridex I.V. administration on heparin anticoagulation are not known. 







Pharmacodynamics:
Feridex I.V. shortens the relaxation times for nearby hydrogen atoms and reduces signal intensity in normal tissues. This results in signal loss (image darkening ) on mid T1/T2 or strongly T2-weighted images. Tissues with decreased RES function (e.g., metastases, primary liver cancer, cysts and various benign tumors, adenomas, and hyperplasia) retain their native signal intensity, so the contrast between normal and abnormal tissue is increased.






