
               
               
               7     DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
                  
                     Cyclosporine: Avoid coadministration of cyclosporine with aliskiren [see Warnings and Precautions (5.7) and Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                  
                     Itraconazole: Avoid coadministration of itraconazole with aliskiren [see Warnings and Precautions (5.7) and Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                  
                     Nonsteroidal Anti-Inflammatory Drugs (NSAIDs) including selective Cyclooxygenase-2 inhibitors (COX-2 inhibitors): In patients who are elderly, volume-depleted (including those on diuretic therapy), or with compromised renal function, coadministration of NSAIDs, including selective COX-2 inhibitors with agents that affect  the RAAS, including aliskiren, may result in deterioration of renal function, including possible acute renal failure. These effects are usually reversible. Monitor renal function periodically in patients receiving aliskiren and NSAID therapy.
                  The antihypertensive effect of aliskiren may be attenuated by NSAIDs.
                  
                     Dual Blockade of the Renin-Angiotensin-Aldosterone System (RAAS): The concomitant use of aliskiren with other agents acting on the RAAS such as ACEIs or ARBs is associated with an increased risk of hypotension, hyperkalemia, and changes in renal function (including acute renal failure) compared to monotherapy. Most patients receiving the combination of two drugs that inhibit the renin-angiotensin system do not obtain any additional benefit compared to monotherapy. In general, avoid combined use of aliskiren with ACE inhibitors or ARBs, particularly in patients with CrCl less than 60 mL/min.  Monitor blood pressure, renal function, and electrolytes in patients taking aliskiren and other agents that affect the RAAS [see Warnings and Precautions (5.4, 5.5, 5.6)].
                  The concomitant use of aliskiren with an ARB or an ACEI in diabetic patients is contraindicated [see Contraindications (4)].
                  
                     Furosemide: Oral coadministration of aliskiren and furosemide reduced exposure to furosemide.  Monitor diuretic effects when furosemide is coadministered with aliskiren.
               
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           Cyclosporine or Itraconazole: Avoid concomitant use. (5.7, 7, 12.3)

                           
                           Nonsteroidal Anti-Inflammatory Drugs (NSAIDs) Increased risk of renal impairment and loss of antihypertensive effect. (7)
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         