
               
               
               DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
                  
                  
                      Tamsulosin hydrochloride capsules USP, 0.4 mg should not be used with strong inhibitors of CYP3A4 (e.g., ketoconazole). Tamsulosin hydrochloride capsules USP  should be used with caution in combination with moderate inhibitors of CYP3A4 (e.g., erythromycin), in combination with strong (e.g., paroxetine) or moderate (e.g., terbinafine) inhibitors of CYP2D6, or in patients known to be CYP2D6 poor metabolizers, particularly at a dose higher than 0.4 mg (e.g., 0.8 mg) (5.2, 7.1, 12.3)
                      Concomitant use of PDE5 inhibitors with tamsulosin can potentially cause symptomatic hypotension (5.2, 7.3, 12.3)
                  
                  
 

                  
                  
                     Strong and Moderate Inhibitors of CYP3A4 or CYP2D6
                  
                  Tamsulosin is extensively metabolized, mainly by CYP3A4 and CYP2D6.
                  Concomitant treatment with ketoconazole (a strong inhibitor of CYP3A4) resulted in an increase in the Cmax and AUC of tamsulosin by a factor of 2.2 and 2.8, respectively [see Warnings and Precautions (5.2) and Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)]. The effects of concomitant administration of a moderate CYP3A4 inhibitor (e.g., erythromycin) on the pharmacokinetics of tamsulosin hydrochloride capsules USP have not been evaluated [see Warnings and Precautions (5.2) and Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                  Concomitant treatment with paroxetine (a strong inhibitor of CYP2D6) resulted in an increase in the Cmax and AUC of tamsulosin by a factor of 1.3 and 1.6, respectively [see Warnings and Precautions (5.2) and Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)]. A similar increase in exposure is expected in CYP2D6 poor metabolizers (PM) as compared to extensive metabolizers (EM). Since CYP2D6 PMs cannot be readily identified and the potential for significant increase in tamsulosin exposure exists when tamsulosin hydrochloride capsules USP, 0.4 mg are co-administered with strong CYP3A4 inhibitors in CYP2D6 PMs, tamsulosin hydrochloride capsules USP, 0.4 mg should not be used in combination with strong inhibitors of CYP3A4 (e.g., ketoconazole) [see Warnings and Precautions (5.2) and Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                  The effects of concomitant administration of a moderate CYP2D6 inhibitor (e.g., terbinafine) on the pharmacokinetics of tamsulosin hydrochloride capsules USP have not been evaluated [see Warnings and Precautions (5.2) and Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                  The effects of co-administration of both a CYP3A4 and a CYP2D6 inhibitor with tamsulosin hydrochloride capsules USP have not been evaluated. However, there is a potential for significant increase in tamsulosin exposure when tamsulosin hydrochloride capsules USP, 0.4 mg are co-administered with a combination of both CYP3A4 and CYP2D6 inhibitors [see Warnings and Precautions (5.2) and Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                  
                     Cimetidine
                  
                  Treatment with cimetidine resulted in a significant decrease (26%) in the clearance of tamsulosin hydrochloride, which resulted in a moderate increase in tamsulosin hydrochloride AUC (44%) [see Warnings and Precautions (5.2) and Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                  
 

                  
                  The pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic interactions between tamsulosin hydrochloride capsules  USP and other alpha adrenergic blocking agents have not been determined; however, interactions between tamsulosin hydrochloride capsules USP and other alpha adrenergic blocking agents may be expected [see Warnings and Precautions (5.2) and Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                  
 

                  
                  Caution is advised when alpha adrenergic blocking agents including tamsulosin hydrochloride capsules USP are co-administered with PDE5 inhibitors. Alpha-adrenergic blockers and PDE5 inhibitors are both vasodilators that can lower blood pressure. Concomitant use of these two drug classes can potentially cause symptomatic hypotension [see Warnings and Precautions (5.2) and Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                  
 

                  
                  A definitive drug-drug interaction study between tamsulosin hydrochloride and warfarin was not conducted. Results from limited in vitro and in vivo studies are inconclusive. Caution should be exercised with concomitant administration of warfarin and tamsulosin hydrochloride capsules USP [see Warnings and Precautions (5.2) and Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                  
 

                  
                  Dosage adjustments are not necessary when tamsulosin hydrochloride capsules USP are administered concomitantly with nifedipine, atenolol, or enalapril [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                  
 

                  
                  Dosage adjustments are not necessary when tamsulosin hydrochloride capsules USP are administered concomitantly with digoxin or theophylline [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                  
 

                  
                  Tamsulosin hydrochloride capsules USP had no effect on the pharmacodynamics (excretion of electrolytes) of furosemide. While furosemide produced an 11% to 12% reduction in tamsulosin hydrochloride Cmax and AUC, these changes are expected to be clinically insignificant and do not require adjustment of the tamsulosin hydrochloride capsules USP dosage [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                  
 

               
               
            
         