
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        The mechanism of action of omacetaxine mepesuccinate has not been fully elucidated but includes inhibition of protein synthesis and is independent of direct Bcr-Abl binding.  Omacetaxine mepesuccinate binds to the A-site cleft in the peptidyl-transferase center of the large ribosomal subunit from a strain of archaeabacteria.  In vitro, omacetaxine mepesuccinate reduced protein levels of the Bcr-Abl oncoprotein and Mcl-1, an anti-apoptotic Bcl-2 family member.  Omacetaxine mepesuccinate showed activity in mouse models of wild-type and T315I mutated Bcr-Abl CML.  
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        The dose proportionality of omacetaxine mepesuccinate is unknown.  A 90% increase in systemic exposure to omacetaxine mepesuccinate was observed between the first dose and steady state.
                        
                           Absorption
                        
                        The absolute bioavailability of omacetaxine mepesuccinate has not been determined.  Omacetaxine mepesuccinate is absorbed following subcutaneous administration, and maximum concentrations are achieved after approximately 30 minutes.  
                        
                           Distribution
                        
                        The steady-state (mean ± SD) volume of distribution of omacetaxine mepesuccinate is approximately 141 ± 93.4 L following subcutaneous administration of 1.25 mg/m2 twice daily for 11 days .  The plasma protein binding of omacetaxine mepesuccinate is less than or equal to 50%.
                        
                           Metabolism
                        
                        Omacetaxine mepesuccinate is primarily hydrolyzed to 4′-DMHHT via plasma esterases with little hepatic microsomal oxidative and/or esterase-mediated metabolism in vitro.  
                        
                           Elimination
                        
                        The major elimination route of omacetaxine mepesuccinate is unknown.  The mean percentage of omacetaxine mepesuccinate excreted unchanged in the urine is less than 15%.  The mean half-life of omacetaxine mepesuccinate following subcutaneous administration is approximately 6 hours.
                        
                           Drug Interactions
                        
                        
                           Cytochrome P450 Enzymes (CYPs):  Omacetaxine mepesuccinate is not a substrate of CYP450 enzymes in vitro.  Omacetaxine mepesuccinate and 4′-DMHHT do not inhibit major CYPs in vitro at concentrations that can be expected clinically.  The potential for omacetaxine mepesuccinate or 4′-DMHHT to induce CYP450 enzymes has not been determined.
                        
                           Transporter Systems:  Omacetaxine mepesuccinate is a P-glycoprotein (P-gp) substrate in vitro.  Omacetaxine mepesuccinate and 4′-DMHHT do not inhibit P-gp mediated efflux of loperamide in vitro at concentrations that can be expected clinically.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.6 Assessment for Risk of QT Prolongation
                     
                        In an uncontrolled pharmacokinetic study there were no reports of QTcF > 480 ms or ΔQTcF > 60 ms in 21 treated patients who received omacetaxine mepesuccinate 1.25 mg/m2 BID for 14 consecutive days.  There was no evidence for concentration-dependent increases in QTc for omacetaxine mepesuccinate or 4’-DMHHT.  Although the mean effect on QTc was 4.2 ms (upper 95% CI: 9.5 ms), QTc effects less than 10 ms cannot be verified due to the absence of a placebo and positive controls.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         