
               
               
               7	DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  
                     
                        Cationic drugs eliminated by renal tubular secretion: Use with caution. (7.2)
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           Alogliptin
                        
                        Alogliptin is primarily renally excreted and CYP-related metabolism is negligible. No drug-drug interactions were observed with the CYP-substrates or inhibitors tested or with renally excreted drugs [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                        
                           Metformin Hydrochloride
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1	Carbonic Anhydrase Inhibitors 
                     
                        Topiramate or other carbonic anhydrase inhibitors (e.g., zonisamide, acetazolamide or dichlorphenamide) frequently decrease serum bicarbonate and induce nonanion gap, hyperchloremic metabolic acidosis. Concomitant use of these drugs may induce metabolic acidosis. Use these drugs with caution in patients treated with metformin, as the risk of lactic acidosis may increase.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2	Cationic Drugs
                     
                        Cationic drugs (e.g., amiloride, digoxin, morphine, procainamide, quinidine, quinine, ranitidine, triamterene, trimethoprim or vancomycin) that are eliminated by renal tubular secretion theoretically have the potential for interaction with metformin by competing for common renal tubular transport systems. Although such interactions remain theoretical (except for cimetidine), careful patient monitoring and dose adjustment of KAZANO and/or the interfering drug is recommended in patients who are taking cationic medications that are excreted via the proximal renal tubular secretory system.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3	The Use of Metformin with Other Drugs
                     
                        Certain drugs tend to produce hyperglycemia and may lead to loss of glycemic control. These drugs include the thiazides and other diuretics, corticosteroids, phenothiazines, thyroid products, estrogens, oral contraceptives, phenytoin, nicotinic acid, sympathomimetics, calcium channel blocking drugs and isoniazid. When such drugs are administered to a patient receiving KAZANO, the patient should be closely observed for loss of blood glucose control. When such drugs are withdrawn from a patient receiving KAZANO, the patient should be observed closely for hypoglycemia.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         