
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
                  See also 
                        Contraindications (4), 
                     
                        Warnings and Precautions (5.7)
                     
                     , and Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)
                     .
               
               
               
                  
                     
                        Coadministration of EVOTAZ can alter the concentration of other drugs and other drugs may alter the concentration of EVOTAZ. The potential drug-drug interactions must be considered prior to and during therapy. (4, 7, 12.3)
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 Potential for EVOTAZ to Affect Other Drugs 
                     
                        Atazanavir is an inhibitor of CYP3A and UGT1A1 and a weak inhibitor of CYP2C8. Cobicistat is an inhibitor of CYP3A and CYP2D6. The transporters that cobicistat inhibits include P-glycoprotein (P-gp), BCRP, OATP1B1 and OATP1B3.
                        Coadministration of EVOTAZ with drugs highly dependent on CYP3A for clearance and for which elevated plasma concentrations are associated with serious and/or life-threatening events is contraindicated [see Contraindications (4)]. Coadministration of EVOTAZ and drugs primarily metabolized by CYP3A, UGT1A1 and/or CYP2D6 or drugs that are substrates of P-gp, BCRP, OATP1B1 and/or OATP1B3 may result in increased plasma concentrations of the other drug that could increase or prolong its therapeutic effects and adverse reactions which may require dose adjustments and/or additional monitoring as shown in Table 5. Use of EVOTAZ is not recommended when coadministered with drugs highly dependent on CYP2C8 for clearance with narrow therapeutic indices (e.g., paclitaxel, repaglinide). [See 
                           
                              Clinical Pharmacology, Table 7 (12.3)
                           
                           .]
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 Potential for Other Drugs to Affect EVOTAZ
                     
                        Atazanavir and cobicistat are CYP3A4 substrates; therefore, drugs that induce CYP3A4 may decrease atazanavir and cobicistat plasma concentrations and reduce the therapeutic effect of EVOTAZ, leading to development of resistance to atazanavir (see Table 5). Cobicistat is also metabolized by CYP2D6 to a minor extent.
                        Coadministration of EVOTAZ with other drugs that inhibit CYP3A4 may increase the plasma concentrations of cobicistat and atazanavir (see Table 5).
                        Atazanavir solubility decreases as pH increases. Reduced plasma concentrations of atazanavir are expected if proton-pump inhibitors, antacids, buffered medications, or H2-receptor antagonists are administered with EVOTAZ. [See 
                              Dosage and Administration (2.1)
                           .]
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3 Established and Other Potentially Significant Drug Interactions
                     
                        Drug interaction trials were not conducted for EVOTAZ. Drug interaction trials were conducted with cobicistat in combination with desipramine, digoxin, or efavirenz and with cobicistat coadministered with elvitegravir in combination with other drugs including rosuvastatin and rifabutin.
                        Table 5 provides dosing recommendations as a result of drug interactions with the components of EVOTAZ. These recommendations are based either on observed drug interactions in studies of cobicistat, atazanavir, or atazanavir coadministered with ritonavir or predicted drug interactions based on the expected magnitude of interaction and potential for serious events or loss of therapeutic effect of EVOTAZ.
                        


                     



                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4 Drugs with No Observed or Predicted Interactions with the Components of EVOTAZ
                     
                        Based on known metabolic profiles, clinically significant drug interactions are not expected between EVOTAZ and acetaminophen, atenolol, dapsone, fluconazole, trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole, or azithromycin. [See Clinical Pharmacology, Table 7 (12.3).]
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         