
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        EVOTAZ is a fixed-dose combination of the HIV-1 antiretroviral drug, atazanavir and the CYP3A inhibitor, cobicistat. [See Microbiology (12.4).]
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Cardiac Electrophysiology
                           
                              
                                 Atazanavir: The effect of atazanavir 400 mg and 800 mg without a CYP3A inhibitor on QTc interval was evaluated in a randomized, multiple-dose, placebo-controlled three-period crossover QT study in 72 healthy subjects. At a dose of 800 mg, atazanavir did not prolong the QTc interval to any clinically relevant extent. Prolongation of the PR interval was noted in subjects receiving atazanavir in the same study. The mean (±SD) maximum change in PR interval from the predose value was 24 (±15) msec for atazanavir 400 mg (n=65) compared to 13 (±11) msec for placebo (n=67). The PR interval prolongations in this study were asymptomatic. Steady state atazanavir exposures (Cmax and AUCtau) observed in this healthy volunteer study exceeded those observed in patients treated with atazanavir coadministered with cobicistat. There is limited information on the potential for a pharmacodynamic interaction in humans between atazanavir and other drugs that prolong the PR interval of the electrocardiogram. [See Warnings and Precautions (5.1).]
                              
                              In 1793 HIV-infected patients receiving antiretroviral regimens, QTc prolongation was comparable in the atazanavir and comparator regimens. No atazanavir-treated healthy subject or HIV-infected patient in clinical trials had a QTc interval >500 msec. [See Warnings and Precautions (5.1).]
                              
                              
                                 Cobicistat: The effect of cobicistat 250 mg (1.7 times the dose in EVOTAZ) and 400 mg (2.7 times the dose in EVOTAZ) on QTc interval was evaluated in a randomized, single-dose, placebo- and active-controlled (moxifloxacin 400 mg) four-period crossover thorough QT study in 48 healthy subjects. At a dose 2.7 times the dose in EVOTAZ, cobicistat did not prolong QTc interval to any clinically relevant extent. Prolongation of the PR interval was noted in subjects receiving cobicistat in the same study. The maximum mean (95% upper confidence bound) difference in PR from placebo after baseline-correction was 9.5 (12.1) msec for 250 mg and 20.2 (22.8) msec for 400 mg dose of cobicistat.
                              
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Effects on Serum Creatinine
                           
                              The effect of cobicistat on serum creatinine was investigated in a trial in subjects with normal renal function (eGFR ≥80 mL/min, N=12) and mild-to-moderate renal impairment (eGFR 50-79 mL/min, N=18). A statistically significant change in estimated glomerular filtration rate, calculated by Cockcroft-Gault method (eGFRCG) from baseline, was observed after 7 days of treatment with cobicistat 150 mg among subjects with normal renal function (−9.9 ± 13.1 mL/min) and mild-to-moderate renal impairment (−11.9 ± 7.0 mL/min). No statistically significant changes in eGFRCG were observed compared to baseline for subjects with normal renal function or mild-to-moderate renal impairment 7 days after cobicistat was discontinued. The actual glomerular filtration rate, as determined by the clearance of probe drug iohexol, was not altered from baseline following treatment of cobicistat among subjects with normal renal function and mild-to-moderate renal impairment, indicating that cobicistat inhibits tubular secretion of creatinine, reflected as a reduction in eGFRCG, without affecting the actual glomerular filtration rate [see Warnings and Precautions (5.3)].
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        One EVOTAZ tablet provided comparable atazanavir exposures (90% confidence intervals within 80%-125%) to one atazanavir capsule (300 mg) plus one cobicistat tablet (150 mg) following single-dose administration with a light meal to healthy subjects (N=62).
                        The activity of cobicistat as a CYP3A inhibitor to increase the systemic exposures of atazanavir was evaluated in the pharmacokinetic substudy (N=48) of Study 114 in which HIV-1 infected subjects received atazanavir 300 mg coadministered with cobicistat 150 mg or atazanavir 300 mg coadministered with ritonavir 100 mg, both in combination with emtricitabine/tenofovir DF. The steady-state pharmacokinetic parameters of atazanavir coadministered with cobicistat were comparable to those observed with ritonavir as shown in Table 6 [see Clinical Studies (14)].
                        


                     



                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Absorption
                           
                              
                                 Atazanavir: Atazanavir is rapidly absorbed with a median Tmax of approximately 3.5 hours following multiple daily doses of atazanavir 300 mg with cobicistat 150 mg in HIV-infected subjects.
                              
                                 Cobicistat: In a trial where subjects were instructed to take coadministered atazanavir and cobicistat with food, the median cobicistat Tmax was approximately 3.0 hours post-dose. Steady-state cobicistat Cmax, AUCtau, and Ctau (mean ± SD), values were 1.5 ± 0.5 μg/mL, 11.1 ± 4.5 μg•hr/mL, and 0.05 ± 0.07 μg/mL, respectively (n=22).
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Food Effect
                           
                              Administration of a single dose of EVOTAZ with a light meal (336 kcal, 5.1 g fat, 9.3 g protein) resulted in a 42% increase in atazanavir Cmax, a 28% increase in atazanavir AUC, a 31% increase in cobicistat Cmax, and a 24% increase in cobicistat AUC relative to the fasting state. Administration of a single dose of EVOTAZ with a high fat meal (1,038 kcal, 59 g fat, 37 g protein) resulted in a 14% reduction in atazanavir Cmax with no change in atazanavir AUC or cobicistat exposures (Cmax, AUC) relative to the fasting state. The 24-hour atazanavir concentration following a high fat meal was increased by approximately 23% due to delayed absorption; the median Tmax increased from 2.0 to 3.5 hours.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Distribution
                           
                              
                                 Atazanavir: Atazanavir is 86% bound to human serum proteins and protein binding is independent of concentration.
                              
                                 Cobicistat: Cobicistat is 97% to 98% bound to human plasma proteins and the mean blood-to-plasma ratio was approximately 0.5.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Metabolism
                           
                              
                                 Atazanavir: Atazanavir is extensively metabolized in humans by CYP3A. Other minor biotransformation pathways for atazanavir or its metabolites consisted of glucuronidation, N-dealkylation, hydrolysis, and oxygenation with dehydrogenation.
                              
                                 Cobicistat: Cobicistat is metabolized by CYP3A and to a minor extent by CYP2D6 enzymes and does not undergo glucuronidation.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Elimination
                           
                              
                                 Atazanavir: The mean elimination half-life of atazanavir in healthy volunteers (n=62) and HIV-infected adult patients (n=13) was approximately 7.5 hours at steady state following a single dose of EVOTAZ with a light meal.
                              
                                 Cobicistat: The median terminal plasma half-life of cobicistat following administration is approximately 3 to 4 hours. With single dose administration of [14C] cobicistat after multiple dosing of cobicistat for six days, 86.2% and 8.2% of the administered dose was excreted in feces and urine, respectively.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Specific Populations
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Renal Impairment
                                 
                                    EVOTAZ is not recommended for use in HIV-treatment-experienced adults with end-stage renal disease managed with hemodialysis. [See Dosage and Administration (2.3).]
                                    
                                    
                                       Atazanavir: In healthy subjects, the renal elimination of unchanged atazanavir was approximately 7% of the administered dose. Atazanavir has been studied in adult subjects with severe renal impairment (n=20), including those on hemodialysis, at multiple doses of 400 mg once daily. The mean atazanavir Cmax was 9% lower, AUC was 19% higher, and Cmin was 96% higher in subjects with severe renal impairment not undergoing hemodialysis (n=10), than in age-, weight-, and gender-matched subjects with normal renal function. In a 4-hour dialysis session, 2.1% of the administered dose was removed. When atazanavir was administered either prior to, or following hemodialysis (n=10), the geometric means for Cmax, AUC, and Cmin were approximately 25% to 43% lower compared to subjects with normal renal function. The mechanism of this decrease is unknown.
                                    
                                       Cobicistat: A study of the pharmacokinetics of cobicistat was performed in non−HIV-1 infected subjects with severe renal impairment (estimated creatinine clearance below 30 mL/min). No clinically relevant differences in cobicistat pharmacokinetics were observed between subjects with severe renal impairment and healthy subjects. [See Use in Specific Populations (8.6).]
                                    
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Hepatic Impairment
                                 
                                    EVOTAZ has not been studied in patients with hepatic impairment and is not recommended for use in patients with hepatic impairment. [See Dosage and Administration (2.4).]
                                    
                                    
                                       Atazanavir: Atazanavir is primarily metabolized and eliminated by the liver. Increased concentrations of atazanavir are expected in patients with moderately or severely impaired hepatic function.
                                    
                                       Cobicistat: Cobicistat is primarily metabolized and eliminated by the liver. No clinically relevant differences in cobicistat pharmacokinetics were observed between subjects with moderate hepatic impairment (Child-Pugh Class B) and healthy subjects. The effect of severe hepatic impairment (Child-Pugh Class C) on the pharmacokinetics of cobicistat has not been studied. [See Use in Specific Populations (8.7).]
                                    
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Gender and Age
                                 
                                    
                                       Atazanavir: There were no clinically important pharmacokinetic differences observed due to age or gender.
                                    
                                       Cobicistat: No clinically relevant pharmacokinetic differences have been observed between men and women for cobicistat.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Assessment of Drug Interactions
                                 
                                    Atazanavir has been shown in vivo not to induce its own metabolism, nor to increase the biotransformation of some drugs metabolized by CYP3A. In a multiple-dose study, atazanavir decreased the urinary ratio of endogenous 6β-OH cortisol to cortisol versus baseline, indicating that CYP3A production was not induced.
                                    Drug interaction studies were not conducted for EVOTAZ or for atazanavir coadministered with cobicistat. Drug interaction studies of cobicistat were conducted with desipramine, digoxin, and efavirenz. Drug interaction studies of cobicistat coadministered with elvitegravir included rosuvastatin and rifabutin. The effects of cobicistat on the exposure of coadministered drugs are summarized in Table 7. For information regarding clinical recommendations, see 
                                          Drug Interactions (7)
                                       .
                                    


                                 



                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.4 Microbiology
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Mechanism of Action
                           
                              EVOTAZ is a fixed-dose combination of atazanavir (ATV) and the CYP3A inhibitor cobicistat. ATV is an azapeptide HIV-1 protease inhibitor (PI) that selectively inhibits the virus-specific processing of viral Gag and Gag-Pol polyproteins in HIV-1 infected cells, thus preventing formation of mature virions. Cobicistat is a mechanism-based inhibitor of cytochrome P450 3A (CYP3A). Inhibition of CYP3A-mediated metabolism by cobicistat increases the systemic exposure of the CYP3A substrate atazanavir.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Antiviral Activity in Cell Culture
                           
                              Atazanavir exhibits anti−HIV-1 activity with a mean 50% effective concentration (EC50 value) in the absence of human serum of 2 to 5 nM against a variety of laboratory and clinical HIV-1 isolates grown in peripheral blood mononuclear cells, macrophages, CEM-SS cells, and MT‑2 cells. ATV has activity against HIV-1 Group M subtype viruses A, B, C, D, AE, AG, F, G, and J isolates in cell culture. ATV has variable activity against HIV-2 isolates (1.9-32 nM), with EC50 values above the EC50 values of failure isolates. Two-drug combination antiviral activity studies with ATV showed no antagonism in cell culture with NNRTIs (delavirdine, efavirenz, and nevirapine), PIs (amprenavir, indinavir, lopinavir, nelfinavir, ritonavir, and saquinavir), NRTIs (abacavir, didanosine, emtricitabine, lamivudine, stavudine, tenofovir, zalcitabine, and zidovudine), the HIV-1 fusion inhibitor enfuvirtide, and two compounds used in the treatment of viral hepatitis, adefovir and ribavirin, without enhanced cytotoxicity.
                              Cobicistat does not inhibit recombinant HIV-1 protease in a biochemical assay and has no detectable antiviral activity in cell culture against HIV-1, HBV, or HCV. The antiviral activity in cell culture of selected HIV-1 antiretroviral drugs was not antagonized by cobicistat.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Resistance
                           
                              
                                 In Cell Culture: HIV-1 isolates with a decreased susceptibility to ATV have been selected in cell culture and obtained from patients treated with ATV or atazanavir coadministered with ritonavir. HIV-1 isolates with 93- to 183-fold reduced susceptibility to ATV from three different viral strains were selected in cell culture by 5 months. The substitutions in these HIV-1 viruses that contributed to ATV resistance include I50L, N88S, I84V, A71V, and M46I. Changes were also observed at the protease cleavage sites following drug selection. Recombinant viruses containing the I50L substitution without other major PI substitutions were growth impaired and displayed increased susceptibility in cell culture to other PIs (amprenavir, indinavir, lopinavir, nelfinavir, ritonavir, and saquinavir). The I50L and I50V substitutions yielded selective resistance to ATV and amprenavir, respectively, and did not appear to be cross-resistant.
                              
                                 Clinical Studies: Resistance to EVOTAZ is driven by atazanavir as cobicistat lacks antiviral activity. For the complete atazanavir resistance-associated substitutions, refer to the atazanavir full prescribing information.
                              
                                 Clinical Studies of Treatment-Naive Patients Receiving Atazanavir 300 mg Coadministered with Cobicistat 150 mg: In an analysis of treatment-failure subjects who received atazanavir coadministered with cobicistat in Study 114 through Week 48, evaluable genotypic data from paired baseline and treatment-failure isolates were available for 11 of the 12 virologic failures in this group (3%, 11/344). Among the 11 subjects, 2 developed the emtricitabine-associated resistance substitution M184V. No subject developed the tenofovir-associated resistance substitution K65R or any primary resistance substitution associated with protease inhibitors. In the ritonavir group, evaluable genotypic data was available for all 12 virologic failures (3%, 12/348) and no subject had emergent resistance to any component of the regimen.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Cross-Resistance
                           
                              Cross-resistance among PIs has been observed. Baseline phenotypic and genotypic analyses of clinical isolates from ATV clinical trials of PI-experienced patients showed that isolates cross-resistant to multiple PIs were cross-resistant to ATV. Greater than 90% of the isolates with substitutions that included I84V or G48V were resistant to ATV. Greater than 60% of isolates containing L90M, G73S/T/C, A71V/T, I54V, M46I/L, or a change at V82 were resistant to ATV, and 38% of isolates containing a D30N substitution in addition to other changes were resistant to ATV. Isolates resistant to ATV were also cross-resistant to other PIs with >90% of the isolates resistant to indinavir, lopinavir, nelfinavir, ritonavir, and saquinavir, and 80% resistant to amprenavir. In treatment-experienced patients, PI-resistant viral isolates that developed the I50L substitution in addition to other PI resistance-associated substitution were also cross-resistant to other PIs.
                              International AIDS Society (IAS)-defined PI resistance substitutions, depending on the number and type, may confer a reduced virologic response to atazanavir. Please refer to the “Baseline Genotype/Phenotype and Virologic Outcome Analyses” section in the atazanavir full prescribing information.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         