
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY

               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           Mechanism of Action
                        
                        Ketorolac tromethamine is a nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug which, when administered systemically, has demonstrated analgesic, anti-inflammatory, and anti-pyretic activity. The mechanism of its action is thought to be due to its ability to inhibit prostaglandin biosynthesis. Ketorolac tromethamine given systemically does not cause pupil constriction.

                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           Pharmacokinetics
                        
                        One drop (0.05 mL) of 0.5% ketorolac tromethamine ophthalmic solution was instilled into one eye and one drop of vehicle into the other eye TID in 26 normal subjects. Only 5 of 26 subjects had a detectable amount of ketorolac in their plasma (range 10.7 to 22.5 ng/mL) at day 10 during topical ocular treatment. When ketorolac tromethamine 10 mg is administered systemically every 6 hours, peak plasma levels at steady state are around 960 ng/mL. 

                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           Clinical Studies
                        
                        In two double-masked, multi-centered, parallel-group studies, 313 patients who had undergone photorefractive keratectomy received ketorolac tromethamine 0.4% or its vehicle QID for up to 4 days. Significant differences favored ketorolac tromethamine for the reduction of ocular pain and burning/stinging following photorefractive keratectomy surgery.

                        Results from clinical studies indicate that ketorolac tromethamine has no significant effect upon intraocular pressure.

                        The safety and effectiveness of ketorolac tromethamine ophthalmic solution in post-cataract surgery patients has not been established.

                     
                     
                  
               
            
         