
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Microbiology
                     
                        
                           Mechanism of Action
                        
                        Penicillinase-resistant penicillins exert a bactericidal action against penicillin-susceptible microorganisms during the state of active multiplication. All penicillins inhibit the biosynthesis of the bacterial cell wall.
                        
                           Antibacterial Activity
                        
                        Dicloxacillin sodium has been shown to be active against most isolates of the following microorganisms, both in vitro and in clinical infections as described in the INDICATIONS AND USAGE section.
                        
                           Gram-positive Bacteria
                        
                        
                           Staphylococcus spp.
                        
                           Susceptibility Test Methods
                        
                        Susceptibility of staphylococcal isolates to dicloxacillin may be inferred by testing penicillin and either oxacillin or cefoxitin1. For staphylococcal isolates, penicillin susceptibility implies susceptibility to other β-lactam agents, and penicillin resistance implies resistance to penicillinase-labile penicillins. Resistance to oxacillin (or cefoxitin) implies resistance to all other β-lactam agents, except newer agents with activity against methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus. Routine testing of dicloxacillin is not advised.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        Methicillin sodium is readily destroyed by gastric acidity and must be administered by intramuscular or intravenous injection. The isoxazolyl penicillins (cloxacillin, dicloxacillin and oxacillin) and nafcillin are more acid-resistant and may be administered orally.
                        Absorption of the isoxazolyl penicillins after oral administration is rapid but incomplete; peak blood levels are achieved in 1 to 1.5 hours. In one study, after ingestion of a single 500 mg oral dose, peak serum concentrations range from 5 to 7 micrograms/milliliter for oxacillin, from 7.5 to 14.4 mcg/mL for cloxacillin and from 10 to 17 mcg/mL for dicloxacillin.
                        Oral absorption of cloxacillin, dicloxacillin, oxacillin and nafcillin is delayed when the drugs are administered after meals.
                        Once absorbed, the penicillinase-resistant penicillins bind to serum protein, mainly albumin. The degree of protein binding reported varies with the method of study and the investigator (see TABLE II).
                        


                        



                           
The penicillinase-resistant penicillins vary in the extent to which they are distributed in the body fluids. With normal doses, insignificant concentrations are found in the cerebrospinal fluid and aqueous humor. All the drugs in this class are found in therapeutic concentrations in the pleural, bile and amniotic fluids.
                        The penicillinase-resistant penicillins are rapidly excreted, primarily as unchanged drug in the urine by glomerular filtration and active tubular secretion. The elimination half-life for dicloxacillin is about 0.7 hour. Nonrenal elimination includes hepatic inactivation and excretion in bile.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         