
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY 
               
                  Progesterone Capsules are an oral dosage form of micronized progesterone which is chemically identical to progesterone of ovarian origin. The oral bioavailability of progesterone is increased through micronization. 
               
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Pharmacokinetics

                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 A. Absorption
                              
                              After oral administration of progesterone as a micronized soft-gelatin capsule formulation, maximum serum concentrations were attained within 3 hours. The absolute bioavailability of micronized progesterone is not known. Table 1 summarizes the mean pharmacokinetic parameters in postmenopausal women after five oral daily doses of Progesterone Capsules 100 mg as a micronized soft-gelatin capsule formulation.
                              


                              


 Serum progesterone concentrations appeared linear and dose proportional following multiple dose administration of Progesterone Capsules 100 mg over the dose range 100 mg per day to 300 mg per day in postmenopausal women. Although doses greater than 300 mg per day were not studied in females, serum concentrations from a study in male volunteers appeared linear and dose proportional between 100 mg per day and 400 mg per day. The pharmacokinetic parameters in male volunteers were generally consistent with those seen in postmenopausal women. 
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 B. Distribution
                              
                              Progesterone is approximately 96 percent to 99 percent bound to serum proteins, primarily to serum albumin (50 to 54 percent) and transcortin (43 to 48 percent). 
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 C. Metabolism
                              
                              Progesterone is metabolized primarily by the liver largely to pregnanediols and pregnanolones. Pregnanediols and pregnanolones are conjugated in the liver to glucuronide and sulfate metabolites. Progesterone metabolites which are excreted in the bile may be deconjugated and may be further metabolized in the intestine via reduction, dehydroxylation, and epimerization. 
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 D. Excretion
                              
                              The glucuronide and sulfate conjugates of pregnanediol and pregnanolone are excreted in the bile and urine. Progesterone metabolites are eliminated mainly by the kidneys. Progesterone metabolites which are excreted in the bile may undergo enterohepatic recycling or may be excreted in the feces. 
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 E. Special Populations
                              
                              The pharmacokinetics of Progesterone Capsules have not been assessed in low body weight or obese patients.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                    Hepatic Insufficiency:
                                  The effect of hepatic impairment on the pharmacokinetics of Progesterone Capsules has not been studied.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                    Renal Insufficiency:
                                  The effect of renal impairment on the pharmacokinetics of Progesterone Capsules has not been studied.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 F. Food–Drug Interaction
                              
                              Concomitant food ingestion increased the bioavailability of Progesterone Capsules relative to a fasting state when administered to postmenopausal women at a dose of 200 mg. 
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 G. Drug Interactions
                              
                              The metabolism of progesterone by human liver microsomes was inhibited by ketoconazole (IC50 < 0.1 μM). Ketoconazole is a known inhibitor of cytochrome P450 3A4, hence these data suggest that ketoconazole or other known inhibitors of this enzyme may increase the bioavailability of progesterone. The clinical relevance of the in vitro findings is unknown. 
                               Coadministration of conjugated estrogens and Progesterone Capsules to 29 postmenopausal women over a 12-day period resulted in an increase in total estrone concentrations (Cmax 3.68 ng/mL to 4.93 ng/mL) and total equilin concentrations (Cmax 2.27 ng/mL to 3.22 ng/mL) and a decrease in circulating 17β estradiol concentrations (Cmax 0.037 ng/mL to 0.030 ng/mL). The half-life of the conjugated estrogens was similar with coadministration of Progesterone Capsules. Table 2 summarizes the pharmacokinetic parameters.
                              


