
                     
                     
                     
                        8 Drug Interactions
                     
                     
                        Consult the labeling of concurrently-used drugs to obtain further information about interactions with hormonal contraceptives or the potential for enzyme alterations.
                        
                           Effects of Other Drugs on Combined Hormonal Contraceptives
                        
                        Substances decreasing the plasma concentrations of COCs and potentially diminishing the efficacy of COCs:
                        Drugs or herbal products that induce certain enzymes, including cytochrome P450 3A4 (CYP3A4), may 
decrease the plasma concentrations of COCs and potentially diminish the effectiveness of CHCs or 
increase breakthrough bleeding. Some drugs or herbal products that may decrease the effectiveness 
of hormonal contraceptives include phenytoin, barbiturates, carbamazepine, bosentan, felbamate, 
griseofulvin, oxcarbazepine, rifampicin, topiramate, rifabutin, rufinamide, aprepitant, and 
products containing St. John’s wort. Interactions between hormonal contraceptives and other drugs 
may lead to breakthrough bleeding and/or contraceptive failure. Counsel women to use an alternative 
method of contraception or a back-up method when enzyme inducers are used with CHCs, and to 
continue back-up contraception for 28 days after discontinuing the enzyme inducer to ensure contraceptive reliability. 
                        Substances increasing the plasma concentrations of COCs:
                        Co-administration of atorvastatin or rosuvastatin and certain COCs containing EE increase AUC 
values for EE by approximately 20-25%. Ascorbic acid and acetaminophen may increase plasma EE 
concentrations, possibly by inhibition of conjugation. CYP3A4 inhibitors such as itraconazole, 
voriconazole, fluconazole, grapefruit juice, or ketoconazole may increase plasma hormone concentrations.
                         Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)/ Hepatitis C virus (HCV) protease
inhibitors and non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors:
                        Significant  changes  (increase  or  decrease)  in  the  plasma  concentrations of estrogen and/or 
progestin have been noted in some cases of co-administration with    HIV    protease    inhibitors  
  (decrease    [e.g.,    nelfinavir,    ritonavir, darunavir/ritonavir, (fos)amprenavir/ritonavir, 
  lopinavir/ritonavir, and tipranavir/ritonavir] or 
increase [e.g., indinavir and atazanavir/ritonavir]) /HCV protease inhibitors (decrease [e.g., 
boceprevir and telaprevir]) or with non­ nucleoside  reverse  transcriptase  inhibitors  (decrease  
[e.g.,  nevirapine]  or increase [e.g., etravirine]).
                        Colesevelam:
                        Colesevelam, a bile acid sequestrant, given together with a combination oral hormonal contraceptive, has been shown to significantly decrease the AUC of EE. A drug interaction between the contraceptive and colesevelam was decreased when the two drug products were given 4 hours apart.
                        Effects of Combined Hormonal Contraceptives on Other Drugs
                        COCs containing EE may inhibit the metabolism of other compounds (e.g., cyclosporine, prednisolone, 
theophylline, tizanidine, and voriconazole) and increase  their  plasma  concentrations.  COCs  
have  been  shown  to  decrease plasma  concentrations of  acetaminophen, clofibric  acid,  
morphine,  salicylic acid, temazepam and lamotrigine. Significant decrease in plasma concentration 
of lamotrigine has been shown, likely due to induction of lamotrigine glucuronidation. This may 
reduce seizure control; therefore, dosage adjustments of lamotrigine may be necessary.
                        Women on thyroid hormone replacement therapy may need increased doses of
thyroid  hormone  because  serum  concentrations  of  thyroid-binding  globulin
increases with use of COCs.
                     
                     
                  
               