
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1	Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Tranexamic acid is a synthetic lysine amino acid derivative, which diminishes the dissolution of hemostatic fibrin by plasmin.  In the presence of tranexamic acid, the lysine receptor binding sites of plasmin for fibrin are occupied, preventing binding to fibrin monomers, thus preserving and stabilizing fibrin's matrix structure.
                        The antifibrinolytic effects of tranexamic acid are mediated by reversible interactions at multiple binding sites within plasminogen.  Native human plasminogen contains 4 to 5 lysine binding sites with low affinity for tranexamic acid (Kd = 750 μmol/L) and 1 with high affinity (Kd = 1.1 μmol/L).  The high affinity lysine site of plasminogen is involved in its binding to fibrin.  Saturation of the high affinity binding site with tranexamic acid displaces plasminogen from the surface of fibrin.  Although plasmin may be formed by conformational changes in plasminogen, binding to and dissolution of the fibrin matrix is inhibited.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        Tranexamic acid, at in vitro concentrations of 25 - 100 μM, reduces by 20 - 60% the maximal rate of plasmin lysis of fibrin catalyzed by tissue plasminogen activator (tPA).
                        Elevated concentrations of endometrial, uterine, and menstrual blood tPA are observed in women with heavy menstrual bleeding (HMB) compared to women with normal menstrual blood loss.  The effect of tranexamic acid on lowering endometrial tPA activity and menstrual fluid fibrinolysis is observed in women with HMB receiving tranexamic acid total oral doses of 2-3 g/day for 5 days.
                        In healthy subjects, tranexamic acid at blood concentrations less than 10 mg/mL has no effect on the platelet count, the coagulation time or various coagulation factors in whole blood or citrated blood. Tranexamic acid, however, at blood concentrations of 1 and 10 mg/mL prolongs the thrombin time.
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Cardiac Electrophysiology
                              
                              The effect of LYSTEDA on QT interval was evaluated in a randomized, single-dose, 4-way crossover study in 48 healthy females aged 18 to 49 years.  Subjects received (1) LYSTEDA 1300 mg (two 650 mg tablets), (2) LYSTEDA 3900 mg (six 650 mg tablets; three times the recommended single dose), (3) moxifloxacin 400 mg, and (4) placebo.  There was no significant increase in the corrected QT interval at any time up to 24 hours after the administration of either dose of LYSTEDA.  Moxifloxacin, the active control, was associated with a maximum 14.11 msec mean increase in corrected QT interval (moxifloxacin – placebo) at 3 hours after administration. 
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Absorption
                              
                              After a single oral administration of two 650 mg tablets of LYSTEDA, the peak plasma concentration (Cmax) occurred at approximately 3 hours (Tmax).  The absolute bioavailability of LYSTEDA in women aged 18-49 is approximately 45%.  Following multiple oral doses (two 650 mg tablets three times daily) administration of LYSTEDA for 5 days, the mean Cmax increased by approximately 19% and the mean area under the plasma concentration-time curve (AUC) remained unchanged, compared to a single oral dose administration (two 650 mg tablets).  Plasma concentrations reached steady state at the 5th dose of LYSTEDA on Day 2.
                              The mean plasma pharmacokinetic parameters of tranexamic acid determined in 19 healthy women following a single (two 650 mg tablets) and multiple (two 650 mg tablets three times daily for 5 days) oral dose of LYSTEDA are shown in Table 3.
                              


                              


Effect of food: LYSTEDA may be administered without regard to meals.  A single dose administration (two 650 mg tablets) of LYSTEDA with food increased both Cmax and AUC by 7% and 16%, respectively.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Distribution
                              
                              Tranexamic acid is 3% bound to plasma proteins with no apparent binding to albumin.  Tranexamic acid is distributed with an initial volume of distribution of 0.18 L/kg and steady-state apparent volume of distribution of 0.39 L/kg. 
                              Tranexamic acid crosses the placenta.  The concentration in cord blood after an intravenous injection of 10 mg/kg to pregnant women is about 30 mg/L, as high as in the maternal blood.
                              Tranexamic acid concentration in cerebrospinal fluid is about one tenth of the plasma concentration.
                              The drug passes into the aqueous humor of the eye achieving a concentration of approximately one tenth of plasma concentrations.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Metabolism
                              
                              A small fraction of the tranexamic acid is metabolized.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Excretion
                              
                              Tranexamic acid is eliminated by urinary excretion primarily via glomerular filtration with more than 95% of the dose excreted unchanged.  Excretion of tranexamic acid is about 90% at 24 hours after intravenous administration of 10 mg/kg.  Most elimination post intravenous administration occurred during the first 10 hours, giving an apparent elimination half-life of approximately 2 hours.  The mean terminal half-life of LYSTEDA is approximately 11 hours.  Plasma clearance of tranexamic acid is 110-116 mL/min. 
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Specific Populations
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                       
                                       
                                          
                                             Pregnancy (Category B)
                                          LYSTEDA is not indicated for use in pregnant women.  Tranexamic acid is known to cross the placenta and appears in cord blood at concentrations approximately equal to maternal concentration. There are no adequate and well-controlled studies in pregnant women [see 
                                                Use in Specific Populations (8.1)
                                             ].
                                       
                                       
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                       
                                       
                                          
                                             Nursing Mothers
                                          
                                          Tranexamic acid is present in the mother's milk at a concentration of about one hundredth of the corresponding serum concentrations.  LYSTEDA should be used during lactation only if clearly needed [see 
                                                Use in Specific Populations (8.3)
                                             ].
                                       
                                       
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                       
                                       
                                          
                                             Pediatric Use
                                          
                                          LYSTEDA is indicated for women of reproductive age and is not intended for use in premenarcheal girls.
                                          LYSTEDA has not been studied in adolescents under age 18 with heavy menstrual bleeding.
                                       
                                       
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                       
                                       
                                          
                                             Geriatric Use
                                          
                                          LYSTEDA is indicated for women of reproductive age and is not intended for use by postmenopausal women.
                                       
                                       
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                       
                                       
                                          
                                             Renal Impairment
                                          
                                          The effect of renal impairment on the disposition of LYSTEDA has not been evaluated.  Urinary excretion following a single intravenous injection of tranexamic acid declines as renal function decreases.  Following a single 10 mg/kg intravenous injection of tranexamic acid in 28 patients, the 24-hour urinary fractions of tranexamic acid with serum creatinine concentrations 1.4 – 2.8, 2.8 – 5.7, and greater than 5.7 mg/dL were 51, 39, and 19%, respectively.  The 24-hour tranexamic acid plasma concentrations for these patients demonstrated a direct relationship to the degree of renal impairment.  Therefore, dose adjustment is needed in patients with renal impairment [see 
                                                Dosage and Administration (2.2)
                                             ].
                                       
                                       
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                       
                                       
                                          
                                             Hepatic Impairment
                                          
                                          The effect of hepatic impairment on the disposition of LYSTEDA has not been evaluated.  One percent and 0.5 percent of an oral dose are excreted as a dicarboxylic acid and acetylated metabolite, respectively.  Because only a small fraction of the drug is metabolized, no dose adjustment is needed in patients with hepatic impairment.
                                       
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Drug Interactions
                                    
                                    No drug-drug interaction studies were conducted with LYSTEDA.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Hormonal Contraceptives
                                    
                                    Because LYSTEDA is antifibrinolytic, concomitant use of hormonal contraception and LYSTEDA may further exacerbate the increased thrombotic risk associated with combination hormonal contraceptives.  Women using hormonal contraception should use LYSTEDA only if there is a strong medical need and the benefit of treatment will outweigh the potential increased risk of a thrombotic event [see 
                                          Warnings and Precautions (5.1)
                                        and 
                                          Drug Interactions (7.1)
                                       ].
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Factor IX Complex Concentrates or Anti-inhibitor Coagulant Concentrates
                                    
                                    LYSTEDA is not recommended in patients taking either Factor IX complex concentrates or anti-inhibitor coagulant concentrates because the risk of thrombosis may be increased [see 
                                          Warnings and Precautions (5.1)
                                        and 
                                          Drug Interactions (7.3)
                                       ].
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Tissue Plasminogen Activators
                                    
                                    Concomitant therapy with tissue plasminogen activators may decrease the efficacy of both LYSTEDA and tissue plasminogen activators.  Therefore, exercise caution if a patient taking LYSTEDA therapy requires tissue plasminogen activators [see 
                                          Drug Interactions (7.2)
                                       ].
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       All-Trans Retinoic Acid (Oral Tretinoin)
                                    
                                    In a study involving 28 patients with acute promyelocytic leukemia who were given either orally administered all-trans retinoic acid plus intravenously administered tranexamic acid, all-trans retinoic acid plus chemotherapy, or all-trans retinoic acid plus tranexamic acid plus chemotherapy, all 4 patients who were given all-trans retinoic acid plus tranexamic acid died, with 3 of the 4 deaths due to thrombotic complications.  It appears that the procoagulant effect of all-trans retinoic acid may be exacerbated by concomitant use of tranexamic acid.  Therefore, exercise caution when prescribing LYSTEDA to patients with acute promyelocytic leukemia taking all-trans retinoic acid [see 
                                          Warnings and Precautions (5.1)
                                        and 
                                          Drug Interactions (7.4)
                                       ].
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         