
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Beleodaq is a histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor. HDACs catalyze the removal of acetyl groups from the lysine residues of histones and some non-histone proteins. In vitro, belinostat caused the accumulation of acetylated histones and other proteins, inducing cell cycle arrest and/or apoptosis of some transformed cells. Belinostat shows preferential cytotoxicity towards tumor cells compared to normal cells. Belinostat inhibited the enzymatic activity of histone deacetylases at nanomolar concentrations (<250 nM).
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        
                           Cardiac Electrophysiology
                        
                        Multiple clinical trials have been conducted with Beleodaq, in many of which ECG data were collected and analyzed by a central laboratory. Analysis of clinical ECG and belinostat plasma concentration data demonstrated no meaningful effect of Beleodaq on cardiac repolarization. None of the trials showed any clinically relevant changes caused by Beleodaq on heart rate, PR duration or QRS duration as measures of autonomic state, atrio-ventricular conduction or depolarization; there were no cases of Torsades de Pointes.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        The pharmacokinetic characteristics of belinostat were analyzed from pooled data from phase 1/2 clinical studies that used doses of belinostat ranging from 150 to 1200 mg/m2. The total mean plasma clearance and elimination half-life were 1240 mL/min and 1.1 hours, respectively. The total clearance approximates average hepatic blood flow (1500 mL/min), suggesting high hepatic extraction (clearance being flow dependent).
                        
                           Distribution
                        
                        The mean belinostat volume of distribution approaches total body water, indicating that belinostat has limited body tissue distribution. In vitro plasma studies have shown that between 92.9% and 95.8% of belinostat is bound to protein in an equilibrium dialysis assay, and was independent of belinostat plasma concentrations from 500 to 25,000 ng/mL.
                        
                           Metabolism
                        
                        Belinostat is primarily metabolized by hepatic UGT1A1. Strong UGT1A1 inhibitors are expected to increase exposure to belinostat. Belinostat also undergoes hepatic metabolism by CYP2A6, CYP2C9, and CYP3A4 enzymes to form belinostat amide and belinostat acid. The enzymes responsible for the formation of methyl belinostat and 3-(anilinosulfonyl)-benzenecarboxylic acid, (3-ASBA) are not known.
                        
                           Excretion
                        
                        Belinostat is eliminated predominantly through metabolism with less than 2% of the dose recovered unchanged in urine. All major human metabolites (methyl belinostat, belinostat amide, belinostat acid, belinostat glucuronide, and 3-ASBA) are generally excreted in urine within the first 24 hours after dose administration. Metabolites 3-ASBA and belinostat glucuronide represented the highest fractions of the belinostat dose excreted in urine (4.61% and 30.5%, respectively).
                        
                           Drug-Drug Interactions
                        
                        In vitro studies showed belinostat and its metabolites (including belinostat glucuronide, belinostat amide, methyl belinostat) inhibited metabolic activities of CYP2C8 and CYP2C9. Other metabolites (3-ASBA and belinostat acid) inhibited CYP2C8. 
                        In cancer patients, co-administration of Beleodaq (1,000 mg/m2) and warfarin (5 mg), a known CYP2C9 substrate, did not increase the AUC or Cmax of either R- or S-warfarin. 
                        Belinostat is likely a glycoprotein (P-gp) substrate but is unlikely to inhibit P-gp.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.5 Pharmacogenomics
                     
                        UGT1A1 activity is reduced in individuals with genetic polymorphisms that lead to reduced enzyme activity such as the UGT1A1*28 polymorphism. Approximately 20% of the black population, 10% of the white population, and 2% of the Asian population are homozygous for the UGT1A1*28 allele. Additional reduced function alleles may be more prevalent in specific populations.
                        Because belinostat is primarily (80 -90%) metabolized by UGT1A1, the clearance of belinostat could be decreased in patients with reduced UGT1A1 activity (e.g., patients with UGT1A1*28 allele). Reduce the starting dose of Beleodaq to 750 mg/m2 in patients known to be homozygous for the UGT1A1*28 allele to minimize dose limiting toxicities.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         