
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  
                     
                        If co‑administered with cimetidine: Maximum single dose of 2.5 mg, not to exceed 5 mg in any 24-hour period. (2.3, 7.4)
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 Ergot-containing drugs
                     
                        Ergot-containing drugs have been reported to cause prolonged vasospastic reactions. Because these effects may be additive, use of ergotamine‑containing or ergot‑type medications (like dihydroergotamine or methysergide) and ZOMIG within 24 hours of each other is contraindicated [see Contraindications (4)
                           ].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 MAO-A Inhibitors
                     
                        MAO-A inhibitors increase the systemic exposure of zolmitriptan. Therefore, the use of ZOMIG in patients receiving MAO-A inhibitors is contraindicated [see Contraindications (4) and Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)
                           ].
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3 5-HT1B/1D agonists (e.g. triptans)
                     
                        Concomitant use of other 5-HT1B/1D agonists (including triptans) within 24 hours of ZOMIG treatment is contraindicated because the risk of vasospastic reactions may be additive [see Contraindications (4)
                           ].
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4 Cimetidine
                     
                        Following administration of cimetidine, the half‑life and AUC of ZOMIG and its active metabolites were approximately doubled [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)
                           ]. If cimetidine and ZOMIG are used concomitantly, limit the maximum single dose of ZOMIG to 2.5 mg, not to exceed 5 mg in any 24-hour period [see Dosage and Administration 
                           
                              (2.3)
                           
                            and Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)
                           ].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.5 Selective Serotonin Reuptake Inhibitors/Serotonin Norepinephrine Reuptake Inhibitors and Serotonin Syndrome
                     
                        Cases of life-threatening serotonin syndrome have been reported during combined use of selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) or serotonin norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs) and triptans [see Warnings and Precautions (5.7)
                           ].
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         