
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  
                     
                        Co-administration of TECHNIVIE can alter the plasma concentrations of some drugs and some drugs may alter the plasma concentrations of TECHNIVIE. The potential for drug-drug interactions must be considered before and during treatment. Consult the full prescribing information prior to and during treatment for potential drug interactions. (4, 5.3, 7, 12.3)
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 Potential for TECHNIVIE to Affect Other Drugs 
                     
                        Paritaprevir is an inhibitor of OATP1B1 and OATP1B3 and paritaprevir and ritonavir are inhibitors of BCRP and P-gp. Ritonavir is an inhibitor of CYP3A4. Co-administration of TECHNIVIE with drugs that are substrates of CYP3A, P-gp, BCRP, OATP1B1 or OATP1B3 may result in increased plasma concentrations of such drugs. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 Potential for Other Drugs to Affect One or More Components of TECHNIVIE 
                     
                        Paritaprevir and ritonavir are primarily metabolized by CYP3A enzymes. Co-administration of TECHNIVIE with strong inhibitors of CYP3A may increase paritaprevir and ritonavir concentrations. Ombitasvir is primarily metabolized via amide hydrolysis while CYP enzymes play a minor role in its metabolism. Ombitasvir, paritaprevir and ritonavir are substrates of P-gp. Paritaprevir is a substrate of BCRP, OATP1B1 and OATP1B3. Inhibition of P-gp, BCRP, OATP1B1 or OATP1B3 may increase the plasma concentrations of the various components of TECHNIVIE.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3 Established and Other Potential Drug Interactions
                     
                        If dosage adjustments of concomitant medications are made due to treatment with TECHNIVIE, dosages should be re-adjusted after administration of TECHNIVIE is completed. Dosage adjustment is not required for TECHNIVIE.
                        
                           Table 4 provides the effect of co-administration of TECHNIVIE on concentrations of concomitant drugs and the effect of concomitant drugs on the various components of TECHNIVIE. See Contraindications (4) for drugs that are contraindicated with TECHNIVIE. Refer to the ritonavir prescribing information for other potentially significant drug interactions with ritonavir.
                        


                     



                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4 Drugs without Clinically Significant Interactions with TECHNIVIE
                     
                        No dosage adjustments are recommended when TECHNIVIE is co-administered with the following medications: duloxetine, emtricitabine/tenofovir disoproxil fumarate, escitalopram, gemfibrozil, methadone, progestin only contraceptives, raltegravir, rosuvastatin, warfarin and zolpidem.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         