
                     
                     
                     Drug Interactions
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           Lisinopril
                           
                              Patients on diuretics, and especially those in whom diuretic therapy was recently instituted, may occasionally experience an excessive reduction of blood pressure after initiation of therapy with lisinopril. The possibility of hypotensive effects with lisinopril can be minimized by either discontinuing the diuretic or increasing the salt intake prior to initiation of treatment with lisinopril. If it is necessary to continue the diuretic, initiate therapy with lisinopril at a dose of 5 mg daily, and provide close medical supervision after the initial dose for at least two hours and until blood pressure has stabilized for at least an additional hour. (See and When a diuretic is added to the therapy of a patient receiving lisinopril, an additional antihypertensive effect is usually observed. (See
                                            Hypotension — Patients on Diuretic Therapy:
                                 
                                    WARNINGS
                                 
                                 .)
                                                DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION
                                 
                                 .)
                                                DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION
                                 
                              
                              Reports suggest that NSAIDs including selective COX-2 inhibitors may diminish the antihypertensive effect of ACE inhibitors, including lisinopril. This interaction should be given consideration in patients taking NSAIDs or selective COX-2 inhibitors concomitantly with ACE inhibitors.
                                            Non-steroidal Anti-inflammatory Agents Including Selective Cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) Inhibitors
                                 :
                              
                              In some patients with compromised renal function (e.g., elderly patients or patients who are volume-depleted, including those on diuretic therapy) who are being treated with non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, including selective COX-2 inhibitors, the co-administration of angiotensin II receptor antagonists or ACE inhibitors, may result in a further deterioration of renal function, including possible acute renal failure. These effects are usually reversible.
                              These interactions should be considered in patients taking NSAIDS including selective COX-2 inhibitors concomitantly with diuretics and angiotensin II antagonists or ACE inhibitors. Therefore, monitor effects on blood pressure and renal function when administering the combination, especially in the elderly.
                              Dual blockade of the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system (RAAS) with angiotensin receptor blockers, ACE inhibitors, or direct renin inhibitors (such as aliskiren) is associated with increased risk of hypotension, syncope, hyperkalemia, and changes in renal function (including acute renal failure) compared to monotherapy. Closely monitor blood pressure, renal function and electrolytes in patients on lisinopril and hydrochlorothiazide and other agents that affect the RAAS. Do not co-administer aliskiren with lisinopril and hydrochlorothiazide in patients with diabetes. Avoid use of aliskiren with lisinopril and hydrochlorothiazide in patients with renal impairment (GFR <60 mL/min).
                                            
                                    Dual Blockade of the Renin-angiotensin-aldosterone System:
                                 
                              
                              Lisinopril has been used concomitantly with nitrates and/or digoxin without evidence of clinically significant adverse interactions. No meaningful clinically important pharmacokinetic interactions occurred when lisinopril was used concomitantly with propranolol, digoxin, or hydrochlorothiazide. The presence of food in the stomach does not alter the bioavailability of lisinopril.
                                            
                                    Other Agents:
                                 
                              
                              Lisinopril attenuates potassium loss caused by thiazide-type diuretics. Use of lisinopril with potassium-sparing diuretics (e.g., spironolactone, eplerenone, triamterene, or amiloride), potassium supplements, or potassium-containing salt substitutes may lead to significant increases in serum potassium. Therefore, if concomitant use of these agents is indicated, because of demonstrated hypokalemia, they should be used with caution and with frequent monitoring of serum potassium.
                                            
                                    Agents Increasing Serum Potassium:
                                 
                              
                              Lithium toxicity has been reported in patients receiving lithium concomitantly with drugs which cause elimination of sodium, including ACE inhibitors. Lithium toxicity was usually reversible upon discontinuation of lithium and the ACE inhibitor. It is recommended that serum lithium levels be monitored frequently if lisinopril is administered concomitantly with lithium.
                                            
                                    Lithium:
                                 
                              
                              Nitritoid reactions (symptoms include facial flushing, nausea, vomiting and hypotension) have been reported rarely in patients on therapy with injectable gold (sodium aurothiomalate) and concomitant ACE inhibitor therapy including lisinopril and hydrochlorothiazide.
                                            
                                    Gold:
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           Hydrochlorothiazide
                           
                              When administered concurrently the following drugs may interact with thiazide diuretics.
                              potentiation of orthostatic hypotension may occur.
                                            Alcohol, barbiturates, or narcotics
                                 —
                              
                              dosage adjustment of the antidiabetic drug may be required.
                                            Antidiabetic drugs (oral agents and insulin)
                                 —
                              
                              additive effect or potentiation.
                                            Other antihypertensive drugs
                                 —
                              
                              Absorption of hydrochlorothiazide is impaired in the presence of anionic exchange resins. Single doses of either cholestyramine or colestipol resins bind the hydrochlorothiazide and reduce its absorption from the gastrointestinal tract by up to 85 and 43 percent, respectively.
                                            Cholestyramine and colestipol resins
                                 —
                              
                              intensified electrolyte depletion, particularly hypokalemia.
                                            Corticosteroids, ACTH
                                 —
                              
                              possible decreased response to pressor amines but not sufficient to preclude their use.
                                            Pressor amines (e.g., norepinephrine)
                                 —
                              
                              possible increased responsiveness to the musclerelaxant
                                            Skeletal muscle relaxants, nondepolarizing (e.g., tubocuraine)-
                              
                              should not generally be given with diuretics. Diuretic agents reduce the renal clearance of lithium and add a high risk of lithium toxicity. Refer to the package insert for lithium preparations before use of such preparations with lisinopril and hydrochlorothiazide.
                                            Lithium
                                 -
                              
                              In some patients, the administration of a non-steroidal anti-inflammatory agent can reduce the diuretic, natriuretic, and antihypertensive effects of loop, potassium -sparing and thiazide diuretics. Therefore, when lisinopril and hydrochlorothiazide and non-steroidal anti-inflammatory agents are used concomitantly, the patient should be observed closely to determine if the desired effect of lisinopril and hydrochlorothiazide is obtained.
                                            Non-steroidal Anti-inflammatory Drugs
                                 -
                              
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               