
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  Tetracyclines are readily absorbed and are bound to plasma proteins in varying degrees. They are concentrated by the liver in the bile and excreted in the urine and feces at high concentrations in a biologically active form. Doxycycline is virtually completely absorbed after oral administration.
                  Following a 200 mg dose of doxycycline monohydrate, 24 normal adult volunteers averaged the following serum concentration values:
                  



                  


Excretion of doxycycline by the kidney is about 40%/72 hours in individuals with normal function (creatinine clearance about 75 mL/min). This percentage excretion may fall as low as 1-5%/72 hours in individuals with severe renal insufficiency (creatinine clearance below 10 mL/min). Studies have shown no significant difference in serum half-life of doxycycline (range 18-22 hours) in individuals with normal and severely impaired renal function.
                  Hemodialysis does not alter serum half-life.
                  
                     
                        Microbiology: 
                     The tetracyclines are primarily bacteriostatic and are thought to exert their antimicrobial effect by the inhibition of protein synthesis. The tetracyclines, including doxycycline, have a similar antimicrobial spectrum of activity against a wide range of gram-positive and gram-negative microorganisms. Cross-resistance of these microorganisms to tetracyclines is common.
                  Doxycycline has been shown to be active against most strains of the following microorganisms, both in vitro and in clinical infections as described in the 
                        INDICATIONS AND USAGE
                      section. 
                  
                     Aerobic Gram-Positive Microorganisms:
                  Because many strains of the following groups of gram-positive microorganisms have been shown to be resistant to tetracyclines, culture and susceptibility testing are recommended:
                  
                     Bacillus anthracis
                     

                     Listeria monocytogenes
Staphylococcus aureus*
                  
                  *Doxycycline is not the drug of choice in the treatment of any type of staphylococcal infection.
                  Up to 44 percent of strains of Streptococcus pyogenes and 74 percent of Streptococcus faecalis have been found to be resistant to tetracycline drugs. Therefore, tetracyclines should not be used to treat streptococcal infections unless the microorganism has been demonstrated to be susceptible.
                  
                     Streptococcus pneumoniae 
                  
                  
                     Aerobic Gram-Negative Microorganisms:
                  
                  
                     Bartonella bacilliformis 
                     

                     Brucella species 

                     Calymmatobacterium granulomatis 
                     

                     Campylobacter fetus 
                     

                     Francisella tularensis 
                     

                     Haemophilus ducreyi 
                     

                     Haemophilus influenzae 
                     

                     Neisseria gonorrhoeae 
                     

                     Vibrio cholerae 
                     

                     Yersinia pestis 
                  
                  Because many strains of the following groups of gram-negative microorganisms have been shown to be resistant to tetracyclines, culture and susceptibility testing are recommended:
                  
                     Acinetobacter species 
                     

                     Enterobacter aerogenes 
                     

                     Escherichia coli 
                     

                     Klebsiella species 
                     

                     Shigella species 
                  
                  
                     Anaerobic Microorganisms:
                  
                  
                     Actinomyces israelii 
                     

                     Clostridium species 
                     

                     Fusobacterium fusiforme 
                  
                  
                     Other Microorganisms:
                  
                     Borrelia recurrentis 
                     

                     Chlamydia psittaci 
                     

                     Chlamydia trachomatis 
                     

                     Mycoplasma pneumoniae 
                     

                     Rickettsiae 
                     

                     Treponema pallidum 
                     

                     Treponema pertenue 
                  
                  
                     Susceptibility Tests: 
                  
                  
                     Dilution techniques: 
                  
                  Quantitative methods are used to determine antimicrobial minimum inhibitory concentrations (MICs). These MICs provide estimates of the susceptibility of bacteria to antimicrobial compounds. The MICs should be determined using a standardized procedure. Standardized procedures are based on a dilution method1,3 (broth or agar) or equivalent with standardized inoculum concentrations and standardized concentrations of tetracycline powder. The MIC values should be interpreted according to the following criteria for indicated aerobic microorganisms other than Haemophilus species, Neisseria gonorrhoeae, and Streptococcus pneumoniae: 
                  


                  



                     Reporting results
                  
                  Recommended interpretive criteria are based on usual dosage regiment and routes of administration in the U.S.
                  Susceptible, intermediate, or resistant interpretations of zone diameter measurements are reported and defined as follows:
                  1. Susceptible (S)
                  The “susceptible” category implies that isolates are inhibited by the usually achievable concentration of antimicrobial agent when the recommended dosage is used for the site of infection.
                  2. Intermediate (I)
                  The “intermediate” category includes isolates with antimicrobial agent MIC’s that approach usually attainable blood and tissue levels and for which response rates may be lower than for susceptible isolates. The intermediate category implies clinical efficacy in body sites where the drugs are physiologically concentrated (e.g., quinolones and ß-lactams in urine) or when a higher than normal dosage of a drug can be used (e.g., ß-lactams). This category also includes a buffer zone, which should prevent small, uncontrolled, technical factors from causing major disappearances in interpretations, especially for drugs without narrow pharmaceutical margins.
                  3. Resistant (R)
                  The “resistant” category implies that isolates are not inhibited by the usually achievable concentrations of the agent with normal dosage schedules, and/or that demonstrate zone diameters that fall in the range where specific microbial resistance mechanisms (e.g., beta-lactamases) are likely, and clinical efficacy of the agent against the isolate has not been reliably shown in treatment studies.
                  Standardized susceptibility test procedures require the use of laboratory control microorganisms to control the technical aspects of the laboratory procedures. Standard tetracycline powder should provide the following MIC values:
                  


                  



                     
                        Diffusion techniques: 
                     
                  
                  Quantitative methods that require measurement of zone diameters also provide reproducible estimates of the susceptibility of bacteria to antimicrobial compounds. One such standardized procedure 2,3 requires the use of standardized inoculum concentrations. This procedure uses paper disks impregnated with 30 mcg tetracycline or 30 mcg doxycycline to test the susceptibility of microorganisms to doxycycline. 
                  Reports from the laboratory providing results of the standard single-disk susceptibility test with 30 mcg tetracycline-class disk or the 30 mcg doxycycline disk should be interpreted according to the following criteria for indicated aerobic microorganisms other than Haemophilus species, Neisseria gonorrhoeae, and Streptococcus pneumoniae: 
                  


                  


Interpretation should be as stated above for results using dilution techniques. Interpretation involves correlation of the diameter obtained in the disk test with the MIC for tetracycline or doxycycline, respectively.
                  As with standardized dilution techniques, diffusion methods require the use of laboratory control microorganisms that are used to control the technical aspects of the laboratory procedures. For the diffusion technique, the 30-mcg tetracycline-class disk or the 30-mcg doxycycline disk should provide the following zone diameters in these laboratory test quality control strains:
                  


                  



                     
                        Anaerobic techniques:
                  
                  For anaerobic bacteria, the susceptibility to tetracycline as MICs can be determined by standardized test methods.4 The MIC values obtained should be interpreted according to the following criteria:
                  


                  


Interpretation is identical to that stated above for results using dilution techniques.
                  As with other susceptibility techniques, the use of laboratory control microorganisms is required to control the technical aspects of the laboratory standardized procedures. Standardized tetracycline powder should provide the following MIC values:
                  


