
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        Following oral administration, azithromycin is rapidly absorbed and widely distributed throughout the body. Rapid distribution of azithromycin into tissues and high concentration within cells result in significantly higher azithromycin concentrations in tissues than in plasma or serum. The 1 g single dose packet is bioequivalent to four 250 mg azithromycin capsules.
                        The pharmacokinetic parameters of azithromycin in plasma after dosing as per labeled recommendations in healthy young adults and asymptomatic HIV-seropositive adults (age 18–40 years old) are portrayed in the following chart:
                        


                        


In these studies (500 mg Day 1, 250 mg Days 2-5), there was no significant difference in the disposition of azithromycin between male and female subjects. Plasma concentrations of azithromycin following single 500 mg oral and I.V. doses declined in a polyphasic pattern resulting in an average terminal half-life of 68 hours. With a regimen of 500 mg on Day 1 and 250 mg/day on Days 2-5, Cmin and Cmax remained essentially unchanged from Day 2 through Day 5 of therapy. However, without a loading dose, azithromycin Cmin levels required 5 to 7 days to reach steady-state.
                        In asymptomatic HIV-seropositive adult subjects receiving 600-mg azithromycin tablets once daily for 22 days, steady state azithromycin serum levels were achieved by Day 15 of dosing.
                        When azithromycin capsules were administered with food, the rate of absorption (Cmax) of azithromycin was reduced by 52% and the extent of absorption (AUC) by 43%.
                        When the oral suspension of azithromycin was administered with food, the Cmax increased by 46% and the AUC by 14%.
                        The absolute bioavailability of two 600 mg tablets was 34% (CV=56%). Administration of two 600 mg tablets with food increased Cmax by 31% (CV=43%) while the extent of absorption (AUC) was unchanged (mean ratio of AUCs=1.00; CV=55%).
                        The AUC of azithromycin in 250 mg capsules was unaffected by coadministration of an antacid containing aluminum and magnesium hydroxide with azithromycin; however, the Cmax was reduced by 24%. Administration of cimetidine (800 mg) two hours prior to azithromycin had no effect on azithromycin absorption.
                        When studied in healthy elderly subjects from age 65 to 85 years, the pharmacokinetic parameters of azithromycin (500 mg Day 1, 250 mg Days 2–5) in elderly men were similar to those in young adults; however, in elderly women, although higher peak concentrations (increased by 30 to 50%) were observed, no significant accumulation occurred.
                        The high values in adults for apparent steady-state volume of distribution (31.1 L/kg) and plasma clearance (630 mL/min) suggest that the prolonged half-life is due to extensive uptake and subsequent release of drug from tissues. Selected tissue (or fluid) concentration and tissue (or fluid) to plasma/serum concentration ratios are shown in the following table:
                        


                        


The extensive tissue distribution was confirmed by examination of additional tissues and fluids (bone, ejaculum, prostate, ovary, uterus, salpinx, stomach, liver, and gallbladder). As there are no data from adequate and well-controlled studies of azithromycin treatment of infections in these additional body sites, the clinical significance of these tissue concentration data is unknown.
                        Following a regimen of 500 mg on the first day and 250 mg daily for 4 days, only very low concentrations were noted in cerebrospinal fluid (less than 0.01 µg/mL) in the presence of non-inflamed meninges.
                        Following oral administration of a single 1200 mg dose (two 600 mg tablets), the mean maximum concentration in peripheral leukocytes was 140 µg/mL. Concentrations remained above 32 µg/mL for approximately 60 hr. The mean half-lives for 6 males and 6 females were 34 hr and 57 hr, respectively. Leukocyte to plasma Cmax ratios for males and females were 258 (±77%) and 175 (±60%), respectively, and the AUC ratios were 804 (±31%) and 541 (±28%), respectively. The clinical relevance of these findings is unknown.
                        Following oral administration of multiple daily doses of 600 mg (1 tablet/day) to asymptomatic HIV-seropositive adults, mean maximum concentration in peripheral leukocytes was 252 µg/mL (±49%). Trough concentrations in peripheral leukocytes at steady-state averaged 146 µg/mL (±33%). The mean leukocyte to serum Cmax ratio was 456 (±38%) and the mean leukocyte to serum AUC ratio was 816 (±31%). The clinical relevance of these findings is unknown.
                        The serum protein binding of azithromycin is variable in the concentration range approximating human exposure, decreasing from 51% at 0.02 µg/mL to 7% at 2 µg/mL. Biliary excretion of azithromycin, predominantly as unchanged drug, is a major route of elimination. Over the course of a week, approximately 6% of the administered dose appears as unchanged drug in urine.
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Renal Insufficiency
                           
                           
                              Azithromycin pharmacokinetics was investigated in 42 adults (21 to 85 years of age) with varying degrees of renal impairment. Following the oral administration of a single 1.0 g dose of azithromycin (4 × 250 mg capsules), the mean Cmax and AUC0–120 increased by 5.1% and 4.2%, respectively in subjects with GFR 10 to 80 mL/min compared to subjects with normal renal function (GFR >80 mL/min). The mean Cmax and AUC0–120 increased 61% and 35%, respectively in subjects with end-stage renal disease (GFR <10 mL/min) compared to subjects with normal renal function (GFR >80 mL/min).  (See 
                                    DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION
                                 .)
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Hepatic Insufficiency
                           
                           
                              The pharmacokinetics of azithromycin in subjects with hepatic impairment has not been established.
                              The effect of azithromycin on the plasma levels or pharmacokinetics of theophylline administered in multiple doses adequate to reach therapeutic steady-state plasma levels is not known. (See PRECAUTIONS.)
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Pharmacodynamics
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Cardiac Electrophysiology
                           
                           
                              QTc interval prolongation was studied in a randomized, placebo-controlled parallel trial in 116 healthy subjects who received either chloroquine (1000 mg) alone or in combination with azithromycin (500 mg, 1000 mg, and 1500 mg once daily). Co-administration of azithromycin increased the QTc interval in a dose- and concentration-dependent manner. In comparison to chloroquine alone, the maximum mean (95% upper confidence bound) increases in QTcF were 5 (10) ms, 7 (12) ms and 9 (14) ms with the co-administration of 500 mg, 1000 mg and 1500 mg azithromycin, respectively.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Microbiology
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Mechanism of Action
                           
                           
                              Azithromycin binds to the 23S rRNA of the bacterial 50S ribosomal subunit. It blocks protein synthesis by inhibiting the transpeptidation/translocation step of protein synthesis and by inhibiting the assembly of the 50S ribosomal subunit.
                              Azithromycin concentrates in phagocytes and fibroblasts as demonstrated by in vitro incubation techniques. Using such methodology, the ratio of intracellular to extracellular concentration was >30 after one hour incubation. In vivo studies suggest that concentration in phagocytes may contribute to drug distribution to inflamed tissues.
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    Activity of Azithromycin Against Mycobacterium avium complex (MAC)
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       In vitro  azithromycin has demonstrated activity against Mycobacterium avium complex (MAC) bacteria. Azithromycin has also been shown to be active against phagocytized MAC bacteria in mouse and human macrophage cell cultures.
                                    The ability to correlate MIC values and plasma drug levels is difficult as azithromycin concentrates in macrophages and tissues (See CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY).
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Mechanism of Resistance
                     
                        Complete cross-resistance between azithromycin and clarithromycin has been observed with MAC isolates. In most isolates, a single point mutation at a position that is homologous to the Escherichia coli positions 2058 or 2059 on the 23S rRNA gene is the mechanism producing this cross-resistance pattern.2,3
                        
                        Azithromycin has been shown to be active against most isolates of the following bacteria, both in vitro and in clinical infections as described in the INDICATIONS AND USAGE section.
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Mycobacterium avium complex (MAC)
                           
                           
                              
                                 Chlamydia trachomatis
                              
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Susceptibility Testing Methods
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Susceptibility testing of Mycobacterium avium complex (MAC)
                           
                           
                              Susceptibility testing may be done following the methodology of the Clinical and Laboratory Standards Institute (CLSI)1
                              
                              CLSI has established methods for testing the susceptibility of MAC clinical isolates and recommends utilizing clarithromycin to test for susceptibility to macrolides, including azithromycin.5
                              
                              The clinical relevance of azithromycin in vitro susceptibility test results for other mycobacterial species, including Mycobacterium tuberculosis, has not been determined.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Susceptibility testing of Chlamydia trachomatis.
                           
                           
                              There is no standardized in vitro  susceptibility test method for C. trachomatis.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         