
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  
                     General
                  
                  Technetium Tc 99m Sestamibi is a cationic Tc 99m complex which has been found to accumulate in viable myocardial tissue in a manner analogous to that of thallous chloride Tl-201. Scintigraphic images obtained in humans after the intravenous administration of the drug have been comparable to those obtained with thallous chloride Tl-201 in normal and abnormal myocardial tissue.
                  Animal studies have shown that myocardial uptake is not blocked when the sodium pump mechanism is inhibited. Although studies of subcellular fractionation and electron micrographic analysis of heart cell aggregates suggest that Tc 99m Sestamibi cellular retention occurs specifically within the mitochondria as a result of electrostatic interactions, the clinical relevance of these findings has not been determined.
                  The mechanism of Tc 99m Sestamibi localization in various types of breast tissue (e.g., benign, inflammatory, malignant, fibrous) has not been established.
               
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        Pulmonary activity is negligible even immediately after injection. Blood clearance studies indicate that the fast clearing component clears with a t1⁄2 of 4.3 minutes at rest, and clears with a t1⁄2 of 1.6 minutes under exercise conditions. At five minutes post injection about 8% of the injected dose remains in circulation. There is less than 1% protein binding of technetium Tc 99m Sestamibi in plasma. The myocardial biological half-life is approximately six hours after a rest or exercise injection. The biological half-life for the liver is approximately 30 minutes after a rest or exercise injection. The effective half-life of clearance (which includes both the biological half-life and radionuclide decay) for the heart is approximately 3 hours, and for the liver is approximately 30 minutes, after a rest or exercise injection. The ideal imaging time reflects the best compromise between heart count rate and surrounding organ uptake.
                        Myocardial uptake which is coronary flow dependent is 1.2% of the injected dose at rest and 1.5% of the injected dose at exercise. Table 6 illustrates the biological clearance as well as effective clearance (which includes biological clearance and radionuclide decay) of Tc 99m Sestamibi from the heart and liver.
                        [Organ concentrations expressed as percentage of injected dose; data based on an average of 5 subjects at rest and 5 subjects during exercise.]
                        


                        


A study in a dog myocardial ischemia model reported that Technetium Tc 99m Sestamibi undergoes myocardial distribution (redistribution), although more slowly and less completely than thallous chloride Tl-201. A study in a dog myocardial infarction model reported that the drug showed no redistribution of any consequence. Definitive human studies to demonstrate possible redistribution have not been reported. In patients with documented myocardial infarction, imaging revealed the infarct up to four hours post dose.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.4 Metabolism
                     
                        The agent is excreted without any evidence of metabolism.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.5 Elimination
                     
                        The major pathway for clearance of Tc 99m Sestamibi is the hepatobiliary system. Activity from the gall bladder appears in the intestines within one hour of injection. Twenty-seven percent of the injected dose is excreted in the urine, and approximately thirty-three percent of the injected dose is cleared through the feces in 48 hours.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         