
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              

                           
                        
                     
                  Hydromorphone hydrochloride is a pure opioid agonist with the 
principal therapeutic activity of analgesia. A significant feature of the 
analgesia is that it can occur without loss of consciousness. Opioid analgesics 
also suppress the cough reflex and may cause respiratory depression, mood 
changes, mental clouding, euphoria, dysphoria, nausea, vomiting and 
electroencephalographic changes. Many of the effects described below are common 
to this class of mu-opioid agonist analgesics which includes morphine, 
oxycodone, hydrocodone, codeine and fentanyl. In some instances, data may not 
exist to distinguish the effects of Hydromorphone Hydrochloride Tablets from 
those observed with other opioid analgesics. However, in the absence of data to 
the contrary, it is assumed that Hydromorphone Hydrochloride Tablets would 
possess all the actions of mu-agonist opioids.
                  
                     

                     
Central Nervous System 
                  The precise mode of analgesic action of opioid analgesics is 
unknown. However, specific CNS opiate receptors have been identified. Opioids 
are believed to express their pharmacological effects by combining with these 
receptors.
                  Hydromorphone depresses the cough reflex by direct effect on the cough center 
in the medulla.
                  Hydromorphone depresses the respiratory reflex by a direct effect on brain 
stem respiratory centers. The mechanism of respiratory depression also involves 
a reduction in the responsiveness of the brain stem respiratory centers to 
increases in carbon dioxide tension.
                  Hydromorphone causes miosis. Pinpoint pupils are a common sign of opioid 
overdose but are not pathognomonic (e.g., pontine lesions of hemorrhagic or 
ischemic origin may produce similar findings). Marked mydriasis rather than 
miosis may be seen with hypoxia in the setting of Hydromorphone Hydrochloride 
Tablets overdose.
                  
                  
                  
                     
Gastrointestinal Tract and Other Smooth 
Muscle 
                  Gastric, biliary and pancreatic secretions are decreased by 
opioids such as hydromorphone. Hydromorphone causes a reduction in motility 
associated with an increase in tone in the gastric antrum and duodenum. 
Digestion of food in the small intestine is delayed and propulsive contractions 
are decreased. Propulsive peristaltic waves in the colon are decreased, and tone 
may be increased to the point of spasm. The end result is constipation. 
Hydromorphone can cause a marked increase in biliary tract pressure as a result 
of spasm of the sphincter of Oddi.
                  
                  
                  
                     
Cardiovascular System 
                  Hydromorphone may produce hypotension as a result of either 
peripheral vasodilation or release of histamine, or both. Other manifestations 
of histamine release and/or peripheral vasodilation may include pruritus, 
flushing, and red eyes.
                  
                  
                  
                  
                     
Pharmacokinetics and Metabolism 

                  The analgesic activity of Hydromorphone Hydrochloride Tablets is 
due to the parent drug, hydromorphone. Hydromorphone is rapidly absorbed from 
the gastrointestinal tract after oral administration and undergoes extensive 
first-pass metabolism. Exposure of hydromorphone (Cmax 
and AUC0-24) is dose-proportional at a dose range of 2 
and 8 mg. In vivo bioavailability following 
single-dose administration of the 8 mg tablet is approximately 24% (coefficient 
of variation 21%).
                  
                  
                  
AbsorptionAfter oral administration of Hydromorphone Hydrochloride Tablets 
peak plasma hydromorphone concentrations are generally attained within ½ to 
1-hour.
                  
                     
                        
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  

                  

               
               
            
         