
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
                  Palbociclib is primarily metabolized by CYP3A and sulfotransferase (SULT) enzyme SULT2A1. In vivo, palbociclib is a time-dependent inhibitor of CYP3A.
               
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                            CYP3A Inhibitors: Avoid concurrent use of IBRANCE with strong CYP3A inhibitors. If the strong inhibitor cannot be avoided, reduce the IBRANCE dose. (2.2, 7.1)
                            CYP3A Inducers: Avoid concurrent use of IBRANCE with strong and moderate CYP3A inducers. (7.2)
                            CYP3A Substrates: The dose of sensitive CYP3A4 substrates with narrow therapeutic indices may need to be reduced when given concurrently with IBRANCE. (7.3)
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 Agents That May Increase Palbociclib Plasma Concentrations
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Effect of CYP3A Inhibitors
                              
                              Coadministration of a strong CYP3A inhibitor (itraconazole) increased the plasma exposure of palbociclib in healthy subjects by 87%. Avoid concomitant use of strong CYP3A inhibitors (e.g., clarithromycin, indinavir, itraconazole, ketoconazole, lopinavir/ritonavir, nefazodone, nelfinavir, posaconazole, ritonavir, saquinavir, telaprevir, telithromycin, verapamil, and voriconazole). Avoid grapefruit or grapefruit juice during IBRANCE treatment. If coadministration of IBRANCE with a strong CYP3A inhibitor cannot be avoided, reduce the dose of IBRANCE [see Dosage and Administration (2.2) and Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 Agents That May Decrease Palbociclib Plasma Concentrations
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Effect of CYP3A Inducers
                              
                              Coadministration of a strong CYP3A inducer (rifampin) decreased the plasma exposure of palbociclib in healthy subjects by 85%. Avoid concomitant use of strong CYP3A inducers (e.g., phenytoin, rifampin, carbamazepine and St John's Wort) [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                              Coadministration of moderate CYP3A inducers may also decrease the plasma exposure of IBRANCE. Avoid concomitant use of moderate CYP3A inducers (e.g., bosentan, efavirenz, etravirine, modafinil, and nafcillin) [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3 Drugs That May Have Their Plasma Concentrations Altered by Palbociclib 
                     
                        Coadministration of midazolam with multiple doses of IBRANCE increased the midazolam plasma exposure by 61%, in healthy subjects, compared with administration of midazolam alone. The dose of the sensitive CYP3A substrate with a narrow therapeutic index (e.g., alfentanil, cyclosporine, dihydroergotamine, ergotamine, everolimus, fentanyl, pimozide, quinidine, sirolimus and tacrolimus) may need to be reduced as IBRANCE may increase their exposure [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         