
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Palbociclib is an inhibitor of cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK) 4 and 6. Cyclin D1 and CDK4/6 are downstream of signaling pathways which lead to cellular proliferation. In vitro, palbociclib reduced cellular proliferation of estrogen receptor (ER)-positive breast cancer cell lines by blocking progression of the cell from G1 into S phase of the cell cycle. Treatment of breast cancer cell lines with the combination of palbociclib and antiestrogens leads to decreased retinoblastoma protein (Rb) phosphorylation resulting in reduced E2F expression and signaling and increased growth arrest compared to treatment with each drug alone. In vitro treatment of ER-positive breast cancer cell lines with the combination of palbociclib and antiestrogens leads to increased cell senescence, which was sustained for up to 6 days following drug removal. In vivo studies using a patient-derived ER-positive breast cancer xenograft model demonstrated that the combination of palbociclib and letrozole increased the inhibition of Rb phosphorylation, downstream signaling and tumor growth compared to each drug alone.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Cardiac Electrophysiology
                              
                              The effect of palbociclib on the QTc interval was evaluated in 184 patients with advanced cancer. No large change (i.e., >20 ms) in the QTc interval was detected at the mean observed maximal steady-state palbociclib concentration following a therapeutic schedule (e.g., 125 mg daily for 21 consecutive days followed by 7 days off to comprise a complete cycle of 28 days).
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        The pharmacokinetics of palbociclib were characterized in patients with solid tumors including advanced breast cancer and in healthy subjects.
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Absorption
                              
                              The mean Cmax of palbociclib is generally observed between 6 to 12 hours (time to reach maximum concentration, Tmax) following oral administration. The mean absolute bioavailability of IBRANCE after an oral 125 mg dose is 46%. In the dosing range of 25 mg to 225 mg, the AUC and Cmax increased proportionally with dose in general. Steady state was achieved within 8 days following repeated once daily dosing. With repeated once daily administration, palbociclib accumulated with a median accumulation ratio of 2.4 (range 1.5–4.2).
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Food effect: Palbociclib absorption and exposure were very low in approximately 13% of the population under the fasted condition. Food intake increased the palbociclib exposure in this small subset of the population, but did not alter palbociclib exposure in the rest of the population to a clinically relevant extent. Therefore, food intake reduced the intersubject variability of palbociclib exposure, which supports administration of IBRANCE with food. Compared to IBRANCE given under overnight fasted conditions, the population average AUCinf and Cmax of palbociclib increased by 21% and 38%, respectively, when given with high-fat, high-calorie food (approximately 800 to 1000 calories with 150, 250, and 500 to 600 calories from protein, carbohydrate and fat, respectively), by 12% and 27%, respectively, when given with low-fat, low-calorie food (approximately 400 to 500 calories with 120, 250, and 28 to 35 calories from protein, carbohydrate and fat, respectively), and by 13% and 24%, respectively, when moderate-fat, standard calorie food (approximately 500 to 700 calories with 75 to 105, 250 to 350 and 175 to 245 calories from protein, carbohydrate and fat, respectively) was given one hour before and two hours after IBRANCE dosing.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Distribution
                              
                              Binding of palbociclib to human plasma proteins in vitro was approximately 85%, with no concentration dependence over the concentration range of 500 ng/mL to 5000 ng/mL. The geometric mean apparent volume of distribution (Vz/F) was 2583 L (26% CV).
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Metabolism
                              
                              In vitro and in vivo studies indicated that palbociclib undergoes hepatic metabolism in humans. Following oral administration of a single 125 mg dose of [14C]palbociclib to humans, the primary metabolic pathways for palbociclib involved oxidation and sulfonation, with acylation and glucuronidation contributing as minor pathways. Palbociclib was the major circulating drug-derived entity in plasma (23%). The major circulating metabolite was a glucuronide conjugate of palbociclib, although it only represented 1.5% of the administered dose in the excreta. Palbociclib was extensively metabolized with unchanged drug accounting for 2.3% and 6.9% of radioactivity in feces and urine, respectively. In feces, the sulfamic acid conjugate of palbociclib was the major drug-related component, accounting for 26% of the administered dose. In vitro studies with human hepatocytes, liver cytosolic and S9 fractions, and recombinant SULT enzymes indicated that CYP3A and SULT2A1 are mainly involved in the metabolism of palbociclib.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Elimination
                              
                              The geometric mean apparent oral clearance (CL/F) of palbociclib was 63.1 L/hr (29% CV), and the mean (± standard deviation) plasma elimination half-life was 29 (±5) hours in patients with advanced breast cancer. In 6 healthy male subjects given a single oral dose of [14C]palbociclib, a median of 91.6% of the total administered radioactive dose was recovered in 15 days; feces (74.1% of dose) was the major route of excretion, with 17.5% of the dose recovered in urine. The majority of the material was excreted as metabolites.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Age, Gender, and Body Weight
                              
                              Based on a population pharmacokinetic analysis in 183 patients with cancer (50 male and 133 female patients, age range from 22 to 89 years, and body weight range from 37.9 to 123 kg), gender had no effect on the exposure of palbociclib, and age and body weight had no clinically important effect on the exposure of palbociclib.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Pediatric Population
                              
                              Pharmacokinetics of IBRANCE have not been evaluated in patients <18 years of age.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Drug Interactions
                              
                              In vitro data indicate that CYP3A and SULT enzyme SULT2A1 are mainly involved in the metabolism of palbociclib. Palbociclib is a weak time-dependent inhibitor of CYP3A following daily 125 mg dosing to steady state in humans. In vitro, palbociclib is not an inhibitor of CYP1A2, 2A6, 2B6, 2C8, 2C9, 2C19, and 2D6, and is not an inducer of CYP1A2, 2B6, 2C8, and 3A4 at clinically relevant concentrations.
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       CYP3A Inhibitors: Data from a drug interaction trial in healthy subjects (N=12) indicate that coadministration of multiple 200 mg daily doses of itraconazole with a single 125 mg IBRANCE dose increased palbociclib AUCinf and the Cmax by approximately 87% and 34%, respectively, relative to a single 125 mg IBRANCE dose given alone.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       CYP3A Inducers: Data from a drug interaction trial in healthy subjects (N=14) indicate that coadministration of multiple 600 mg daily doses of rifampin with a single 125 mg IBRANCE dose decreased palbociclib AUCinf and the Cmax by 85% and 70%, respectively, relative to a single 125 mg IBRANCE dose given alone.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       CYP3A Substrates: Palbociclib is a weak time-dependent inhibitor of CYP3A following daily 125 mg dosing to steady state in humans. In a drug interaction trial in healthy subjects (N=26), coadministration of midazolam with multiple doses of IBRANCE increased the midazolam AUCinf and the Cmax values by 61% and 37%, respectively, as compared with administration of midazolam alone.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Gastric pH Elevating Medications: In a drug interaction trial in healthy subjects, coadministration of a single 125 mg dose of IBRANCE with multiple doses of the proton pump inhibitors (PPI) rabeprazole under fed conditions decreased palbociclib Cmax by 41%, but had limited impact on AUCinf (13% decrease), when compared to a single dose of IBRANCE administered alone. Given the reduced effect on gastric pH of H2-receptor antagonists and local antacids compared to PPIs, the effect of these classes of acid-reducing agents on palbociclib exposure under fed conditions is expected to be minimal. Under fed conditions there is no clinically relevant effect of PPIs, H2-receptor antagonists, or local antacids on palbociclib exposure. In another healthy subject study, coadministration of a single dose of IBRANCE with multiple doses of the PPI rabeprazole under fasted conditions decreased palbociclib AUCinf and Cmax by 62% and 80%, respectively, when compared to a single dose of IBRANCE administered alone.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Letrozole: Data from a drug interaction trial in patients with breast cancer showed that there was no drug interaction between palbociclib and letrozole when the two drugs were coadministered.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Effect of Palbociclib on Transporters: In vitro evaluations indicated that palbociclib has a low potential to inhibit the activities of drug transporters P-glycoprotein (P-gp), breast cancer resistance protein (BCRP), organic anion transporter (OAT)1, OAT3, organic cation transporter (OCT)2 and organic anion transporting polypeptide (OATP)1B1, OATP1B3 at clinically relevant concentrations.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Effect of Transporters on Palbociclib: Based on in vitro data, P-gp and BCRP mediated transport are unlikely to affect the extent of oral absorption of palbociclib at therapeutic doses.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         