
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        The mechanism of action of Clozapine ODT is unknown. However, it has been proposed that the therapeutic efficacy of Clozapine ODT in schizophrenia is mediated through antagonism of the dopamine type 2 (D2) and the serotonin type 2A (5-HT2A) receptors. Clozapine ODT also acts as an antagonist at adrenergic, cholinergic, histaminergic and other dopaminergic and serotonergic receptors.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        Clozapine demonstrated binding affinity to the following receptors: histamine H1 (Ki 1.1 nM), adrenergic α1A (Ki 1.6 nM), serotonin 5-HT6 (Ki 4 nM), serotonin 5-HT2A (Ki 5.4 nM), muscarinic M1 (Ki 6.2 nM), serotonin 5-HT7 (Ki 6.3 nM), serotonin 5-HT2C (Ki 9.4 nM), dopamine D4 (Ki 24 nM), adrenergic α2A (Ki 90 nM), serotonin 5-HT3 (Ki 95 nM), serotonin 5-HT1A (Ki 120 nM), dopamine D2 (Ki 160 nM), dopamine D1 (Ki 270 nM), dopamine D5 (Ki 454 nM), and dopamine D3 (Ki 555 nM). 
                        Clozapine ODT causes little or no prolactin elevation. 
                        Clinical electroencephalogram (EEG) studies demonstrated that clozapine increases delta and theta activity and slows dominant alpha frequencies. Enhanced synchronization occurs. Sharp wave activity and spike and wave complexes may also develop. Patients have reported an intensification of dream activity during clozapine therapy. REM sleep was found to be increased to 85% of the total sleep time. In these patients, the onset of REM sleep occurred almost immediately after falling asleep.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        
                           
                              Absorption 
                           
                        
                        In man, clozapine tablets (25 and 100 mg) are equally bioavailable relative to a clozapine solution. Clozapine ODT is bioequivalent to Clozaril® (clozapine) tablets, a registered trademark of Novartis Pharmaceuticals Corporation. Following a dosage of 100 mg b.i.d., the average steady-state peak plasma concentration was 413 ng/mL (range: 132-854 ng/mL), occurring at the average of 2.3 hours (range: 1-6 hours) after dosing. The average minimum concentration at steady state was 168 ng/mL (range: 45-574 ng/mL), after 100 mg b.i.d. dosing.  
                        A comparative bioequivalence/bioavailability study was conducted in 32 patients (with schizophrenia or schizoaffective disorder) comparing FazaClo® 200 mg tablets* to 2 × FazaClo® 100 mg tablets (the approved reference product) under fasted conditions. The study also evaluated the effect of food and chewing on the pharmacokinetics of the 200 mg tablet. Under fasted conditions, the mean AUCss and Cmin,ss of clozapine for the 200 mg tablets were equivalent to those of the 2 x 100 mg tablets. The mean Cmax,ss of clozapine for FazaClo® 200 mg tablets was 85% that for 2 x 100 mg FazaClo® tablets. This decrease in Cmax,ss for FazaClo® 200 mg tablets is not clinically significant.
                        For FazaClo® 200 mg tablets, food significantly increased the Cmin,ss of clozapine by 21%. However, this increase is not clinically significant. The mean AUCss and Cmax,ss of clozapine under fed conditions were equivalent to those under fasted conditions. Food delayed clozapine absorption by 1.5 hours, from a median Tmax of 2.5 hours under fasted conditions to 4 hours under fed conditions. 
                        The mean Cmax,ss of clozapine under chewed conditions for FazaClo® 200 mg tablets was about 86% that for 2 x 100 mg FazaClo® tablets under non-chewed conditions, while the AUCss and Cmin,ss values were similar between the chewed and non-chewed conditions. 
                        In a food-effect study, a single dose of FazaClo® (clozapine) orally disintegrated tablets 12.5 mg was administered to healthy volunteers under fasting conditions and after a high-fat meal. When FazaClo® was administered after a high fat meal, the Cmax of both clozapine and its active metabolite, desmethylclozapine, were decreased by approximately 20%, compared to administration under fasting conditions, while the AUC values were unchanged. This decrease in Cmax is not clinically significant. Therefore, Clozapine orally disintegrating tablets can be taken without regard to meals.
                        
                           
                              Distribution 
                           
                        
                        Clozapine is approximately 97% bound to serum proteins. The interaction between clozapine and other highly protein-bound drugs has not been fully evaluated but may be important. 
                        
                           
                              Metabolism and Excretion 
                           
                        
                        Clozapine ODT is almost completely metabolized prior to excretion, and only trace amounts of unchanged drug are detected in the urine and feces. Clozapine ODT is a substrate for many cytochrome P450 isozymes, in particular CYP1A2, CYP2D6, and CYP3A4. Approximately 50% of the administered dose is excreted in the urine and 30% in the feces. The demethylated, hydroxylated, and N-oxide derivatives are components in both urine and feces. Pharmacological testing has shown the desmethyl metabolite (norclozapine) to have only limited activity, while the hydroxylated and N-oxide derivatives were inactive. The mean elimination half-life of clozapine after a single 75 mg dose was 8 hours (range: 4-12 hours), compared to a mean elimination half-life of 12 hours (range: 4-66 hours), after achieving steady state with 100 mg twice daily dosing. 
                        A comparison of single-dose and multiple-dose administration of clozapine demonstrated that the elimination half-life increased significantly after multiple dosing relative to that after single-dose administration, suggesting the possibility of concentration-dependent pharmacokinetics. However, at steady state, approximately dose-proportional changes with respect to AUC (area under the curve), peak, and minimum clozapine plasma concentrations were observed after administration of 37.5, 75, and 150 mg twice daily. 
                        
                           
                              Drug-Drug Interaction Studies 
                           
                        
                        
                           Fluvoxamine 
                        
                        A pharmacokinetic study was conducted in 16 schizophrenic patients who received clozapine under steady-state conditions. After coadministration of fluvoxamine for 14 days, mean trough concentrations of clozapine and its metabolites, N-desmethylclozapine and clozapine N-oxide, were elevated about three-fold compared to baseline steady state concentrations. 
                        
                           Paroxetine, Fluoxetine, and Sertraline 
                        
                        In a study of schizophrenic patients (n=14) who received clozapine under steady-state conditions, coadministration of paroxetine produced only minor changes in the levels of clozapine and its metabolites. However, other published reports describe modest elevations (less than two-fold) of clozapine and metabolite concentrations when clozapine was taken with paroxetine, fluoxetine, and sertraline.
                        
                           
                              Specific Population Studies 
                           
                        
                        
                           Renal or Hepatic Impairment 
                        
                        No specific pharmacokinetic studies were conducted to investigate the effects of renal or hepatic impairment on the pharmacokinetics of clozapine. Higher clozapine plasma concentrations are likely in patients with significant renal or hepatic impairment when given usual doses.
                        
                           CYP2D6 Poor Metabolizers 
                        
                        A subset (3%–10%) of the population has reduced activity of CYP2D6 (CYP2D6 poor metabolizers). These individuals may develop higher than expected plasma concentrations of clozapine when given usual doses.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         