
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action 
                     
                        Endogenous androgens, including testosterone and dihydrotestosterone (DHT), are responsible for the normal growth and development of the male sex organs and for maintenance of secondary sex characteristics. These effects include the growth and maturation of prostate, seminal vesicles, penis and scrotum; the development of male hair distribution, such as facial, pubic, chest and axillary hair; laryngeal enlargement; vocal chord thickening; and alterations in body musculature and fat distribution. Testosterone and DHT are necessary for the normal development of secondary sex characteristics.
                        Male hypogonadism, a clinical syndrome resulting from insufficient secretion of testosterone, has two main etiologies. Primary hypogonadism is caused by defects of the gonads, such as Klinefelter's syndrome or Leydig cell aplasia, whereas secondary hypogonadism is the failure of the hypothalamus (or pituitary) to produce sufficient gonadotropins (FSH, LH).
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics 
                     
                        No specific pharmacodynamic studies were conducted using AndroGel 1.62%. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        
                           
                              Absorption
                           
                        
                        AndroGel 1.62% delivers physiologic amounts of testosterone, producing circulating testosterone concentrations that approximate normal levels (300 – 1000 ng/dL) seen in healthy men. AndroGel 1.62% provides continuous transdermal delivery of testosterone for 24 hours following once daily application to clean, dry, intact skin of the shoulders and upper arms. Average serum testosterone concentrations over 24 hours (Cavg) observed when AndroGel 1.62% was applied to the upper arms/shoulders were comparable to average serum testosterone concentrations (Cavg) when AndroGel 1.62% was applied using a rotation method utilizing the abdomen and upper arms/shoulders. The rotation of abdomen and upper arms/shoulders was a method used in the pivotal clinical trial [see Clinical Studies (14.1)].
                        
                        
                        
                           Figure 2: Mean (±SD) Serum Total Testosterone Concentrations on Day 7 in Patients Following AndroGel 1.62% Once-Daily Application of 81 mg of Testosterone (N=33) for 7 Days
                        
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                    Distribution
                                 
                              
                              Circulating testosterone is primarily bound in the serum to sex hormone-binding globulin (SHBG) and albumin. Approximately 40% of testosterone in plasma is bound to SHBG, 2% remains unbound (free) and the rest is loosely bound to albumin and other proteins. 
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                    Metabolism
                                 
                              
                              Testosterone is metabolized to various 17-keto steroids through two different pathways. The major active metabolites of testosterone are estradiol and DHT. 
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                    Excretion
                                 
                              
                              There is considerable variation in the half-life of testosterone concentration as reported in the literature, ranging from 10 to 100 minutes. About 90% of a dose of testosterone given intramuscularly is excreted in the urine as glucuronic acid and sulfuric acid conjugates of testosterone and its metabolites. About 6% of a dose is excreted in the feces, mostly in the unconjugated form. Inactivation of testosterone occurs primarily in the liver. 
                              When AndroGel 1.62% treatment is discontinued, serum testosterone concentrations return to approximately baseline concentrations within 48-72 hours after administration of the last dose. 
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Potential for testosterone transfer
                              
                              The potential for testosterone transfer following administration of AndroGel 1.62% when it was applied only to upper arms/shoulders was evaluated in two clinical studies of males dosed with AndroGel 1.62% and their untreated female partners. In one study, 8 male subjects applied a single dose of AndroGel 1.62% 81 mg to their shoulders and upper arms. Two (2) hours after application, female subjects rubbed their hands, wrists, arms, and shoulders to the application site of the male subjects for 15 minutes. Serum concentrations of testosterone were monitored in female subjects for 24 hours after contact occurred. After direct skin-to-skin contact with the site of application, mean testosterone Cavg and Cmax in female subjects increased by 280% and 267%, respectively, compared to mean baseline testosterone concentrations. In a second study evaluating transfer of testosterone, 12 male subjects applied a single dose of AndroGel 1.62% 81 mg to their shoulders and upper arms. Two (2) hours after application, female subjects rubbed their hands, wrists, arms, and shoulders to the application site of the male subjects for 15 minutes while the site of application was covered by a t-shirt. When a t-shirt was used to cover the site of application, mean testosterone Cavg and Cmax in female subjects increased by 6% and 11%, respectively, compared to mean baseline testosterone concentrations. 
                              A separate study was conducted to evaluate the potential for testosterone transfer from 16 males dosed with AndroGel 1.62% 81 mg when it was applied to abdomen only for 7 days, a site of application not approved for AndroGel 1.62%. Two (2) hours after application to the males on each day, the female subjects rubbed their abdomens for 15 minutes to the abdomen of the males. The males had covered the application area with a T-shirt. The mean testosterone Cavg and Cmax in female subjects on day 1 increased by 43% and 47%, respectively, compared to mean baseline testosterone concentrations. The mean testosterone Cavg and Cmax in female subjects on day 7 increased by 60% and 58%, respectively, compared to mean baseline testosterone concentrations. 
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Effect of showering
                              
                              In a randomized, 3-way (3 treatment periods without washout period) crossover study in 24 hypogonadal men, the effect of showering on testosterone exposure was assessed after once daily application of AndroGel 1.62% 81 mg to upper arms/shoulders for 7 days in each treatment period. On the 7th day of each treatment period, hypogonadal men took a shower with soap and water at either 2, 6, or 10 hours after drug application. The effect of showering at 2 or 6 hours post-dose on Day 7 resulted in 13% and 12% decreases in mean Cavg, respectively, compared to Day 6 when no shower was taken after drug application.  Showering at 10 hours after drug application had no effect on bioavailability. The amount of testosterone remaining in the outer layers of the skin at the application site on the 7th day was assessed using a tape stripping procedure and was reduced by at least 80% after showering 2-10 hours post-dose compared to on the 6th day when no shower was taken after drug application. 
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Effect of hand washing
                              
                              In a randomized, open-label, single-dose, 2-way crossover study in 16 healthy male subjects, the effect of hand washing on the amount of residual testosterone on the hands was evaluated. Subjects used their hands to apply the maximum dose (81 mg testosterone) of AndroGel 1.62%  to their upper arms and shoulders. Within 1 minute of applying the gel, subjects either washed or did not wash their hands prior to study personnel wiping the subjects’ hands with ethanol dampened gauze pads.  The gauze pads were then analyzed for residual testosterone content. A mean (SD) of 0.1 (0.04) mg of residual testosterone (0.12% of the actual applied dose of testosterone, and a 96% reduction compared to when hands were not washed) was recovered after washing hands with water and soap. 
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Effect of sunscreen or moisturizing lotion on absorption of testosterone
                              
                              In a randomized, 3-way (3 treatment periods without washout period) crossover study in 18 hypogonadal males, the effect of applying a moisturizing lotion or a sunscreen on the absorption of testosterone was evaluated with the upper arms/shoulders as application sites. For 7 days, moisturizing lotion or sunscreen (SPF 50) was applied daily to the AndroGel 1.62% application site 1 hour after the application of AndroGel 1.62% 40.5 mg. Application of moisturizing lotion increased mean testosterone Cavg and Cmax by 14% and 17%, respectively, compared to AndroGel 1.62% administered alone. Application of sunscreen increased mean testosterone Cavg and Cmax by 8% and 13%, respectively, compared to AndroGel 1.62% applied alone. 
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           rotation method graph
                           
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         