
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  Endogenous estrogens are largely responsible for the development 
and maintenance of the female reproductive system and secondary sexual 
characteristics. Although circulating estrogens exist in a dynamic equilibrium 
of metabolic interconversions, estradiol is the principal intracellular human 
estrogen and is substantially more potent than its metabolites, estrone and 
estriol, at the receptor level. 
                  The primary source of estrogen in normally cycling adult women is the ovarian 
follicle which secretes 70 to 500 mcg of estradiol daily depending on the phase 
of the menstrual cycle. After menopause, most endogenous estrogen is produced by 
conversion of androstenedione, secreted by the adrenal cortex, to estrone by 
peripheral tissues. Thus, estrone and the sulfate conjugated form, estrone 
sulfate, are the most abundant circulating estrogens in postmenopausal women. 

                  Estrogens act through binding to nuclear receptors in estrogen-responsive 
tissues. To date, two estrogen receptors have been identified. These vary in 
proportion from tissue to tissue.
                  Circulating estrogens modulate the pituitary secretion of the gonadotropins, 
luteinizing hormone (LH) and follicle stimulating hormone (FSH) through a 
negative feedback mechanism. Estrogens act to reduce the elevated levels of 
these hormones seen in postmenopausal women.
                  
                  
                  Pharmacokinetics
                  
                  A. AbsorptionDrug delivery from Femring is rapid for the first hour and then 
declines to a relatively constant rate for the remainder of the 3-month dosing 
interval. In vitro studies have shown that this initial release is higher as the 
rings age upon storage. Estradiol acetate is rapidly hydrolyzed to estradiol 
which is absorbed through the vaginal mucosa as evidenced by the mean time to 
maximum concentration (tmax) for estradiol of about 1 
hour (range 0.25 to 1.5 hrs). Following the maximum concentration (Cmax), serum estradiol decreases rapidly such that by 24 to 48 
hours postdose, serum estradiol concentrations are relatively constant through 
the end of the 3-month dosing interval, see 
                         Figure 1
                      for results 
from rings stored for 16 months.
                  
                  
                  
                  Figure 1. Mean serum estradiol concentrations 
following multiple dose administration of Femring (0.05 mg/day estradiol) 
(second dose administered at 13 weeks) (inset: mean (±SD) of serum 
concentration-time profile for dose 1 from 0-24 hours)
                  Following administration of Femring (0.05 mg/day estradiol), average serum 
estradiol concentration was 40.6 pg/mL; the corresponding apparent in vivo 
estradiol delivery rate was 0.052 mg/day. Following administration of Femring 
(0.10 mg/day estradiol), average serum estradiol concentration was 76 pg/mL; 
apparent in vivo delivery rate was 0.097 mg/day. Results are summarized in Table 1 below.
                  

*  Relative Standard Deviation




                  †   Study 1

                  ‡  Study 2

                  §  Not determined

                  ¶  Study 3

                  

                  Consistent with the avoidance of first pass metabolism achieved by vaginal 
estradiol administration, serum estradiol concentrations were slightly higher 
than estrone concentrations. 
                  
                  
                  B. DistributionThe distribution of exogenous estrogens is similar to that of 
endogenous estrogens. Estrogens are widely distributed in the body and are 
generally found in higher concentrations in the sex hormone target organs. 
Estrogens circulate in the blood largely bound to sex hormone binding globulin 
(SHBG) and to albumin.
                  
                  
                  C. MetabolismExogenous estrogens are metabolized in the same manner as 
endogenous estrogens. Circulating estrogens exist in a dynamic equilibrium of 
metabolic interconversions. These transformations take place mainly in the 
liver. Estradiol is converted reversibly to estrone, and both can be converted 
to estriol, which is the major urinary metabolite. Estrogens also undergo 
enterohepatic recirculation via sulfate and glucuronide conjugation in the 
liver, biliary secretion of conjugates into the intestine, and hydrolysis in the 
gut followed by reabsorption. In postmenopausal women, a significant proportion 
of the circulating estrogens exist as sulfate conjugates, especially estrone 
sulfate, which serves as a circulating reservoir for the formation of more 
active estrogens. 
                  
                  
                  D. ExcretionEstradiol, estrone, and estriol are excreted in the urine along 
with glucuronide and sulfate conjugates. 
                  
                  
                  E. Special PopulationsNo pharmacokinetic studies were conducted in special populations, 
including patients with renal or hepatic impairment.
                  
                  
                  F. Drug InteractionsIn vitro and in vivo studies have shown that estrogens are 
metabolized partially by cytochrome P450 3A4 (CYP3A4). Therefore, inducers or 
inhibitors of CYP3A4 may affect estrogen drug metabolism. Inducers of CYP3A4 
such as St. John’s Wort preparations (Hypericum perforatum), phenobarbital, 
carbamazepine and rifampin may reduce plasma concentrations of estrogens, 
possibly resulting in a decrease in therapeutic effects and/or changes in the 
uterine bleeding profile. Inhibitors of CYP3A4 such as erythromycin, 
clarithromycin, ketoconazole, itraconazole, ritonavir and grapefruit juice may 
increase plasma concentrations of estrogens and may result in side effects.
                  

                  

               
               
               
                  
                     image of figure 1
                     
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         