
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Endogenous estrogens are largely responsible for the development and maintenance of the female reproductive system and secondary sexual characteristics. Although circulating estrogens exist in a dynamic equilibrium of metabolic interconversions, estradiol is the principal intracellular human estrogen and is substantially more potent than its metabolites, estrone and estriol, at the receptor level.
                        The primary source of estrogen in normally cycling adult women is the ovarian follicle, which secretes 70 to 500 mcg of estradiol daily, depending on the phase of the menstrual cycle. After menopause, most endogenous estrogen is produced by conversion of androstenedione, secreted by the adrenal cortex, to estrone in the peripheral tissues. Thus, estrone and the sulfate conjugated form, estrone sulfate, are the most abundant circulating estrogens in postmenopausal women.
                        Estrogens act through binding to nuclear receptors in estrogen-responsive tissues.  To date, two estrogen receptors have been identified.  These vary in proportion from tissue to tissue.
                        Circulating estrogens modulate the pituitary secretion of the gonadotropins, luteinizing hormone (LH) and FSH, through a negative feed back mechanism.  Estrogens act to reduce the elevated levels of these hormones seen in postmenopausal women.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        There are no pharmacodynamic data for Evamist.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Absorption
                              
                              In a multiple-dose study, 72 postmenopausal women were treated for 14 days with Evamist to the inner forearm. Serum concentrations of estradiol appeared to reach steady state after 7 to 8 days of application of one, two, or three 90 mcL sprays of Evamist per day (Figure 1).
                              
                                 Figure 1. Mean (±SD) Serum Estradiol Concentrations on Day 14 Following Topical Application for 14 Days of One, Two or Three Sprays of Evamist (Unadjusted for Baseline) 
                              
                              Pharmacokinetics parameters for estradiol from one, two, or three 90 mcL sprays of Evamist, as assessed on Day 14 of this study, are described in Table 2.
                              


                           



                           
                           
                              
                                 Figure 1
                                 
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Distribution
                              
                              The distribution of exogenous estrogens is similar to that of endogenous estrogens. Estrogens are widely distributed in the body and are generally found in higher concentrations in the sex hormone target organs. Estrogens circulate in blood largely bound to SHBG and albumin.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Metabolism
                              
                              Exogenous estrogens are metabolized in the same manner as endogenous estrogens. Circulating estrogens exist in a dynamic equilibrium of metabolic interconversions. These transformations take place mainly in the liver. Estradiol is converted reversibly to estrone, and both can be converted to estriol, which is a major urinary metabolite. Estrogens also undergo enterohepatic recirculation via sulfate and glucuronide conjugation in the liver, biliary secretion of conjugates into the intestine, and hydrolysis in the intestine followed by reabsorption. In postmenopausal women, a significant proportion of the circulating estrogens exist as sulfate conjugates, especially estrone sulfate, which serves as a circulating reservoir for the formation of more active estrogens.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Excretion
                              
                              Estradiol, estrone and estriol are excreted in the urine along with glucuronide and sulfate conjugates.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Use in Specific Populations
                              
                              No pharmacokinetic studies were conducted with Evamist in specific populations, including women with renal or hepatic impairment.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Potential for Estradiol Transfer
                              
                              The effect of estradiol transfer was evaluated in 20 healthy postmenopausal women who applied three 90-mcL sprays of Evamist to the inner forearm once daily. One hour after applying Evamist, subjects held the dosed forearm against the inner forearm of a non-dosed (recipient) male subject for one 5-minute period of continual contact.  A 4% increase in serum estradiol exposure was observed in persons who came in contact with the application site. The possibility of unintentional secondary exposure to Evamist should be brought to the attention of physicians and Evamist users.
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    Effect of Application Site Washing
                                 
                                 
                                    Site washing with warm water and soap one hour after the application of three 90 mcL sprays to the inner forearm did not have a significant effect on average 24-hour serum concentrations of estradiol.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         