
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY:
               
                  Pyrilamine Maleate: Pyrilamine is an antihistamine belonging to the ethylenediamine class. Pyrilamine is a 
highly effective H1 blocker which possesses local anesthetic activity. Pyrilamine antagonizes most of the 
smooth muscle stimulating actions of histamine on the H1 receptors of the gastrointestinal tract, blood 
vessels and bronchial muscle. It also antagonizes the actions of histamine that result in increased capillary 
permeability and the formation of edema. Pyrilamine has a duration of action of 4 to 6 hours in clinical studies.

                  

                  Chlorpheniramine Maleate:
                  
Chlorpheniramine is an antihistamine belonging to the alkylamine class. It possesses anticholinergic and 
sedative effects. Antihistamines appear to compete with histamine for H1 cell receptor sites on effector cells. 
Chlorpheniramine Maleate does not prevent the release of histamine in response to injury, drugs or antigens. 
Antihistamines effectively block most smooth muscle responses to histamine and acts as an antagonist of 
the constrictor action of histamine on respiratory smooth muscle. Antihistamines counteract edema formation 
and whealing in response to injury, antigens, or histamine-liberating drugs. Chlorpheniramine is readily absorbed 
from the gastrointestinal tract and has a duration of 4 to 6 hours. Plasma half-life is approximately 22 hours. 
Degradation products of chlorpheniramine's metabolic transformation by the liver are almost completely excreted 
in 24 hours via the kidney. The alkylamines of which chlorpheniramine is the prototype, are among the most 
potent H1 blockers. Although not so prone as others to cause drowsiness, a significant proportion of patients 
do experience this effect. CNS stimulation is more common in chlorpheniramine than in other groups of H1 blockers.

                  
                     
Phenylephrine Hydrochloride:
                  
Phenylephrine is a potent postsynaptic alpha-receptor agonist with little effect on beta-receptors on the heart. 
Phenylephrine has no effect on beta-adrenergic receptors of the bronchi or peripheral blood vessels. A direct 
action at receptors accounts for the greater part of its effects; only a small part is due to its ability to release 
norepinephrine. Therapeutic doses of phenylephrine mainly cause vasoconstriction. It increases resistance, 
and to a lesser extent, decreases capacitance of blood vessels. Total peripheral resistance is increased, 
resulting in increased systolic and diastolic blood pressure. Pulmonary arterial pressure is usually increased, 
and renal blood flow is usually decreased. Following oral administration of phenylephrine, constriction of blood 
vessels in the nasal mucosa relieves nasal congestion associated with allergy or head colds. Following oral 
administration of phenylephrine, nasal decongestion may occur within 15 to 20 minutes and may persist for up 
to 4 hours. Phenylephrine is irregularly absorbed from and readily metabolized in the gastrointestinal tract. 
Phenylephrine is metabolized in the liver and intestine by monoamine oxidase. The metabolites and their route 
and rate of excretion have not been identified. The pharmacologic action of phenylephrine is terminated at least 
partially by uptake of the drug into the tissues.

               
               
            
         