
                     
                     
                     Drug Interactions
                     
                        
                  As with all drugs, care should be exercised when
                  treating patients with multiple medications. Diltiazem is both a substrate
                  and an inhibitor of the cytochrome P-450 3A4 enzyme system. Other
                  drugs that are specific substrates inhibitors, or inducers of this
                  enzyme system may have a significant impact on the efficacy and side
                  effect profile of diltiazem. Patients taking other drugs that are
                  substrates of CYP450 3A4, especially patients with renal and/or hepatic
                  impairment, may require dosage adjustment when starting or stopping
                  concomitantly administered diltiazem in order to maintain optimum
                  therapeutic blood levels.
                
                        
                           
                              Anesthetics.  
                           The depression of cardiac contractility,
                  conductivity, and automaticity as well as the vascular dilation associated
                  with anesthetics may be potentiated by calcium channel blockers. When
                  used concomitantly, anesthetics and calcium blockers should be titrated
                  carefully.
                
                        
                           
                              
                    Benzodiazepines.
                  
                           Studies showed that diltiazem increased the AUC of midazolam
                  and triazolam by 3-4 fold and Cmax by 2-fold, compared
                  to placebo. The elimination half-life of midazolam and triazolam also
                  increased (1.5-2.5 fold) during coadministration with diltiazem. These
                  pharmacokinetic effects seen during diltiazem coadministration can
                  result in increased clinical effects (e.g., prolonged sedation) of
                  both midazolam and triazolam.
                
                        
                           
                              Beta-blockers. 
                           Intravenous diltiazem has
                  been administered to patients on chronic oral beta-blocker therapy.
                  The combination of the two drugs was generally well tolerated without
                  serious adverse effects. If intravenous diltiazem is administered
                  to patients receiving chronic oral beta-blocker therapy, the possibility
                  for bradycardia, AV block, and/or depression of contractility should
                  be considered (see 
                              CONTRAINDICATIONS
                           ). 
                              Oral 
                           administration
                  of diltiazem with propranolol in five normal volunteers resulted in
                  increased propranolol levels in all subjects and bioavailability of
                  propranolol was increased approximately 50%. 
                              In vitro, 
                           propranolol appears to be displaced from its
                  binding sites by diltiazem.
                
                        
                           
                              Buspirone
                           . In nine healthy subjects, diltiazem
                  significantly increased the mean buspirone AUC 5.5 fold and Cmax 4.1 fold compared to placebo. The T1/2 and Tmax of buspirone were not significantly affected by diltiazem.
                  Enhanced effects and increased toxicity of buspirone may be possible
                  during concomitant administration with diltiazem. Subsequent dose
                  adjustments may be necessary during co-administration, and should
                  be based on clinical assessment.
                
                        
                           
                              Carbamazepine. 
                           Concomitant administration
                  of 
                              oral 
                           diltiazem with
                  carbamazepine has been reported to result in elevated plasma levels
                  of carbamazepine (by 40 to 72%), resulting in toxicity in some cases.
                  Patients receiving these drugs concurrently should be monitored for
                  a potential drug interaction.
                
                        
                           
                              Cimetidine. 
                           A study in six healthy volunteers
                  has shown a significant increase in peak diltiazem plasma levels (58%)
                  and area-under-the-curve (53%) after a 1-week course of cimetidine
                  at 1200 mg per day and a single dose of diltiazem 60 mg. Ranitidine
                  produced smaller, nonsignificant increases. The effect may be mediated
                  by cimetidine’s known inhibition of hepatic cytochrome P-450,
                  the enzyme system responsible for the first-pass metabolism of diltiazem.
                  Patients currently receiving diltiazem therapy should be carefully
                  monitored for a change in pharmacological effect when initiating and
                  discontinuing therapy with cimetidine. An adjustment in the diltiazem
                  dose may be warranted.
                
                        
                           
                              Cyclosporine. 
                           A pharmacokinetic interaction between diltiazem
                  and cyclosporine has been observed during studies involving renal
                  and cardiac transplant patients. In renal and cardiac transplant recipients,
                  a reduction of cyclosporine dose ranging from 15% to 48% was necessary
                  to maintain cyclosporine trough concentrations similar to those seen
                  prior to the addition of diltiazem. If these agents are to be administered
                  concurrently, cyclosporine concentrations should be monitored, especially
                  when diltiazem therapy is initiated, adjusted or discontinued.
                
                        
                  The effect of cyclosporine on diltiazem plasma concentrations
                  has not been evaluated.
                
                        
                           
                              Digitalis. 
                           Intravenous diltiazem has been administered
                  to patients receiving either intravenous or oral digitalis therapy.
                  The combination of the two drugs was well tolerated without serious
                  adverse effects. However, since both drugs affect AV nodal conduction,
                  patients should be monitored for excessive slowing of the heart rate
                  and/or AV block.
                
                        
                           
                              Lovastatin. 
                           In a ten-subject study, coadministration of diltiazem (120 mg bid,
                  diltiazem SR) with lovastatin resulted in a 3-4 times increase in
                  mean lovastatin AUC and Cmax versus lovastatin alone; no
                  change in pravastatin AUC and Cmax was observed during
                  diltiazem coadministration. Diltiazem plasma levels were not significantly
                  affected by lovastatin or pravastatin.
                
                        
                           
                              Quinidine.  
                           Diltiazem significantly increases
                  the AUC(0→∞) of quinidine by 51%, T1/2 by 36% and decreases its CLoral by 33%. Monitoring for
                  quinidine adverse effects may be warranted and the dose adjusted accordingly.
                
                        
                           
                              Rifampin.  
                           Coadministration
                  of rifampin with diltiazem lowered the diltiazem plasma concentrations
                  to undetectable levels. Coadministration of diltiazem with rifampin
                  or any known CYP3A4 inducer should be avoided when possible, and alternative
                  therapy considered.
                
                     
                     
                  
               