
                     
                     
                     Drug Interactions
                     
                        Caution should be exercised when propranolol is administered with drugs that have an effect on CYP2D6, 1A2, or 2C19 metabolic pathways. Co-administration of such drugs with propranolol may lead to clinically relevant drug interactions and changes in its efficacy and/or toxicity (see 
                              CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY: Drug Interactions
                           ).
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Cardiovascular Drugs
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    Antiarrhythmics
                                 
                                 
                                    Propafenone has negative inotropic and beta-blocking properties that can be additive to those of propranolol.
                                    Quinidine increases the concentration of propranolol and produces a greater degree of clinical beta-blockade and may cause postural hypotension.
                                    Disopyramide is a Type I antiarrhythmic drug with potent negative inotropic and chronotropic effects and has been associated with severe bradycardia, asystole and heart failure when administered with propranolol.
                                    Amiodarone is an antiarrhythmic agent with negative chronotropic properties that may be additive to those seen with propranolol.
                                    The clearance of lidocaine is reduced when administered with propranolol. Lidocaine toxicity has been reported following coadministration with propranolol.
                                    Caution should be exercised when administering propranolol with drugs that slow A-V nodal conduction, e.g. digitalis, lidocaine and calcium channel blockers.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    Calcium Channel Blockers
                                 
                                 
                                    Caution should be exercised when patients receiving a beta-blocker are administered a calcium-channel-blocking drug with negative inotropic and/or chronotropic effects. Both agents may depress myocardial contractility or atrioventricular conduction.
                                    There have been reports of significant bradycardia, heart failure, and cardiovascular collapse with concurrent use of verapamil and beta-blockers.
                                    Co-administration of propranolol and diltiazem in patients with cardiac disease has been associated with bradycardia, hypotension, high degree heart block, and heart failure.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    ACE Inhibitors
                                 
                                 
                                    When combined with beta-blockers, ACE inhibitors can cause hypotension, particularly in the setting of acute myocardial infarction.
                                    ACE inhibitors have been reported to increase bronchial hyperreactivity when administered with propranolol.
                                    The antihypertensive effects of clonidine may be antagonized by beta-blockers. Propranolol should be administered cautiously to patients withdrawing from clonidine.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    Alpha-blockers
                                 
                                 
                                    Prazosin has been associated with prolongation of first dose hypotension in the presence of beta-blockers.
                                    Postural hypotension has been reported in patients taking both beta-blockers and terazosin or doxazosin.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    Reserpine
                                 
                                 
                                    Patients receiving catecholamine-depleting drugs, such as reserpine, with propranolol should be closely observed for excess reduction of resting sympathetic nervous activity, which may result in hypotension, marked bradycardia, vertigo, syncopal attacks, or orthostatic hypotension. Administration of reserpine with propranolol may also potentiate depression.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    Inotropic Agents
                                 
                                 
                                    Patients on long-term therapy with propranolol may experience uncontrolled hypertension if administered epinephrine as a consequence of unopposed alpha-receptor stimulation. Epinephrine is therefore not indicated in the treatment of propranolol overdose (see 
                                          OVERDOSAGE
                                       ).
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    Isoproterenol and 
                                    Dobutamine
                                 
                                 
                                    Propranolol is a competitive inhibitor of beta-receptor agonists, and its effects can be reversed by administration of such agents, e.g., dobutamine or isoproterenol. Also, propranolol may reduce sensitivity to dobutamine stress echocardiography in patients undergoing evaluation for myocardial ischemia.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Non-Cardiovascular Drugs
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    Non-Steroidal Anti-Inflammatory Drugs
                                 
                                 
                                    Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDS) have been reported to blunt the antihypertensive effect of beta-adrenoreceptor blocking agents.
                                    Administration of indomethacin with propranolol may reduce the efficacy of propranolol in reducing blood pressure and heart rate.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    Antidepressants
                                 
                                 
                                    The hypotensive effects of MAO inhibitors or tricyclic antidepressants may be exacerbated when administered with beta-blockers by interfering with the beta blocking activity of propranolol.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    Anesthetic Agents
                                 
                                 
                                    Methoxyflurane and trichloroethylene may depress myocardial contractility when administered with propranolol.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    Warfarin
                                 
                                 
                                    Administration of propranolol with warfarin increases the concentration of warfarin. Therefore, the prothrombin time should be monitored.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    Neuroleptic Drugs
                                 
                                 
                                    Hypotension and cardiac arrest have been reported with the concomitant use of propranolol and haloperidol.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    Thyroxine
                                 
                                 
                                    Thyroxine may result in a lower than expected T3 concentration when used concomitantly with propranolol.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               