
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  Each of these irrigation solutions exert a mechanical cleansing action for sterile irrigation of body cavities, tissues or wounds, indwelling urethral catheters and surgical drainage tubes and for washing, rinsing or soaking surgical dressings, instruments and laboratory specimens. Each also serves as a diluent or vehicle for drugs used for irrigation or other pharmaceutical preparations.
                  0.45% Sodium Chloride Irrigation, USP provides a hypotonic half-strength saline irrigation identical in composition with 0.45% Sodium Chloride Injection, USP.
                  0.9% Sodium Chloride Irrigation, USP provides an isotonic saline irrigation identical in composition with 0.9% Sodium Chloride Injection, USP (normal saline).
                  0.9% Sodium Chloride Irrigation, USP is considered generally compatible with living tissues and organs; 0.45% Sodium Chloride Irrigation, USP may be used alone or combined with appropriate additives when 0.9% sodium chloride is considered too irritating for wounds or other altered structures.
                  Sodium chloride in water dissociates to provide sodium (Na+) and chloride (Cl−) ions. Sodium (Na+) is the principal cation of the extracellular fluid and plays a large part in the therapy of fluid and electrolyte disturbances. Chloride (Cl−) has an integral role in buffering action when oxygen and carbon dioxide exchange occurs in the red blood cells. The distribution and excretion of sodium (Na+) and chloride (Cl−) are largely under the control of the kidney which maintains a balance between intake and output.
                  Water is an essential constituent of all body tissues and accounts for approximately 70% of total body weight. Average normal adult daily requirement ranges from two to three liters (1.0 to 1.5 liters each for insensible water loss by perspiration and urine production).
                  Water balance is maintained by various regulatory mechanisms. Water distribution depends primarily on the concentration of electrolytes in the body compartments and sodium (Na+) plays a major role in maintaining physiologic equilibrium.
               
               
            
         