
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              •Atazanavir and nelfinavir: Omeprazole reduces plasma levels of atazanavir and nelfinavir. Concomitant use is not recommended (7.1)
                           
                              •Saquinavir: Omeprazole increases plasma levels of saquinavir. Monitor for toxicity and consider dose reduction of saquinavir (7.1)
                           
                              •May interfere with drugs for which gastric pH affects bioavailability (e.g., ketoconazole, iron salts, erlotinib, ampicillin esters, and digoxin). Patients treated with omeprazole and digoxin may need to be monitored for increases in digoxin toxicity (7.2)
                           
                              •Clopidogrel: Omeprazole decreases exposure to the active metabolite of clopidogrel (7.3, 12.3) 
                           
                              •Cilostazol: Omeprazole increases systemic exposure of cilostazol and one of its active metabolites. Consider dose reduction of cilostazol (7.3)
                           
                              •Drugs metabolized by cytochrome P450 (e.g., diazepam, warfarin, phenytoin, cyclosporine, disulfiram, benzodiazepines): Omeprazole can prolong their elimination. Monitor and determine need for dose adjustments (7.3) 
                           
                              •Patients treated with proton pump inhibitors and warfarin may need to be monitored for increases in INR and prothrombin time (7.3) 
                           
                              •Combined inhibitor of CYP 2C19 and 3A4 (e.g., voriconazole) may raise omeprazole levels (7.3) 
                           
                              •Tacrolimus: Omeprazole may increase serum levels of tacrolimus (7.4)
                           
                              •Methotrexate: Omeprazole may increase serum levels of methotrexate (7.7)
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 Interference with Antiretroviral Therapy
                     
                        Concomitant use of atazanavir and nelfinavir with proton pump inhibitors is not recommended. Coadministration of atazanavir with proton pump inhibitors is expected to substantially decrease atazanavir plasma concentrations and may result in a loss of therapeutic effect and the development of drug resistance. Coadministration of saquinavir with proton pump inhibitors is expected to increase saquinavir concentrations, which may increase toxicity and require dose reduction.
                        Omeprazole has been reported to interact with some antiretroviral drugs. The clinical importance and the mechanisms behind these interactions are not always known. Increased gastric pH during omeprazole treatment may change the absorption of the antiretroviral drug. Other possible interaction mechanisms are via CYP 2C19.
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Reduced concentrations of atazanavir and nelfinavir
                           
                           
                              For some antiretroviral drugs, such as atazanavir and nelfinavir, decreased serum levels have been reported when given together with omeprazole. Following multiple doses of nelfinavir (1250 mg, twice daily) and omeprazole (40 mg daily), AUC was decreased by 36% and 92%, Cmax by 37% and 89% and Cmin by 39% and 75% respectively for nelfinavir and M8. Following multiple doses of atazanavir (400 mg, daily) and omeprazole (40 mg, daily, 2 hours before atazanavir), AUC was decreased by 94%, Cmax by 96%, and Cmin by 95%. Concomitant administration with omeprazole and drugs such as atazanavir and nelfinavir is therefore not recommended.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Increased concentrations of saquinavir
                           
                           
                              For other antiretroviral drugs, such as saquinavir, elevated serum levels have been reported, with an increase in AUC by 82%, in Cmax by 75%, and in Cmin by 106%, following multiple dosing of saquinavir/ritonavir (1000 mg/100 mg) twice daily for 15 days with omeprazole 40 mg daily coadministered days 11 to 15. Therefore, clinical and laboratory monitoring for saquinavir toxicity is recommended during concurrent use with omeprazole. Dose reduction of saquinavir should be considered from the safety perspective for individual patients.
                              There are also some antiretroviral drugs of which unchanged serum levels have been reported when given with omeprazole.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 Drugs for which Gastric pH can Affect Bioavailability
                     
                        Because of its profound and long lasting inhibition of gastric acid secretion, it is theoretically possible that omeprazole may interfere with absorption of drugs where gastric pH is an important determinant of their bioavailability. Like with other drugs that decrease the intragastric acidity, the absorption of drugs such as ketoconazole, ampicillin esters, iron salts and erlotinib can decrease, while the absorption of drugs such as digoxin can increase during treatment with omeprazole. Concomitant treatment with omeprazole (20 mg daily) and digoxin in healthy subjects increased the bioavailability of digoxin by 10% (30% in two subjects). Therefore, patients may need to be monitored when digoxin is taken concomitantly with omeprazole. In the clinical trials, antacids were used concomitantly with the administration of omeprazole.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3 Effects on Hepatic Metabolism/Cytochrome P450 Pathways
                     
                        Omeprazole can prolong the elimination of diazepam, warfarin and phenytoin, drugs that are metabolized by oxidation in the liver. There have been reports of increased INR and prothrombin time in patients receiving proton pump inhibitors, including omeprazole, and warfarin concomitantly. Increases in INR and prothrombin time may lead to abnormal bleeding and even death. Patients treated with proton pump inhibitors and warfarin may need to be monitored for increases in INR and prothrombin time.
                        Although in normal subjects no interaction with theophylline or propranolol was found, there have been clinical reports of interaction with other drugs metabolized via the cytochrome P450 system (e.g., cyclosporine, disulfiram, benzodiazepines). Patients should be monitored to determine if it is necessary to adjust the dosage of these drugs when taken concomitantly with omeprazole.
                        Concomitant administration of omeprazole and voriconazole (a combined inhibitor of CYP2C19 and CYP3A4) resulted in more than doubling of the omeprazole exposure. Dose adjustment of omeprazole is not normally required. However, in patients with Zollinger-Ellison syndrome, who may require higher doses up to 240 mg/day, dose adjustment may be considered. When voriconazole (400 mg Q12h x 1 day, then 200 mg x 6 days) was given with omeprazole (40 mg once daily x 7 days) to healthy subjects, it significantly increased the steady-state Cmax and AUC0 to 24 of omeprazole, an average of 2 times (90% CI: 1.8, 2.6) and 4 times (90% CI: 3.3, 4.4) respectively as compared to when omeprazole was given without voriconazole.
                        Omeprazole acts as an inhibitor of CYP 2C19. Omeprazole, given in doses of 40 mg daily for one week to 20 healthy subjects in crossover study, increased Cmax and AUC of cilostazol by 18% and 26% respectively. Cmax and AUC of one of its active metabolites, 3,4-dihydro-cilostazol, which has 4 to 7 times the activity of cilostazol, were increased by 29% and 69% respectively. Coadministration of cilostazol with omeprazole is expected to increase concentrations of cilostazol and its above mentioned active metabolite. Therefore a dose reduction of cilostazol from 100 mg twice daily to 50 mg twice daily should be considered.
                        Drugs known to induce CYP2C19 or CYP3A4 (such as rifampin) may lead to decreased omeprazole serum levels. In a cross-over study in 12 healthy male subjects, St John’s wort (300 mg three times daily for 14 days), an inducer of CYP3A4, decreased the systemic exposure of omeprazole in CYP2C19 poor metabolisers (Cmax and AUC decreased by 37.5% and 37.9%, respectively) and extensive metabolisers (Cmax and AUC decreased by 49.6% and 43.9%, respectively). Avoid concomitant use of St. John’s Wort or rifampin with omeprazole.
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Clopidogrel 
                           
                           
                              Omeprazole is an inhibitor of CYP2C19 enzyme. Clopidogrel is metabolized to its active metabolite in part by CYP2C19. Concomitant use of omeprazole 80 mg results in reduced plasma concentrations of the active metabolite of clopidogrel and a reduction in platelet inhibition. Avoid concomitant administration of omeprazole with clopidogrel. When using omeprazole, consider use of alternative anti-platelet therapy [see Pharmacokinetics (12.3)].
                              There are no adequate combination studies of a lower dose of omeprazole or a higher dose of clopidogrel in comparison with the approved dose of clopidogrel.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4 Tacrolimus
                     
                        Concomitant administration of omeprazole and tacrolimus may increase the serum levels of tacrolimus.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.5 Interactions with Investigations of Neuroendocrine Tumors 
                     
                        Drug-induced decrease in gastric acidity results in enterochromaffin-like cell hyperplasia and increased Chromogranin A levels which may interfere with investigations for neuroendocrine tumors [see Warnings and Precautions (5.8) and Clinical Pharmacology (12)].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.6 Combination Therapy with Clarithromycin
                     
                        Concomitant administration of clarithromycin with other drugs can lead to serious adverse reactions due to drug interactions [see Warnings and Precautions in prescribing information for clarithromycin]. Because of these drug interactions, clarithromycin is contraindicated for coadministration with certain drugs [see Contraindications in prescribing information for clarithromycin].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.7 Methotrexate
                     
                        Case reports, published population pharmacokinetic studies and retrospective analyses suggest that concomitant administration of PPIs and methotrexate (primarily at high dose; see methotrexate prescribing information) may elevate and prolong serum levels of methotrexate and/or its metabolite hydroxymethotrexate. However, no formal drug interaction studies of methotrexate with PPIs have been conducted [see Warnings and Precautions (5.9)].
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         