
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY: 
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           Mechanism of Action: Ciclopirox acts by chelation of polyvalent cations (Fe3+ or Al3+) resulting in the inhibition of the metal-dependent enzymes that are responsible for the degradation of peroxides within the fungal cell. In vitro studies showed that ciclopirox inhibited the formation of 5-lipoxygenase inflammatory mediators (5-HETE and LTB4) and also inhibited PGE2 release in a cell culture model. In vivo, ciclopirox inhibited inflammation in an arachidonic acid-induced murine ear edema model. The clinical significance of these findings is unknown. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           Pharmacokinetics: A comparative study of the pharmacokinetics of ciclopirox gel and ciclopirox cream (ciclopirox olamine) 0.77% in 18 healthy males indicated that systemic absorption of ciclopirox from ciclopirox gel was higher than that of ciclopirox cream. A 5 gm dose of ciclopirox gel produced a mean (±SD) peak serum concentration of 25.02 (±20.6) ng/mL total ciclopirox and 5 gm of ciclopirox cream produced 18.62 (±13.56) ng/mL total ciclopirox. Approximately 3% of the applied ciclopirox was excreted in the urine within 48 hours after application, with a renal elimination half-life of about 5.5 hours. In a study of ciclopirox gel, 16 men with moderate to severe tinea cruris applied approximately 15 grams/day of the gel for 14.5 days. The mean (±SD) dose-normalized values of Cmax for total ciclopirox in serum were 100 (±42) ng/mL on day 1 and 238 (±144) ng/mL on Day 15. During the 10 hours after dosing on Day 1, approximately 10% of the administered dose was excreted in the urine.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           Microbiology: Ciclopirox is a hydroxypyridinone antifungal agent that inhibits the growth of pathogenic dermatophytes. Ciclopirox has been shown to be active against most strains of the following microorganisms both in vitro and in clinical infections as described in the 
                              INDICATIONS AND USAGE
                            section: Trichophyton
                            
                           rubrum
                           , 
                           Trichophyton
                            
                           mentagrophytes
                           , and 
                           Epidermophyton
                            
                           floccosum
                           .
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         