
               
               
               12	CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1	Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Vivaglobin supplies a broad spectrum of opsonizing and neutralizing IgG antibodies against a wide variety of bacterial and viral agents. The mechanism of action in PI has not been fully elucidated.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3	Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        The bioavailability of Vivaglobin is approximately 73% compared with IGIV, but can vary significantly among patients (see Clinical Studies [14.1]
                           ). With Vivaglobin, peak serum IgG levels are lower than those achieved with IGIV. Subcutaneous administration results in relatively stable steady-state serum IgG levels when the product is dosed on a weekly basis.12-13
                        
                        The pharmacokinetics (PK) of Vivaglobin were evaluated in the clinical study conducted in the US and Canada (see Clinical Studies [14.1]
                           ). Subjects previously treated with IGIV were switched to weekly subcutaneous treatment with Vivaglobin. After a 3-month wash-in/wash-out period, doses were adjusted individually aiming to provide an IgG systemic exposure (AUC) that was not inferior to the AUC of the previous weekly-equivalent IGIV dose.
                        For the 19 per-protocol subjects completing the wash-in/wash-out period, the average dose adjustment for Vivaglobin was 137% ± 21% SD (range: 103% to 192%) of the previous weekly-equivalent IGIV dose. Following 10 to 12 weeks of treatment with Vivaglobin at this individually adjusted dose, the final steady-state AUC determinations were made in 17 of the 19 per-protocol subjects. The geometric mean ratio of the steady-state AUCs, standardized to a weekly treatment period, for Vivaglobin versus IGIV treatment, was 94.5% (range: 71.4% to 110.1%) with a lower 95% confidence limit of 89.8% for the 17 subjects. 
                        Table 7 summarizes additional pharmacokinetic parameters for this study including dosing and serum IgG peak and trough levels following treatment with IGIV and Vivaglobin.
                        


                        


The 6-month clinical study conducted in Europe and Brazil in 60 subjects with PI also included a PK evaluation. Subjects were treated weekly with Vivaglobin at a mean dose of 89 mg/kg body weight (range: 51 to 147 mg/kg), which was 101% of their previous weekly IGIV or IGSC dose (see Clinical Studies [14.2]
                           ). After the subjects had reached steady state with weekly administration of Vivaglobin, peak serum IgG levels were observed after a mean of 2.5 days (range: 0 to 7 days) in 41 subjects.
                        In both studies, the serum IgG levels in subjects receiving weekly subcutaneous therapy with Vivaglobin were relatively stable in contrast to serum IgG levels observed with monthly IGIV treatment (rapid peaks followed by a slow decline).
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         