
               
               
                CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY 
               
                  
                     Pharmacokinetics: Following a single bilateral 4-drop (total dose = 0.28 mL, 0.84 mg ciprofloxacin, 0.28 mg dexamethasone) topical otic dose of CIPRODEX® Otic to pediatric patients after tympanostomy tube insertion, measurable plasma concentrations of ciprofloxacin and dexamethasone were observed at 6 hours following administration in 2 of 9 patients and 5 of 9 patients, respectively.
                  Mean ± SD peak plasma concentrations of ciprofloxacin were 1.39 ± 0.880 ng/mL (n=9). Peak plasma concentrations ranged from 0.543 ng/mL to 3.45 ng/mL and were on average approximately 0.1% of peak plasma concentrations achieved with an oral dose of 250-mg [1]. Peak plasma concentrations of ciprofloxacin were observed within 15 minutes to 2 hours post dose application.
                  Mean ± SD peak plasma concentrations of dexamethasone were 1.14 ± 1.54 ng/mL (n=9). Peak plasma concentrations ranged from 0.135 ng/mL to 5.10 ng/mL and were on average approximately 14% of peak concentrations reported in the literature following an oral 0.5-mg tablet dose[2]. Peak plasma concentrations of dexamethasone were observed within 15 minutes to 2 hours post dose application.
                  Dexamethasone has been added to aid in the resolution of the inflammatory response accompanying bacterial infection (such as otorrhea in pediatric patients with AOM with tympanostomy tubes).
                  
                     Microbiology: Ciprofloxacin has in vitro activity against a wide range of gram-positive and gram-negative microorganisms. The bactericidal action of ciprofloxacin results from interference with the enzyme, DNA gyrase, which is needed for the synthesis of bacterial DNA. Cross-resistance has been observed between ciprofloxacin and other fluoroquinolones. There is generally no cross-resistance between ciprofloxacin and other classes of antibacterial agents such as beta-lactams or aminoglycosides. 
                  Ciprofloxacin has been shown to be active against most isolates of the following microorganisms, both in vitro and clinically in otic infections as described in the 
                        
                           INDICATIONS AND USAGE
                        
                      section.
                  
                     Aerobic and facultative gram-positive microorganisms
                  
                  
                     Staphylococcus aureus
                  
                  
                     Streptococcus pneumoniae
                  
                  
                     Aerobic and facultative gram-negative microorganisms
                  
                  
                     Haemophilus influenzae
                  
                  
                     Moraxella catarrhalis
                  
                  
                     Pseudomonas aeruginosa
                  
               
               
            
         