
               
               
               7	DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           Coadministration of ISENTRESS and other drugs may alter the plasma concentration of raltegravir. The potential for drug-drug interactions must be considered prior to and during therapy (7).
                           Coadministration of ISENTRESS with drugs that are strong inducers of UGT1A1, such as rifampin, may result in reduced plasma concentrations of raltegravir (2.1, 7.2).
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1	Effect of Raltegravir on the Pharmacokinetics of Other Agents
                     
                        Raltegravir does not inhibit (IC50>100 µM) CYP1A2, CYP2B6, CYP2C8, CYP2C9, CYP2C19, CYP2D6 or CYP3A in vitro. Moreover, in vitro, raltegravir did not induce CYP1A2, CYP2B6 or CYP3A4. A midazolam drug interaction study confirmed the low propensity of raltegravir to alter the pharmacokinetics of agents metabolized by CYP3A4 in vivo by demonstrating a lack of effect of raltegravir on the pharmacokinetics of midazolam, a sensitive CYP3A4 substrate. Similarly, raltegravir is not an inhibitor (IC50>50 µM) of UGT1A1 or UGT2B7, and raltegravir does not inhibit P-glycoprotein-mediated transport. Based on these data, ISENTRESS is not expected to affect the pharmacokinetics of drugs that are substrates of these enzymes or P-glycoprotein (e.g., protease inhibitors, NNRTIs, opioid analgesics, statins, azole antifungals, proton pump inhibitors and anti-erectile dysfunction agents).
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2	Effect of Other Agents on the Pharmacokinetics of Raltegravir
                     
                        Raltegravir is not a substrate of cytochrome P450 (CYP) enzymes. Based on in vivo and in vitro studies, raltegravir is eliminated mainly by metabolism via a UGT1A1-mediated glucuronidation pathway. Coadministration of ISENTRESS with drugs that inhibit UGT1A1 may increase plasma levels of raltegravir and coadministration of ISENTRESS with drugs that induce UGT1A1, such as rifampin, may reduce plasma levels of raltegravir.
                        The impact of other inducers of drug metabolizing enzymes, such as phenytoin and phenobarbital, on UGT1A1 is unknown.
                        Selected drug interactions are presented in Table 8 [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                        


                     



                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3	Drugs without Clinically Significant Interactions with ISENTRESS
                     
                        In drug interaction studies, raltegravir did not have a clinically meaningful effect on the pharmacokinetics of the following: hormonal contraceptives, methadone, lamivudine, tenofovir, etravirine, darunavir/ritonavir, or boceprevir. Moreover, atazanavir, atazanavir/ritonavir, boceprevir, calcium carbonate antacids, darunavir/ritonavir, efavirenz, etravirine, omeprazole, or tipranavir/ritonavir did not have a clinically meaningful effect on the pharmacokinetics of raltegravir. No dose adjustment is required when ISENTRESS is coadministered with these drugs.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         