
               
               
               DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
                  

                  

                  
                     Clinically meaningful drug interactions have occurred with 
concomitant medications and include, but are not limited to, the following: 

                  
                  
                  Agents That May Affect Carbamazepine Plasma Levels
                     CYP 3A4 inhibitors inhibit carbamazepine metabolism and can 
thus increase plasma carbamazepine levels. Drugs that have been shown, or would 
be expected, to increase plasma carbamazepine levels include:
                  cimetidine, danazol, diltiazem, macrolides, erythromycin, troleandomycin, 
clarithromycin, fluoxetine, fluvoxamine, nefazodone, loratadine, terfenadine, 
isoniazid, niacinamide, nicotinamide, propoxyphene, azoles (e.g., ketaconazole, 
itraconazole, fluconazole), acetazolamide, verapamil, grapefruit juice, protease 
inhibitors, valproate.*
                  
                  CYP 3A4 inducers can increase the rate of carbamazepine metabolism. Drugs 
that have been shown, or that would be expected, to decrease plasma 
carbamazepine levels include:
                  cisplatin, doxorubicin HCl, felbamate,† rifampin, 
phenobarbital, phenytoin, primidone, methsuximide, theophylline. 
                  When carbamazepine is given with drugs that can increase or decrease 
carbamazepine levels, close monitoring of carbamazepine levels is indicated and 
dosage adjustment may be required.
                  Effect of Carbamazepine on Plasma Levels of Concomitant 
Agents
                     Increased levels: clomipramine HCl, phenytoin, primidone 

                  Carbamazepine induces hepatic CYP activity. Carbamazepine causes, or would be 
expected to cause, decreased levels of the following: 
                  acetaminophen, alprazolam, dihydropyridine calcium channel blockers (e.g., 
felodipine), cyclosporine, corticosteroids (e.g., prednisolone, dexamethasone), 
clonazepam, clozapine, dicumarol, doxycycline, ethosuximide, haloperidol, 
itraconazole, lamotrigine, levothyroxine, methadone, methsuximide, midazolam, 
olanzapine, oral and other hormonal contraceptives, oxcarbazepine, phensuximide, 
phenytoin, praziquantel, protease inhibitors, risperidone, theophylline, 
tiagabine, topiramate, tramadol, tricyclic antidepressants (e.g., imipramine, 
amitriptyline, nortriptyline), valproate, warfarin, ziprasidone, zonisamide. 

                  In concomitant use with carbamazepine, dosage adjustment of the above agents 
may be necessary. 
                  Coadministration of carbamazepine with nefazodone results in insufficient 
plasma concentrations of nefazodone and its active metabolite to achieve a 
therapeutic effect. Coadministration of carbamazepine with nefazodone is 
contraindicated. (see 
                        CONTRAINDICATIONS). 

                  
                  Concomitant administration of carbamazepine and lithium may increase the risk 
of neurotoxic side effects. 
                  Alterations of thyroid function have been reported in combination therapy 
with other anticonvulsant medications. 
                  Concomitant use of carbamazepine with hormonal contraceptive products (e.g., 
oral, and levonorgestrel subdermal implant contraceptives) may render the 
contraceptives less effective because the plasma concentrations of the hormones 
may be decreased. Breakthrough bleeding and unintended pregnancies have been 
reported. Alternative or back-up methods of contraception should be considered. 

                  
                  
                  Carcinogenesis, Mutagenesis, Impairment of 
Fertility
                     Carbamazepine, when administered to Sprague-Dawley rats for 
two years in the diet at doses of 25, 75, and 250 mg/kg/day, resulted in a 
dose-related increase in the incidence of hepatocellular tumors in females and 
of benign interstitial cell adenomas in the testes of males. 
                  Carbamazepine must, therefore, be considered to be carcinogenic in 
Sprague-Dawley rats. Bacterial and mammalian mutagenicity studies using 
carbamazepine produced negative results. The significance of these findings 
relative to the use of carbamazepine in humans is, at present, unknown. 
                  

               
               
            
         