
               
               
               
                  7     DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              Cyclosporine: Combination increases fluvastatin exposure. Limit LESCOL dose to 20 mg (2.4, 7.1)

                           
                           
                              Fluconazole: Combination increases fluvastatin exposure. Limit LESCOL dose to 20 mg (2.5, 7.2)

                           
                           
                              Concomitant lipid-lowering therapies: Use with fibrates or lipid-modifying doses (≥1 g/day) of niacin increases the risk of adverse skeletal muscle effects.   Caution should be used when prescribing with LESCOL/LESCOL XL (5.1,7.3,7.4)

                           
                           
                              Glyburide
                              : Monitor blood glucose levels when fluvastatin dose is changed (7)

                           
                           
                              Phenytoin: Monitor plasma phenytoin levels when fluvastatin treatment is initiated or when the dosage is changed (7)

                           
                           
                              Warfarin and 
                              coumar
                              in
                               derivates: Monitor prothrombin times when fluvastatin co-administration is initiated, discontinued, or the dosage changed (7)
                        
                        
     

                        
     

                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1     Cyclosporine
                     
                        Cyclosporine coadministration increases fluvastatin exposure. Therefore, in patients taking cyclosporine, therapy should be limited to LESCOL 20 mg twice daily [see Warnings and Precautions (5.1) and Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2     Fluconazole
                     
                        Administration of fluvastatin 40 mg single dose to healthy volunteers pre-treated with fluconazole for 4 days results in an increase of fluvastatin exposure. Therefore, in patients taking fluconazole, therapy should be limited to LESCOL 20 mg twice daily [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3     Gemfibrozil
                     
                        Due to an increased risk of myopathy/rhabdomyolysis when HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors are coadministered with gemfibrozil, concomitant administration of LESCOL/LESCOL XL with gemfibrozil should be avoided.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4     Other Fibrates
                     
                        Because it is known that the risk of myopathy during treatment with HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors is increased with concurrent administration of other fibrates, LESCOL/LESCOL XL should be administered with caution when used concomitantly with other fibrates [see Warnings and Precautions (5.1) and Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.5     Niacin
                     
                        The risk of skeletal muscle effects may be enhanced when LESCOL is used in combination with lipid-modifying doses (≥1 g/day) of niacin; a reduction in LESCOL dosage should be considered in this setting [see Warnings and Precautions (5.1)].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.6     Glyburide
                     
                        Concomitant administration of fluvastatin and glyburide increased glyburide exposures. Patients on concomitant therapy of glyburide and fluvastatin should continue to be monitored appropriately [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.7     Phenytoin
                     
                        Concomitant administration of fluvastatin and phenytoin increased phenytoin exposures. Patients should continue to be monitored appropriately when fluvastatin therapy is initiated or when fluvastatin dose is changed [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.8     Warfarin
                     
                        Bleeding and/or increased prothrombin times have been reported in patients taking coumarin anticoagulants concomitantly with other HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors. Therefore, patients receiving warfarin-type anticoagulants should have their prothrombin times closely monitored when fluvastatin sodium is initiated or the dosage of fluvastatin sodium is changed. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.9     Colchicine
                     
                        Cases of myopathy, including rhabdomyolysis, have been reported with fluvastatin coadministered with colchicine, and caution should be exercised when prescribing fluvastatin with colchicine.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         