
                     
                     
                     Drug Interactions
                     
                        
                           CNS Depressants • Promethazine hydrochloride tablets, USP may increase, prolong, or intensify the sedative action of other central-nervous-system depressants, such as alcohol, sedatives/hypnotics (including barbiturates), narcolics, narcotic analgesics, general anesthetics, tricyclic antidepressants, and tranquilizers; therefore, such agents should be avoided or administered in reduced dosage to patients receiving promethazine hydrochloride. When given concomitantly with promethazine hydrochloride tablets, USP the dose of barbiturates should be reduced by at least one·half, and the dose of narcotics should be reduced by one-quarter to one-half. Dosage must be individualized. excessive amounts of promethazine hydrochloride relative to a narcotic may lead to restlessness and motor hyperactivity in the patient with pain; these symptoms usually disappear with adequate control of the pain.
                        
                           Epinephrine -Because of the potential for promethazine hydrochloride to raverse epinephrine's
                        
                        -Because of the potential for promethazine hydrochloride to raverse epinephrine's vasopressor effect, epinephrine should NOT be used to treat hypotension associated with promethazine hydrochloride tablets, USP overdose.
                        
                           Antichollnerglcs -Concomitant use of other agents with anticholinergic properties should be
                        
                        -Concomitant use of other agents with anticholinergic properties should be undertaken with caution.
                        
                           Monoamine Oxldase inhibitors (MAO/)· Drug Interactions, Including an Increased incidence
                        
                        Drug Interactions, Including an Increased incidence of exlrapyramldal effects, have been reported when some MAOI and phenothlazlnes are used concomitantly. This possibility should be considered with promethazine hydrochloride tablets, USP.
                        Drug/Laboratory Test Interactions
                        The following laboratory tests may be affected in patients who are receiving therapy with promethazine hydrochloride:
                        
                           PregnancyTests
                        
                        Diagnostic pregnancy tests based on Immunological reactlons between HCG and anti-HCG may result in false-negative or false-posllive Interpretations.
                        
                           Glucose ToIenance Tests
                        
                        An increase in blood glucose has been reported in patients receiving promethazine hydrochloride.
                     
                     
                  
               