
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1  Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Axitinib has been shown to inhibit receptor tyrosine kinases including vascular endothelial growth factor receptors (VEGFR)-1, VEGFR-2, and VEGFR-3 at therapeutic plasma concentrations. These receptors are implicated in pathologic angiogenesis, tumor growth, and cancer progression. VEGF-mediated endothelial cell proliferation and survival were inhibited by axitinib in vitro and in mouse models. Axitinib was shown to inhibit tumor growth and phosphorylation of VEGFR-2 in tumor xenograft mouse models.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        The effect of a single oral dose of INLYTA (5 mg) in the absence and presence of 400 mg ketoconazole on the QTc interval was evaluated in a randomized, single-blinded, two-way crossover study in 35 healthy subjects. No large changes in mean QTc interval (i.e., >20 ms) from placebo were detected up to 3 hours post-dose. However, small increases in mean QTc interval (i.e., <10 ms) cannot be ruled out.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3	Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        The population pharmacokinetic analysis pooled data from 17 trials in healthy subjects and patients with cancer. A two-compartment disposition model with first-order absorption and lag-time adequately describes the axitinib concentration-time profile.
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Absorption and Distribution: Following single oral 5-mg dose administration, the median Tmax ranged from 2.5 to 4.1 hours. Based on the plasma half-life, steady state is expected within 2 to 3 days of dosing. Dosing of axitinib at 5 mg twice daily resulted in approximately 1.4-fold accumulation compared to administration of a single dose. At steady state, axitinib exhibits approximately linear pharmacokinetics within the 1-mg to 20-mg dose range. The mean absolute bioavailability of axitinib after an oral 5 mg dose is 58%.
                              Compared to overnight fasting, administration of INLYTA with a moderate fat meal resulted in 10% lower AUC and a high fat, high-calorie meal resulted in 19% higher AUC. INLYTA can be administered with or without food [see Dosage and Administration (2.1)].
                              
                              Axitinib is highly bound (>99%) to human plasma proteins with preferential binding to albumin and moderate binding to α1-acid glycoprotein. In patients with advanced RCC (n=20), at the 5 mg twice daily dose in the fed state, the geometric mean (CV%) Cmax and AUC0–24 were 27.8 (79%) ng/mL and 265 (77%) ng.h/mL, respectively. The geometric mean (CV%) clearance and apparent volume of distribution were 38 (80%) L/h and 160 (105%) L, respectively.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Metabolism and Elimination: The plasma half life of INLYTA ranges from 2.5 to 6.1 hours. Axitinib is metabolized primarily in the liver by CYP3A4/5 and to a lesser extent by CYP1A2, CYP2C19, and UGT1A1. Following oral administration of a 5-mg radioactive dose of axitinib, approximately 41% of the radioactivity was recovered in feces and approximately 23% was recovered in urine. Unchanged axitinib, accounting for 12% of the dose, was the major component identified in feces. Unchanged axitinib was not detected in urine; the carboxylic acid and sulfoxide metabolites accounted for the majority of radioactivity in urine. In plasma, the N-glucuronide metabolite represented the predominant radioactive component (50% of circulating radioactivity) and unchanged axitinib and the sulfoxide metabolite each accounted for approximately 20% of the circulating radioactivity.
                              The sulfoxide and N-glucuronide metabolites show approximately ≥400-fold less in vitro potency against VEGFR-2 compared to axitinib.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Drug-Drug Interactions
                              
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Effects of Other Drugs on INLYTA:  Axitinib is metabolized primarily in the liver by CYP3A4/5. Additionally, the aqueous solubility of axitinib is pH dependent, with higher pH resulting in lower solubility. The effects of a strong CYP3A4/5 inhibitor, a strong CYP3A4/5 inducer, and an antacid on the pharmacokinetics of axitinib are presented in Figure 1  [see Dosage and Administration (2.2) and Drug Interactions (7.1, 7.2)].
                                    
                                    
                                       Figure 1. Impact of Co-administered Drugs and Hepatic Impairment on Axitinib Pharmacokinetics
                                    
                                    
                                       
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Figure 1
                                       
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Effects of INLYTA on Other Drugs:
                                         In vitro studies demonstrated that axitinib has the potential to inhibit CYP1A2 and CYP2C8. However, co-administration of axitinib with paclitaxel, a CYP2C8 substrate, did not increase plasma concentrations of paclitaxel in patients.
                                    
                                       In vitro studies indicated that axitinib does not inhibit CYP2A6, CYP2C9, CYP2C19, CYP2D6, CYP2E1, CYP3A4/5, or UGT1A1 at therapeutic plasma concentrations. In vitro studies in human hepatocytes indicated that axitinib does not induce CYP1A1, CYP1A2, or CYP3A4/5.
                                    Axitinib is an inhibitor of the efflux transporter P-glycoprotein (P-gp) in vitro. However, INLYTA is not expected to inhibit P-gp at therapeutic plasma concentrations.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Pharmacokinetics in Specific Populations
                              
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Pediatric Use:  INLYTA has not been studied in patients <18 years of age.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Hepatic Impairment:  The effects of hepatic impairment on the pharmacokinetics of axitinib are presented in Figure 1  [see Dosage and Administration (2.2), Warnings and Precautions (5.12), and Use in Specific Populations (8.6)].
                                    
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Renal Impairment: Population pharmacokinetic analysis (based on pre-existing renal function) was carried out in 590 healthy volunteers and patients, including five with severe renal impairment (15 mL/min ≤CLcr <29 mL/min), 64 with moderate renal impairment (30 mL/min ≤CLcr <59 mL/min), and 139 with mild renal impairment (60 mL/min ≤CLcr <89 mL/min). Mild to severe renal impairment did not have meaningful effects on the pharmacokinetics of axitinib. Data from only one patient with end-stage renal disease are available [see Use in Specific Populations (8.7)].
                                    
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Other Intrinsic Factors:  Population pharmacokinetic analyses indicate that there are no clinically relevant effects of age, gender, race, body weight, body surface area, UGT1A1 genotype, or CYP2C19 genotype on the clearance of axitinib.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         