
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              •
                              Atazanavir: Do not co-administer with DEXILANT because atazanavir systemic concentrations may be substantially decreased. (7.1)
                           
                              •Drugs with pH-dependent absorption (e.g., ampicillin esters, digoxin, iron salts, ketoconazole, erlotinib, mycophenolate mofetil):DEXILANT may interfere with absorption of drugs for which gastric pH is important for bioavailability. (7.1)
                           
                              •
                              Warfarin: Patients taking concomitant warfarin may require monitoring for increases in international normalized ratio (INR) and prothrombin time. (7.2)
                           
                              •
                              Tacrolimus: Concomitant tacrolimus use may increase tacrolimus whole blood concentrations. (7.3)
                           
                              •
                              Methotrexate: DEXILANT may increase serum levels of methotrexate. (7.5)
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 Drugs with pH-Dependent Absorption Kinetics
                     
                        Due to its effects on gastric acid secretion, dexlansoprazole can reduce the absorption of drugs where gastric pH is an important determinant of their bioavailability.  Like with other drugs that decrease the intragastric acidity, the absorption of drugs such as ampicillin esters, ketoconazole, atazanavir, iron salts, erlotinib, and mycophenolate mofetil (MMF) can decrease, while the absorption of drugs such as digoxin can increase during treatment with DEXILANT.
                        DEXILANT is likely to substantially decrease the systemic concentrations of the HIV protease inhibitor atazanavir, which is dependent upon the presence of gastric acid for absorption, and may result in a loss of therapeutic effect of atazanavir and the development of HIV resistance. Therefore, DEXILANT should not be co-administered with atazanavir. 
                        Co-administration of PPIs in healthy subjects and in transplant patients receiving MMF has been reported to reduce the exposure to the active metabolite, mycophenolic acid (MPA), possibly due to a decrease in MMF solubility at an increased gastric pH.  The clinical relevance of reduced MPA exposure on organ rejection has not been established in transplant patients receiving PPIs and MMF.  Use DEXILANT with caution in transplant patients receiving MMF.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 Warfarin
                     
                        Co-administration of DEXILANT 90 mg and warfarin 25 mg did not affect the pharmacokinetics of warfarin or INR [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)]. However, there have been reports of increased INR and prothrombin time in patients receiving PPIs and warfarin concomitantly. Increases in INR and prothrombin time may lead to abnormal bleeding and even death. Patients treated with DEXILANT and warfarin concomitantly may need to be monitored for increases in INR and prothrombin time.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3 Tacrolimus
                     
                        Concomitant administration of dexlansoprazole and tacrolimus may increase whole blood levels of tacrolimus, especially in transplant patients who are intermediate or poor metabolizers of CYP2C19.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4 Clopidogrel
                     
                        Concomitant administration of dexlansoprazole and clopidogrel in healthy subjects had no clinically important effect on exposure to the active metabolite of clopidogrel or clopidogrel-induced platelet inhibition [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)]. No dose adjustment of clopidogrel is necessary when administered with an approved dose of DEXILANT.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.5 Methotrexate
                     
                        Case reports, published population pharmacokinetic studies, and retrospective analyses suggest that concomitant administration of PPIs and methotrexate (primarily at high dose; see methotrexate prescribing information) may elevate and prolong serum levels of methotrexate and/or its metabolite hydroxymethotrexate. However, no formal drug interaction studies of high-dose methotrexate with PPIs have been conducted [see Warnings and Precautions (5.7)].
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         