
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Perflutren lipid microspheres exhibit lower acoustic impedance than blood and enhance the intrinsic backscatter of blood. These physical acoustic properties of activated DEFINITY速 provide contrast enhancement of the left ventricular chamber and aid delineation of the left ventricular endocardial border during echocardiography.
                        In animal models the acoustic properties of activated DEFINITY速 were established at or below a mechanical index of 0.7 (1.8 MHz frequency). In clinical trials, the majority of the patients were imaged at or below a mechanical index of 0.8.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        Human pharmacokinetics information is not available for the intact or degassed lipid microspheres. The pharmacokinetics of octafluoropropane gas (OFP) was evaluated in healthy subjects (n=8) after the IV administration of activated DEFINITY速 at a 50 microL/kg dose.
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              12.2.1	Distribution
                              OFP gas binding to plasma proteins or partitioning into blood cells has not been studied.  However, OFP protein binding is expected to be minimal due to its low partition coefficient into whole blood.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              12.2.2	Metabolism
                              OFP is a stable gas that is not metabolized. The phospholipid components of the microspheres are thought to be metabolized to free fatty acids.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              12.2.3	Elimination
                              OFP was not detectable after 10 minutes in most subjects either in the blood or in expired air.  OFP concentrations in blood were shown to decline in a mono-exponential fashion with a mean half-life of 1.3 minutes in healthy subjects.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              12.2.4	Special Populations
                              The pharmacokinetics of octafluoropropane gas (OFP) was evaluated in subjects (n=11) with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). The mean half-life of OFP in blood was 1.9 minutes. The total lung clearance of OFP was similar to that in healthy subjects.
                              The pharmacokinetics of activated DEFINITY速 has not been studied in subjects with hepatic diseases or congestive heart failure.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         