
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Thallous Chloride Tl 201 with no carrier added accumulates in viable myocardium in a manner analogous to that of potassium.  Experiments in human volunteers using labeled microspheres have shown that the myocardial distribution of Thallous Chloride Tl 201 correlates well with regional perfusion.
                        In clinical studies, Thallous Chloride Tl 201 images have been found to visualize areas of infarction as “cold” or nonlabeled regions which are confirmed by electrocardiographic and enzyme changes. Regions of transient myocardial ischemia corresponding to areas perfused by coronary arteries with partial stenoses have been visualized when Thallous Chloride Tl 201 was administered in conjunction with an exercise stress test. Anatomic configurations may interfere with visualization of the right coronary artery.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        After intravenous administration, Thallous Chloride Tl 201 clears rapidly from the blood with maximal concentration by normal myocardium occurring at about 10 minutes. It will, in addition, localize in parathyroid adenomas; it is not specific since it will localize to a lesser extent in sites of parathyroid hyperplasia and other abnormal tissues such as thyroid adenoma, neoplasia (e.g., parathyroid carcinoma) and sarcoid. Biodistribution is generally proportional to organ blood flow at the time of injection. Blood clearance of Thallous Chloride Tl 201 is primarily by the myocardium, thyroid, liver, kidneys and stomach with the remainder distributing fairly uniformly throughout the body. The dosimetry data in Table 1 reflect this distribution pattern and are based on a biological half-life of 2.4 days. Thallous Chloride Tl 201 is excreted slowly and to an equal extent in both feces and urine.
                        Five minutes after intravenous administration only 5 to 8 percent of injected activity remained in the blood. A biexponential disappearance curve was obtained, with 91.5 percent of the blood radioactivity disappearing with a half-time of about 5 minutes. The remainder had a half-time of about 40 hours.
                        Approximately 4 to 8 percent of the injected dose was excreted in the urine in the first 24 hours. The whole body disappearance half-time was 9.8 ± 2.5 days. Kidney concentration was found to be about 3 percent of the injected activity and the testicular content was 0.15 percent. Net thyroid activity was determined to be only 0.2 percent of the injected dose, and the activity disappeared in 24 hours. From anterior and posterior whole-body scans, it was determined that about 45 percent of the injected dose was in the large intestines and contiguous structures (liver, kidneys, abdominal musculature).
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         