
                     
                     
                     DRUG INTERACTIONS
                     
                        Since nicardipine HCl injection may be administered to patients already being treated with other medications, including other antihypertensive agents, careful monitoring of these patients is necessary to detect and promptly treat any undesired effects from concomitant administration.
                        BETA-BLOCKERS
                        In most patients, nicardipine HCl injection can safely be used concomitantly with beta-blockers. However, caution should be exercised when using nicardipine HCl injection in combination with a beta-blocker in congestive heart failure patients (see “Warnings”).
                        CIMETIDINE
                        Cimetidine has been shown to increase nicardipine plasma concentrations with nicardipine HCl capsule administration. Patients receiving the two drugs concomitantly should be carefully monitored. Data with other histamine-2 antagonists are not available.
                        DIGOXIN
                        Studies have shown that nicardipine HCl capsules usually do not alter digoxin plasma concentrations.  However, as a precaution, digoxin levels should be evaluated when concomitant therapy with nicardipine HCl injection is initiated.
                        FENTANYL ANESTHESIA
                        Hypotension has been reported during fentanyl anesthesia with concomitant use of a beta-blocker and a calcium channel blocker. Even though such interactions were not seen during clinical studies with nicardipine HCl injection an increased volume of circulating fluids might be required if such an interaction were to occur.
                        CYCLOSPORINE
                        Concomitant administration of nicardipine HCl  capsules and cyclosporine results in elevated plasma cyclosporine levels. Plasma concentrations of cyclosporine should therefore be closely monitored during nicardipine HCl injection administration, and the dose of cyclosporine reduced accordingly.
                        
                           IN VITRO INTERACTION
                        The plasma protein binding of nicardipine was not altered when therapeutic concentrations of furosemide, propranolol, dipyridamole, warfarin, quinidine, or naproxen were added to human plasma in vitro.

                        
                     
                  
               