
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  
                     General
                  
                  In animal studies, flutamide demonstrates potent antiandrogenic effects. It exerts its antiandrogenic action by inhibiting androgen uptake and/or by inhibiting nuclear binding of androgen in target tissues or both. Prostatic carcinoma is known to be androgen-sensitive and responds to treatment that counteracts the effect of androgen and/or removes the source of androgen, e.g., castration. Elevations of plasma testosterone and estradiol levels have been noted following flutamide administration.
                  
                     Pharmacokinetics
                  
                  
                     Absorption
                  
                  Analysis of plasma, urine, and feces following a single oral 200 mg dose of tritium-labeled flutamide to human volunteers showed that the drug is rapidly and completely absorbed. Following a single 250 mg oral dose to normal adult volunteers, the biologically active alpha-hydroxylated metabolite reaches maximum plasma concentrations in about 2 hours, indicating that it is rapidly formed from flutamide. Food has no effect on the bioavailability of flutamide.
                  
                     Distribution
                  
                  In male rats administered an oral 5 mg/kg dose of14C-flutamide neither flutamide nor any of its metabolites is preferentially accumulated in any tissue except the prostate. Total drug levels were highest 6 hours after drug administration in all tissues. Levels declined at roughly similar rates to low levels at 18 hours. The major metabolite was present at higher concentrations than flutamide in all tissues studied. Following a single 250 mg oral dose to normal adult volunteers, low plasma concentrations of flutamide were detected. The plasma half-life for the alpha-hydroxylated metabolite of flutamide is approximately 6 hours. Flutamide,in vivo, at steady-state plasma concentrations of 24 to 78 ng/mL, is 94% to 96% bound to plasma proteins. The active metabolite of flutamide, in vivo, at steady-state plasma concentrations of 1556 to 2284 ng/mL, is 92% to 94% bound to plasma proteins.
                  
                     Metabolism
                  
                  The composition of plasma radioactivity, following a single 200 mg oral dose of tritium-labeled flutamide to normal adult volunteers, showed that flutamide is rapidly and extensively metabolized, with flutamide comprising only 2.5% of plasma radioactivity 1 hour after administration. At least six metabolites have been identified in plasma. The major plasma metabolite is a biologically active alpha-hydroxylated derivative which accounts for 23% of the plasma tritium 1 hour after drug administration. The major urinary metabolite is 2-amino-5nitro-4-(trifluoromethyl)phenol.
                  
                     Excretion
                  
                  Flutamide and its metabolites are excreted mainly in the urine with only 4.2% of a single dose excreted in the feces over 72 hours.
                  Plasma Pharmacokinetics of Flutamide and Hydroxyflutamide in Geriatric Volunteers (mean ± SD)
                  


                  



                     Special Populations
                  
                  
                     Geriatri
                     c Following multiple oral dosing of 250 mg t.i.d. in normal geriatric volunteers, flutamide and its active metabolite approached steady-state plasma levels (based on pharmacokinetic simulations) after the fourth flutamide dose. The half-life of the active metabolite in geriatric volunteers after a single flutamide dose is about 8 hours and at steady-state in 9.6 hours.
                  
                     Rac
                     e There are no known alterations in flutamide absorption, distribution, metabolism, or excretion due to race.
                  
                     Renal Impairmen
                     t Following a single 250 mg dose of flutamide administered to subjects with chronic renal insufficiency, there appeared to be no correlation between creatinine clearance and either Cmaxor AUC of flutamide. Renal impairment did not have an effect on the Cmaxor AUC of the biologically active alpha- hydroxylated metabolite of flutamide. In subjects with creatinine clearance of < 29 mL/min, the half-life of the active metabolite was slightly prolonged. Flutamide and its active metabolite were not well dialyzed. Dose adjustment in patients with chronic renal insufficiency is not warranted.
                  
                     Hepatic Impairmen
                     t No information on the pharmacokinetics of flutamide in hepatic impairment is available (seeBOXED WARNING, Hepatic Injury).
                  
                     Women, Pediatric
                     s Flutamide has not been studied in women or pediatric subjects.
                  
                     Drug-Drug Interactions
                  
                  Interactions between flutamide capsules and LHRH-agonists have not occurred. Increases in prothrombin time have been noted in patients receiving warfarin therapy (seePRECAUTIONS).
                  
               
               
            
         