
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Absorption and Excretion
                     
                        
Cefpodoxime proxetil is a prodrug that is absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract and de-esterified to its active metabolite, cefpodoxime. Following oral administration of 100 mg of cefpodoxime proxetil to fasting subjects, approximately 50% of the administered cefpodoxime dose was absorbed systemically. Over the recommended dosing range (100 to 400 mg), approximately 29 to 33% of the administered cefpodoxime dose was excreted unchanged in the urine in 12 hours. There is minimal metabolism of cefpodoxime in vivo.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Effects of Food
                     
                        
The extent of absorption (mean AUC) and the mean peak plasma concentration increased when film-coated tablets were administered with food. Following a 200 mg tablet dose taken with food, the AUC was 21 to 33% higher than under fasting conditions, and the peak plasma concentration averaged 3.1 mcg/mL in fed subjects versus 2.6 mcg/mL in fasted subjects. Time to peak concentration was not significantly different between fed and fasted subjects.

                        
When a 200 mg dose of the suspension was taken with food, the extent of absorption (mean AUC) and mean peak plasma concentration in fed subjects were not significantly different from fasted subjects, but the rate of absorption was slower with food (48% increase in Tmax).
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Pharmacokinetics of Cefpodoxime Proxetil Film-coated Tablets
                     
                        
Over the recommended dosing range, (100 to 400 mg), the rate and extent of cefpodoxime absorption exhibited dose-dependency; dose-normalized Cmax and AUC decreased by up to 32% with increasing dose. Over the recommended dosing range, the Tmax was approximately 2 to 3 hours and the T1/2 ranged from 2.09 to 2.84 hours. Mean Cmax was 1.4 mcg/mL for the 100 mg dose, 2.3 mcg/mL for the 200 mg dose, and 3.9 mcg/mL for the 400 mg dose. In patients with normal renal function, neither accumulation nor significant changes in other pharmacokinetic parameters were noted following multiple oral doses of up to 400 mg Q 12 hours.

                        

                        


                     



                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Pharmacokinetics of Cefpodoxime Proxetil Suspension
                     
                        
In adult subjects, a 100 mg dose of oral suspension produced an average peak cefpodoxime concentration of approximately 1.5 mcg/mL (range: 1.1 to 2.1 mcg/mL), which is equivalent to that reported following administration of the 100 mg tablet. Time to peak plasma concentration and area under the plasma concentration-time curve (AUC) for the oral suspension were also equivalent to those produced with film-coated tablets in adults following a 100 mg oral dose.

                        
The pharmacokinetics of cefpodoxime were investigated in 29 patients aged 1 to 17 years. Each patient received a single, oral, 5 mg/kg dose of cefpodoxime oral suspension. Plasma and urine samples were collected for 12 hours after dosing. The plasma levels reported from this study are as follows:

                        

                        


                     



                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Distribution
                     
                        
Protein binding of cefpodoxime ranges from 22 to 33% in serum and from 21 to 29% in plasma.
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Skin Blister
                           
                              
Following multiple-dose administration every 12 hours for 5 days of 200 mg or 400 mg cefpodoxime proxetil, the mean maximum cefpodoxime concentration in skin blister fluid averaged 1.6 and 2.8 mcg/mL, respectively. Skin blister fluid cefpodoxime levels at 12 hours after dosing averaged 0.2 and 0.4 mcg/mL for the 200 mg and 400 mg multiple-dose regimens, respectively.
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Tonsil Tissue
                           
                              
Following a single, oral 100 mg cefpodoxime proxetil film-coated tablet, the mean maximum cefpodoxime concentration in tonsil tissue averaged 0.24 mcg/g at 4 hours post-dosing and 0.09 mcg/g at 7 hours post-dosing. Equilibrium was achieved between plasma and tonsil tissue within 4 hours of dosing. No detection of cefpodoxime in tonsillar tissue was reported 12 hours after dosing. These results demonstrated that concentrations of cefpodoxime exceeded the MIC90 of S. pyogenes for at least 7 hours after dosing of 100 mg of cefpodoxime proxetil.
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Lung Tissue
                           
                              
Following a single, oral 200 mg cefpodoxime proxetil film-coated tablet, the mean maximum cefpodoxime concentration in lung tissue averaged 0.63 mcg/g at 3 hours post-dosing, 0.52 mcg/g at 6 hours post-dosing, and 0.19 mcg/g at 12 hours post-dosing. The results of this study indicated that cefpodoxime penetrated into lung tissue and produced sustained drug concentrations for at least 12 hours after dosing at levels that exceeded the MIC90 for S. pneumoniae and H. influenzae.
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           CSF
                           
                              
Adequate data on CSF levels of cefpodoxime are not available.
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Effects of Decreased Renal Function
                     
                        

                        Elimination of cefpodoxime is reduced in patients with moderate to severe renal impairment (<50 mL/min creatinine clearance). (See 
                              PRECAUTIONS
                            and 
                              DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION.) In subjects with mild impairment of renal function (50 to 80 mL/min creatinine clearance), the average plasma half-life of cefpodoxime was 3.5 hours. In subjects with moderate (30 to 49 mL/min creatinine clearance) or severe renal impairment (5 to 29 mL/min creatinine clearance), the half-life increased to 5.9 and 9.8 hours, respectively. Approximately 23% of the administered dose was cleared from the body during a standard 3-hour hemodialysis procedure.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Effect of Hepatic Impairment (cirrhosis)
                     
                        
Absorption was somewhat diminished and elimination unchanged in patients with cirrhosis. The mean cefpodoxime T1/2 and renal clearance in cirrhotic patients were similar to those derived in studies of healthy subjects. Ascites did not appear to affect values in cirrhotic subjects. No dosage adjustment is recommended in this patient population.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Pharmacokinetics in Elderly Subjects
                     
                        
Elderly subjects do not require dosage adjustments unless they have diminished renal function. (See 
                           PRECAUTIONS.) In healthy geriatric subjects, cefpodoxime half-life in plasma averaged 4.2 hours (vs 3.3 in younger subjects) and urinary recovery averaged 21% after a 400 mg dose was administered every 12 hours. Other pharmacokinetic parameters (Cmax, AUC, and Tmax) were unchanged relative to those observed in healthy young subjects.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Microbiology
                     
                        
Cefpodoxime is active against a wide-spectrum of Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria. Cefpodoxime is stable in the presence of beta-lactamase enzymes. As a result, many organisms resistant to penicillins and cephalosporins, due to their production of beta-lactamase, may be susceptible to cefpodoxime. Cefpodoxime is inactivated by certain extended spectrum beta-lactamases.

                        
The bactericidal activity of cefpodoxime results from its inhibition of cell wall synthesis.

                        
Cefpodoxime has been shown to be active against most strains of the following microorganisms, both in vitro and in clinical infections, as described in the 
                           
                              INDICATIONS AND USAGE
                           
                         section.
 

                        Aerobic Gram-positive microorganisms
                        
                           

                           
Staphylococcus aureus (including penicillinase-producing strains)
NOTE: Cefpodoxime is inactive against methicillin-resistant staphylococci

                        Staphylococcus saprophyticus
                        

                        Streptococcus pneumoniae (excluding penicillin-resistant strains)

                        Streptococcus pyogenes
                        
                           

                           
Aerobic Gram-negative microorganisms
                        
                           

                           
Escherichia coli
                        

                        Klebsiella pneumoniae
                        

                        Proteus mirabilis

                        
                        Haemophilus influenzae (including beta-lactamase producing strains)

                        Moraxella (Branhamella) catarrhalis
                        

                        Neisseria gonorrhoeae (including penicillinase-producing strains)

                        
The following in vitro data are available, but their clinical significance is unknown. Cefpodoxime exhibits in vitro minimum inhibitory concentrations (MICs) of ≤ 2 mcg/mL against most (≥90%) of isolates of the following microorganisms. However, the safety and efficacy of cefpodoxime in treating clinical infections due to these microorganisms have not been established in adequate and well controlled clinical trials.
                           

                           
Aerobic Gram-positive microorganisms
                        
                           

                           
Streptococcus agalactiae

                        
                        Streptococcus spp. (Groups C, F, G)
NOTE: Cefpodoxime is inactive against enterococci.
                           

                           
Aerobic Gram-negative microorganisms
                        
                           

                           
Citrobacter diversus

                        
                        Klebsiella oxytoca

                        
                        Proteus vulgaris

                        
                        Providencia rettgeri
                        

                        Haemophilus parainfluenzae

                        NOTE: Cefpodoxime is inactive against most strains of Pseudomonas and Enterobacter.
                           

                           
Anaerobic Gram-positive microorganisms

                        
                        
                           
Peptostreptococcus magnus
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           SUSCEPTIBILITY TESTING
                           
                              

                              
                                 Dilution Techniques:
                               Quantitative methods are used to determine antimicrobial inhibitory concentrations (MICs). These MICs provide estimates of the susceptibility of microorganisms to antimicrobial compounds. The MICs should be determined using a standardized procedure. Standardized procedures are based on dilution methods1,2 (broth or agar) or equivalent using standardized inoculum concentrations, and standardized concentrations of cefpodoxime from a powder of known potency. The MIC values should be interpreted according to the following criteria:
                                 

                                 
For Susceptibility Testing of Enterobacteriaceae and Staphylococcus spp.
                              
                              

                              

                              MIC (mcg/mL)                                                Interpretation
                              
        ≤2                                                            Susceptible (S)
          4                                                            Intermediate (I)
        ≥8                                                            Resistant (R)
                                 

                                 
For Susceptibility Testing of Haemophilus spp.
                              
                              
                                 a
                              
                              

                              

                              MIC (mcg/mL)                                                Interpretation
                              b
                              
        ≤2                                                          Susceptible (S)

                              

                              a  The interpretive criteria for Haemophilus spp. is applicable only to broth microdilution susceptibility testing done with Haemophilus Test Medium (HTM) broth.2
                              

                              b  “Intermediate” and “Resistant” categories have not been determined.
                                 

                                 
For Susceptibility Testing of Neisseria gonorrhoeae.
                              
                                 c
                              
                              

                              

                              MIC (mcg/mL)                                                Interpretation
                              d
                              
        ≤0.5                                                         Susceptible (S)

                              

                              c  The interpretive value for N. gonorroheae is applicable only to agar dilution susceptibility testing done with Neisseria gonorrhoeae susceptibility test medium.2
                              

                              d  “Intermediate” and “Resistant” categories have not been determined.
                                 

                                 
For Susceptibility Testing of Streptococcus pneumoniae.
                              

                              

                              MIC (mcg/mL)                                                Interpretation
                              e
                              
         ≤0.5                                                       Susceptible (S)
           1                                                          Intermediate (I)
         ≥2                                                          Resistant (R)

                              

                              e The interpretive value for S. pneumoniae is applicable only to broth microdilution susceptibility testing done with cation-adjusted Mueller-Hinton broth with lysed horse blood (LHB) (2 to 5% v/v).2
                              
                                 

                                 
For Susceptibility Testing of Streptococcus spp. other than Streptococcus pneumoniae.
                              
                              
                                 f
                              
                              

                              
A streptococcal isolate that is susceptible to penicillin (MIC ≤0.12 mcg/mL) can be considered susceptible to cefpodoxime for approved indications, and need not be tested against cefpodoxime.

                              

                              f  The interpretive value for Streptococcus spp. is applicable only to broth microdilution susceptibility testing done with cation-adjusted Mueller-Hinton broth with lysed horse blood (LHB) (2 to 5% v/v).2
                              

                              
A report of “Susceptible” indicates that the pathogen is likely to be inhibited if the concentration of the antimicrobial compound in the blood reaches usually achievable levels. A report of “Intermediate” indicates that the results should be considered equivocal, and, if the microorganism is not fully susceptible to alternative, clinically feasible drugs, the test should be repeated. This category implies possible clinical applicability in body sites where the drug is physiologically concentrated or in situations where high dosage of drug can be used. This category also provides a buffer zone which prevents small technical factors from causing major discrepancies in interpretation. A report of “Resistant” indicates that the pathogen is not likely to be inhibited if the antimicrobial compound in the blood reaches the concentrations usually achievable; other therapy should be selected.

                              

                              Quality Control
                              

                              
A standardized susceptibility test procedure requires the use of laboratory control organisms to control the technical aspects of the laboratory procedures. Standard cefpodoxime powder should provide the following MIC values with the indicated quality control strains:

                              

                              Microorganism (ATCC
                              ®
                              #)                                MIC Range (mcg/mL)
                              

                              Escherichia coli (25922)                                                0.25 - 1

                              Staphylococcus aureus (29213)                                       1 - 8

                              Haemophilus influenzae (49247)                                0.25 - 1g
                              

                              Neisseria gonorrhoeae (49226)                                 0.03 - 0.12h
                              

                              Streptococcus pneumoniae (49619)j                          0.03 - 0.12i
                              

                              

                              g These quality control ranges are applicable to tests performed by a broth microdilution procedure using Haemophilus Test Medium (HTM).

                              h These quality control ranges are applicable to tests performed by agar dilution only using GC agar base with 1% defined growth supplement.

                              i These quality control ranges are applicable to tests performed by the broth microdilution method only using cation-adjusted Mueller-Hinton broth with 2 to 5% lysed horse blood.

                              j When susceptibility testing Streptococcus pneumoniae or Streptococcus spp. this quality control strain should be tested.

                              

                              
                                 Diffusion Techniques
                                 :
                               Quantitative methods that require measurement of zone diameters also provide reproducible estimates of the susceptibility of bacteria to antimicrobial compounds. One such standardized procedure3 requires the use of standardized inoculum concentrations. This procedure uses paper disks impregnated with 10 mcg cefpodoxime to test the susceptibility of microorganisms to cefpodoxime. Reports from the laboratory providing results of the standard single-disk susceptibility test with a 10 mcg cefpodoxime disk should be interpreted according to the following criteria:
                                 

                                 
For Susceptibility Testing of Enterobacteriaceae and Staphylococcus spp.
                              

                              

                              Zone Diameter (mm)                                        Interpretation
                              
           ≥21                                                      Susceptible (S)
        18-20                                                      Intermediate (I)
          ≤17                                                       Resistant (R)
                                 

                                 
For Susceptibility Testing of Haemophilus spp.
                              
                                 k
                              
                              

                              

                              Zone Diameter (mm)                                        Interpretation
                              l
                              
           ≥21                                                       Susceptible (S)

                              

                              k  The zone diameter for Haemophilus spp. is applicable only to tests performed on Haemophilus Test Medium (HTM) agar incubated under 5% CO2.2
                              

                              l   “Intermediate” and “Resistant” criteria have not been determined.
                                 

                                 
For Susceptibility Testing of Neisseria gonorrhoeae.
                              
                                 m
                                 

                              
                              

                              Zone Diameter (mm)                                       Interpretation
                              n
                              
         ≥29                                                       Susceptible (S)

                              m  The zone diameter for N. gonorrhoeae isapplicable only to tests performed on GC agar base and 1% defined growth supplement incubated under 5% CO2.2
                              

                              n  “Intermediate” and “Resistant” categories have not been determined.
                                 

                                 
For Susceptibility Testing of Streptococcus pneumoniae.
                              
                                 o
                              
                              

                              
Isolates of pneumococci with oxacillin zone sizes of ≥20 mm are susceptible (MIC ≤0.06 mcg/mL) to penicillin and can be considered susceptible to cefpodoxime for approved indications, and cefpodoxime need not be tested.

                              

                              o The zone diameter for S. pneumoniae is applicable only to tests performed on Mueller-Hinton agar with 5% sheep blood incubated in 5% CO2.2
                              
                              

                              

                              For Susceptibility Testing of Streptococcus spp. other than Streptococcus pneumoniae.p
                              
                              

                              
A streptococcal isolate that is susceptible to penicillin (zone diameter ≥28 mm) can be considered susceptible to cefpodoxime for approved indications, and cefpodoxime need not be tested.

                              

                              p The zone diameter for Streptococcus spp. is applicable only to tests performed on Mueller-Hinton agar with 5% sheep blood incubated in 5% CO2.2
                              

                              

                              Quality Control
                              

                              
As with standardized dilution techniques, diffusion methods require the use of laboratory control microorganisms that are used to control the technical aspects of the laboratory procedures. For the diffusion technique, the 10 mcg cefpodoxime disk should provide the following zone diameters with the quality control strains listed below:

                              

                              Microorganism (ATCC
                              ®
                              #)                              Zone Diameter Range (mm)
                              
                                 
Escherichia coli (25922)                                             23-28

                              Staphylococcus aureus (25923)                                   19-25

                              Haemophilus influenzae (49247)                                25-31q
                              

                              Neisseria gonorrhoeae (49226)                                  35-43r
                              

                              Streptococcus pneumoniae (49619)t                          28-34s
                              

                              

                              q  This zone diameter range is only applicable to tests performed on Haemophilus Test Medium (HTM) agar incubated in 5% CO2.

                              r  This zone diameter range is only applicable to tests performed on GC agar base and 1% defined growth supplement incubated in 5% CO2.

                              s  This zone diameter range is only applicable to tests performed on Mueller-Hinton agar supplemented with 5% defibrinated sheep blood, incubated in 5% CO2.

                              t  This organism is to be used for quality control testing for both S. pneumoniae and Streptococcus spp. 

                              
ATCC® is a registered trademark of the American Type Culture Collection.
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         