
               
               
               7. Drug Interactions

               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           CYP2D6 enzyme inhibitors may increase nebivolol levels (7.1)

                           Reserpine or clonidine may produce excessive reduction of sympathetic activity. (7.2)

                           Both digitalis glycosides and β-blockers slow atrioventricular conduction and decrease heart rate.  Concomitant use can increase the risk of bradycardia. (7.3)

                           Verapamil- or diltiazem-type calcium channel blockers may cause excessive reductions in heart rate, blood pressure, and cardiac contractility. (7.4)

                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 CYP2D6 Inhibitors

                     
                        Use caution when BYSTOLIC is co-administered with CYP2D6 inhibitors (quinidine, propafenone, fluoxetine, paroxetine, etc.) [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.5)].
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 Hypotensive Agents

                     
                        Do not use BYSTOLIC with other β-blockers. Closely monitor patients receiving catecholamine-depleting drugs, such as reserpine or guanethidine, because the added β-blocking action of BYSTOLIC may produce excessive reduction of sympathetic activity. In patients who are receiving BYSTOLIC and clonidine, discontinue BYSTOLIC for several days before the gradual tapering of clonidine.

                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3 Digitalis Glycosides

                     
                        Both digitalis glycosides and β-blockers slow atrioventricular conduction and decrease heart rate.  Concomitant use can increase the risk of bradycardia.

                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4 Calcium Channel Blockers

                     
                        BYSTOLIC can exacerbate the effects of myocardial depressants or inhibitors of AV conduction, such as certain calcium antagonists (particularly of the phenylalkylamine [verapamil] and benzothiazepine [diltiazem] classes), or antiarrhythmic agents, such as disopyramide.

                     
                     
                  
               
            
         