
               
               
               
                  7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  Trospium is metabolized by ester hydrolysis and excreted by the kidneys through a combination of tubular secretion and glomerular filtration. Based on in vitro data, no clinically relevant metabolic drug-drug interactions are anticipated with trospium. However, some drugs which are actively secreted by the kidney may interact with trospium by competing for renal tubular secretion.
                  The concomitant use of trospium chloride extended-release capsules with other antimuscarinic agents that produce dry mouth, constipation, and other anticholinergic effects may increase the frequency and/or severity of such effects. Trospium chloride extended-release capsules may potentially alter the absorption of some concomitantly administered drugs due to anticholinergic effects on gastrointestinal motility.
               
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           Some drugs which are actively secreted by the kidney may interact with trospium by competing for renal tubular secretion. (7) 

                           Concomitant use with digoxin did not affect the pharmacokinetics of either drug. (7.1) 

                           Exposure to trospium on average was comparable in the presence of and without antacid, however, some individuals demonstrated increases or decreases in trospium exposure in the presence of antacid. The clinical relevance of these findings is not known. (7.2) 

                           Concomitant use with metformin immediate release tablets reduced exposure and peak concentration of trospium. (7.3)
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        7.1 Digoxin
                     
                     
                        Concomitant use of trospium chloride 20 mg twice daily and digoxin did not affect the pharmacokinetics of either drug [see Clinical Pharmacology  (12.3)].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        7.2 Antacid
                     
                     
                        While the systemic exposure of trospium on average was comparable with and without antacid containing aluminum hydroxide and magnesium carbonate, 5 out of 11 individuals in a drug interaction study demonstrated either an increase or decrease in trospium exposure, in presence of antacid. The clinical relevance of these findings is not known [see 
                                 Clinical Pharmacology
                               (12.3)].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        7.3 Metformin
                     
                     
                        Co-administration of 500 mg metformin immediate release tablets twice daily reduced the steady-state systemic exposure of trospium by approximately 29% for mean AUC0-24 and by 34% for mean Cmax. The effect of a decrease in trospium exposure on the efficacy of trospium chloride extended-release capsules is unknown. The steady-state pharmacokinetics of metformin were comparable when administered with or without 60 mg trospium chloride extended-release capsules once daily under fasted condition. The effect of metformin at higher doses on trospium PK is unknown [see 
                                 Clinical Pharmacology
                               (12.3)].
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         