
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  Ipratropium Bromide and Albuterol Sulfate Inhalation Solution is 
a combination of the β2-adrenergic bronchodilator, 
albuterol sulfate, and the anticholinergic bronchodilator, ipratropium 
bromide.
                  
                  
                  Albuterol sulfate
                  
                  Mechanism of ActionThe prime action of β-adrenergic drugs is to stimulate adenyl 
cyclase, the enzyme that catalyzes the formation of cyclic-3’,5’-adenosine 
monophosphate (cAMP) from adenosine triphosphate (ATP). The cAMP thus formed 
mediates the cellular responses. In vitro studies and in vivo pharmacologic 
studies have demonstrated that albuterol has a preferential effect on β2-adrenergic receptors compared with isoproterenol. While it is 
recognized that β2-adrenergic receptors are the 
predominant receptors in bronchial smooth muscle, recent data indicated that 10% 
to 50% of the β-receptors in the human heart may be β2-receptors. The precise function of these receptors, however, 
is not yet established. Albuterol has been shown in most controlled clinical 
trials to have more effect on the respiratory tract, in the form of bronchial 
smooth muscle relaxation, than isoproterenol at comparable doses while producing 
fewer cardiovascular effects. Controlled clinical studies and other clinical 
experience have shown that inhaled albuterol, like other β-adrenergic agonist 
drugs, can produce a significant cardiovascular effect in some patients. 
                  
                  
                  PharmacokineticsAlbuterol sulfate is longer acting than isoproterenol in most 
patients by any route of administration, because it is not a substrate for the 
cellular uptake processes for catecholamine nor for the metabolism of 
catechol-O-methyl transferase. Instead the drug is conjugatively metabolized to 
albuterol 4’-O-sulfate.
                  
                  
                  Animal Pharmacology/ToxicologyIntravenous studies in rats with albuterol sulfate have 
demonstrated that albuterol crosses the blood-brain barrier and reaches brain 
concentrations amounting to approximately 5% of plasma concentrations. In 
structures outside of the blood-brain barrier (pineal and pituitary glands), 
albuterol concentrations were found to be 100 times those found in whole 
brain.
                  Studies in laboratory animals (minipigs, rodents, and dogs) have demonstrated 
the occurrence of cardiac arrythmias and sudden death (with histological 
evidence of myocardial necrosis) when beta-agonists and methyl-xanthines are 
administered concurrently. The clinical significance of these findings is 
unknown.
                  
                  
                  Ipratropium bromide
                  
                  Mechanism of ActionIpratropium bromide is an anticholinergic (parasympatholytic) 
agent, which blocks the muscarinic receptors of acetylcholine, and, based on 
animal studies, appears to inhibit vagally mediated reflexes by antagonizing the 
action of acetylcholine, the transmitter agent released from the vagus nerve. 
Anticholinergics prevent the increases in intracellular concentration of cyclic 
guanosine monophosphate (cGMP), resulting from the interaction of acetylcholine 
with the muscarinic receptors of bronchial smooth muscle.
                  
                  
                  PharmacokineticsThe bronchodilation following inhalation of ipratropium is 
primarily a local, site-specific effect, not a systemic one. Much of an inhaled 
dose is swallowed as shown by fecal excretion studies. Following nebulization of 
a 1-mg dose to healthy volunteers, a mean of 4% of the dose was excreted 
unchanged in the urine.
                  Ipratropium bromide is minimally (0% to 9% in vitro) bound to plasma albumin 
and α1-acid glycoproteins. It is partially metabolized to 
inactive ester hydrolysis products. Following intravenous administration, 
approximately one-half is excreted unchanged in the urine. The half-life of 
elimination is about 1.6 hours after intravenous administration. Ipratropium 
bromide that reaches the systemic circulation is reportedly removed by the 
kidneys rapidly at a rate that exceeds the glomerular filtration rate. The 
pharmacokinetics of Ipratropium Bromide and Albuterol Sulfate Inhalation 
Solution or ipratropium bromide have not been studied in the elderly and in 
patients with hepatic or renal insufficiency (see PRECAUTIONS).
                  
                  
                  Animal Pharmacology/ToxicologyAutoradiographic studies in rats have shown that ipratropium does 
not penetrate the blood-brain barrier.
                  
                  
                  Ipratropium Bromide 0.5 mg and Albuterol Sulfate 3.0 
mg
                  
                  Mechanism of ActionIpratropium Bromide and Albuterol Sulfate is expected to maximize 
the response to treatment in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 
(COPD) by reducing bronchospasm through two distinctly different mechanisms: 
sympathomimetic (albuterol sulfate) and anticholinergic/parasympatholytic 
(ipratropium bromide). Simultaneous administration of both an anticholinergic 
and a ß2-sympathomimetic is designed to produce greater 
bronchodilation effects than when either drug is utilized alone at its 
recommended dosage.
                  
                  
                  Animal Pharmacology/ToxicologyIn 30-day studies in Sprague-Dawley rats and Beagle dogs, 
subcutaneous doses of up to 205.5 mcg/kg of ipratropium administered with up to 
1000 mcg/kg albuterol in rats and 3.16 mcg/kg ipratropium and 15 mcg/kg 
albuterol in dogs (less than the maximum recommended daily inhalation dose for 
adults on a mg/m2 basis) did not cause death or 
potentiation of the cardiotoxicity induced by albuterol administered 
alone.
                  
                  
                  PharmacokineticsIn a double blind, double period, crossover study, 15 male and 
female subjects were administered single doses of Ipratropium Bromide and 
Albuterol Sulfate or albuterol sulfate inhalation solution at two times the 
recommended single doses as two inhalations separated by 15 minutes. The total 
nebulized dose of albuterol sulfate from both treatments was 6.0 mg and the 
total dose of ipratropium bromide from Ipratropium Bromide and Albuterol Sulfate 
was 1.0 mg. Peak albuterol plasma concentrations occurred at 0.8 hours after 
dosing for both treatments. The mean peak albuterol concentration following 
administration of albuterol sulfate alone was 4.86 (± 2.65) mg/mL and it was 
4.65 (± 2.92) mg/mL for Ipratropium Bromide and Albuterol Sulfate. Mean AUC 
values for the two treatments were 26.6 (± 15.2) ng•hr/mL (albuterol sulfate 
alone) versus 24.2 (± 14.5) ng•hr/mL (Ipratropium Bromide and Albuterol 
Sulfate). The mean t1/2 values were 7.2 (± 1.3) hours 
(albuterol sulfate alone) and 6.7 (± 1.7) hours (Ipratropium Bromide and 
Albuterol Sulfate). A mean of 8.4 (± 8.9)% of the albuterol dose was excreted 
unchanged in urine following administration of two vials of Ipratropium Bromide 
and Albuterol Sulfate which is similar to 8.8 (± 7.3)% that was obtained from 
albuterol sulfate inhalation solution. There were no statistically significant 
differences in the pharmacokinetics of albuterol between the two treatments. For 
ipratropium, a mean of 3.9 (± 5.1)% of the ipratropium bromide dose was excreted 
unchanged in urine following two vials of Ipratropium Bromide and Albuterol 
Sulfate Inhalation Solution, which is comparable with previously reported 
data.
               
               
               
                  
                     image of Figure 3.1-3
                     
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        Clinical TrialsIn a 12 week, randomized, double-blind, positive-control, 
crossover study of albuterol sulfate, ipratropium bromide, and Ipratropium 
Bromide and Albuterol Sulfate, 863 COPD patients were evaluated for 
bronchodilator efficacy comparing Ipratropium Bromide and Albuterol Sulfate with 
albuterol sulfate and ipratropium bromide alone.
                        Ipratropium Bromide and Albuterol Sulfate demonstrated significantly better 
changes in FEV1, as measured from baseline to peak 
response, when compared with either albuterol sulfate or ipratropium bromide. 
Ipratropium Bromide and Albuterol Sulfate was also shown to have the rapid onset 
associated with albuterol sulfate, with a mean time to peak FEV1 of 1.5 hours, and the extended duration associated with 
ipratropium bromide with a duration of 15% response in FEV1 of 4.3 hours.
                        
                           
                        
                        
                        Figure 3.1-3. Mean Change in FEV1 - Measured on Day 14
                        This study demonstrated that each component of Ipratropium Bromide and 
Albuterol Sulfate contributed to the improvement in pulmonary function, 
especially during the first 4 to 5 hours after dosing, and that Ipratropium 
Bromide and Albuterol Sulfate was significantly more effective than albuterol 
sulfate or ipratropium bromide alone.
                     
                  
               
            
         