
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        The mechanism of action of DICLEGIS is unknown.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        The pharmacokinetics of DICLEGIS has been characterized in healthy non-pregnant adult women. Pharmacokinetic results for doxylamine and pyridoxine, including its vitamin B6 metabolites, pyridoxal, pyridoxal 5’-phosphate, pyridoxamine and pyridoxamine 5’-phosphate, are summarized in Tables 2 to 5.
                        
                           Absorption
                        
                        A single-dose (two tablets) and multiple-dose (four tablets daily), open-label study was conducted to assess the safety and pharmacokinetic profile of DICLEGIS administered in healthy non-pregnant adult women. Single-doses (two tablets at bedtime) were administered on Days 1 and 2. Multiple-doses (one tablet in the morning, one tablet in the afternoon and two tablets at bedtime) were administered on Days 3-18. 
                        Blood samples for pharmacokinetic analysis were collected pre-and post-dose on Days 2 and 18 as well as pre-dose prior to bedtime dose only (trough) on Days 9, 10, 11, 16, 17, and 18. 
                        Doxylamine and pyridoxine are absorbed in the gastrointestinal tract, mainly in the jejunum. 
                        The Cmax of doxylamine and pyridoxine are achieved within 7.5 and 5.5 hours, respectively (see Table 2). 
                        


                        


Multiple-dose administration of DICLEGIS results in increased concentrations of doxylamine as well as increases in doxylamine Cmax and AUC0-last of absorption.  The time to reach the maximum concentration is not affected by multiple doses.  The mean accumulation index is more than 1.0 suggesting that doxylamine accumulates following multiple dosing (see Table 3). 
                        Although no accumulation was observed for pyridoxine, the mean accumulation index for each metabolite (pyridoxal, pyridoxal 5’-phosphate, and pyridoxamine 5’-phosphate) is more than 1.0 following multiple-dose administration of DICLEGIS. The time to reach the maximum concentration is not affected by multiple doses (see Table 2).
                        


                        



                           Food Effect
                        
                        The administration of food delays the absorption of both doxylamine and pyridoxine. This delay is associated with a lower peak concentration of doxylamine, but the extent of absorption is not affected (see Table 4). 
                        The effect of food on the peak concentration and the extent of absorption of the pyridoxine component is more complex because the pyridoxal, pyridoxamine, pyridoxal 5’-phosphate and pyridoxamine 5’-phosphate metabolites also contribute to the biological activity. Food significantly reduces the bioavailability of pyridoxine, lowering its Cmax and AUC by approximately 50% compared to fasting conditions. Similarly, food significantly reduces pyridoxal AUC and reduces its Cmax by 50% compared to fasting conditions. In contrast, food slightly increases pyridoxal 5’-phosphate Cmax and extent of absorption. As for pyridoxamine and pyridoxamine 5’-phosphate, the rate and extent of absorption seem to decrease under fed conditions. 
                        


                        



                           Distribution
                        
                        Pyridoxine is highly protein bound, primarily to albumin. Its main active metabolite, pyridoxal 5’-phosphate (PLP) accounts for at least 60% of circulating vitamin B6 concentrations. 
                        
                           Metabolism
                        
                        Doxylamine is biotransformed in the liver by N-dealkylation to its principle metabolites N-desmethyl-doxylamine and N, N-didesmethyldoxylamine. 
                        Pyridoxine is a prodrug primarily metabolized in the liver. 
                        
                           Excretion
                        
                        The principle metabolites of doxylamine, N-desmethyl-doxylamine and N, N-didesmethyldoxylamine, are excreted by the kidney.
                        The terminal elimination half-life of doxylamine and pyridoxine are 12.5 hours and 0.5 hours, respectively (see Table 5).
                        
                           Table 5 – Terminal Elimination Half-Life (T1/2el) for 
                           DICLEGIS Administered as a Single Dose of Two Tablets under Fasting Conditions in Healthy Non-Pregnant Adult 
                           Women
                        
                        


                        



                           Use in Specific Populations
                        
                        
                           Race: No pharmacokinetic studies have been conducted related to race.
                        
                           Hepatic Impairment: No pharmacokinetic studies have been conducted in hepatic impaired patients.
                        
                           Renal Impairment: No pharmacokinetic studies have been conducted in renal impaired patients.
                     
                  
               
            
         