
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           OxyContin may enhance the neuromuscular blocking action of skeletal muscle relaxants and produce an increased degree of respiratory depression. (7.1)
                           
                           The CYP3A4 isoenzyme plays a major role in the metabolism of OxyContin, drugs that inhibit CYP3A4 activity may cause decreased clearance of oxycodone which could lead to an increase in oxycodone plasma concentrations. (7.2)
                           
                           Concurrent use of other CNS depressants may cause respiratory depression, hypotension, and profound sedation or coma. (7.3)
                           
                           Mixed agonist/antagonist analgesics may reduce the analgesic effect of oxycodone and may precipitate withdrawal symptoms in these patients. (7.4)
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1  Neuromuscular Junction Blocking Agents
                     
                        OxyContin may enhance the neuromuscular blocking action of true skeletal muscle relaxants (such as pancuronium) and produce an increased degree and/or duration of respiratory depression.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2  Agents Affecting Cytochrome P450 Isoenzymes 
                     
                        Inhibitors of CYP3A4:
Since the CYP3A4 isoenzyme plays a major role in the metabolism of OxyContin, drugs that inhibit CYP3A4 activity, such as macrolide antibiotics (e.g., erythromycin), azole-antifungal agents (e.g., ketoconazole), and protease inhibitors (e.g., ritonavir), may cause decreased clearance of oxycodone which could lead to an increase in oxycodone plasma concentrations. A published study showed that the co-administration of the antifungal drug, voriconazole, increased oxycodone AUC and Cmax by 3.6 and 1.7 fold, respectively. Although clinical studies have not been conducted with other CYP3A4 inhibitors, the expected clinical results would be increased or prolonged opioid effects. If co-administration with OxyContin is necessary, caution is advised when initiating therapy with, currently taking, or discontinuing CYP450 inhibitors. Evaluate these patients at frequent intervals and consider dose adjustments until stable drug effects are achieved. 
                              [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)]
                           
                        
                        Inducers of CYP3A4:
CYP450 inducers, such as rifampin, carbamazepine, and phenytoin, may induce the metabolism of oxycodone and, therefore, may cause increased clearance of the drug which could lead to a decrease in oxycodone plasma concentrations, lack of efficacy or, possibly, development of an abstinence syndrome in a patient who had developed physical dependence to oxycodone. A published study showed that the co-administration of rifampin, a drug metabolizing enzyme inducer, decreased oxycodone (oral) AUC and Cmax by 86% and 63%, respectively. If co-administration with OxyContin is necessary, caution is advised when initiating therapy with, currently taking, or discontinuing CYP3A4 inducers. Evaluate these patients at frequent intervals and consider dose adjustments until stable drug effects are achieved.
                        Inhibitors of CYP2D6:
Oxycodone is metabolized in part to oxymorphone via cytochrome CYP2D6.  While this pathway may be blocked by a variety of drugs (e.g., certain cardiovascular drugs including amiodarone and quinidine as well as polycyclic antidepressants), such blockade has not been shown to be of clinical significance during oxycodone treatment.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3  CNS Depressants
                     
                        Start OxyContin at 1/3 to 1/2 of the usual dosage in patients who are concurrently receiving other CNS depressants including sedatives or hypnotics, general anesthetics, phenothiazines, centrally acting anti-emetics, tranquilizers, and alcohol because respiratory depression, hypotension, and profound sedation or coma may result.  No specific interaction between oxycodone and monoamine oxidase inhibitors has been observed, but caution in the use of any opioid in patients taking this class of drugs is appropriate. 
                              [see 
                           
                           
                              Warnings and Precautions (5.2 )]
                           
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4  Interactions with Mixed Agonist/Antagonist Opioid Analgesics
                     
                        Mixed agonist/antagonist analgesics (i.e., pentazocine, nalbuphine, and butorphanol) should generally not be administered to a patient who has received or is receiving a course of therapy with a pure opioid agonist analgesic such as OxyContin.  In this situation, mixed agonist/antagonist analgesics may reduce the analgesic effect of oxycodone and may precipitate withdrawal symptoms in these patients.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         