
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  Desmopressin acetate is a synthetic analog of the natural hormone arginine vasopressin. One mL (0.1 mg) of intranasal desmopressin acetate has an antidiuretic activity of about 400 international units; 10 mcg of desmopressin acetate is equivalent to 40 international units.
                  1. The biphasic half-lives for desmopressin acetate were 7.8 and 75.5 minutes for the fast and slow phases, compared with 2.5 and 14.5 minutes for Iysine vasopressin, another form of the hormone used in this condition. As a result, intranasal desmopressin acetate provides a prompt onset of antidiuretic action with a long duration after each administration.
                  2. The change in structure of arginine vasopressin to desmopressin acetate has resulted in a decreased vasopressor action and decreased actions on visceral smooth muscle relative to the enhanced antidiuretic activity, so that clinically effective antidiuretic doses are usually below threshold levels for effects on vascular or visceral smooth muscle.
                  3. Desmopressin acetate administered intranasally has an antidiuretic effect about one-tenth that of an equivalent dose administered by injection.
               
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Human Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        Desmopressin acetate nasal spray solution is mainly excreted in the urine. A pharmacokinetic study conducted in healthy volunteers and patients with mild, moderate, and severe renal impairment (n=24, 6 subjects in each group) receiving single dose desmopressin acetate (2 mcg) injection demonstrated a difference in desmopressin acetate nasal spray solution terminal half-life. Terminal half-life significantly increased from 3 hours in normal healthy patients to 9 hours in patients with severe renal impairment. (See  CONTRAINDICATION.)
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         