
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Metformin is an antihyperglycemic agent which improves glucose tolerance in patients with type 2 diabetes, lowering both basal and postprandial plasma glucose. Its pharmacologic mechanisms of action are different from other classes of oral antihyperglycemic agents. Metformin decreases hepatic glucose production, decreases intestinal absorption of glucose and improves insulin sensitivity by increasing peripheral glucose uptake and utilization. Unlike sulfonylureas, metformin does not produce hypoglycemia in either patients with type 2 diabetes or normal subjects (except in special circumstances, see 
                              PRECAUTIONS
                           ) and does not cause hyperinsulinemia. With metformin therapy, insulin secretion remains unchanged while fasting insulin levels and day-long plasma insulin response may actually decrease.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Pharmacokinetics
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Absorption and Bioavailability
                           
                              The absolute bioavailability of a metformin hydrochloride 500 mg tablet, USP given under fasting conditions is approximately 50-60%. Studies using single oral doses of metformin hydrochloride tablets, USP of 500 mg to 1500 mg, and 850 mg to 2550 mg, indicate that there is a lack of dose proportionality with increasing doses, which is due to decreased absorption rather than an alteration in elimination. Food decreases the extent and slightly delays the absorption of metformin, as shown by approximately a 40% lower mean peak plasma concentration (Cmax), a 25% lower area under the plasma concentration versus time curve (AUC), and a 35 minute prolongation of time to peak plasma concentration (Tmax) following administration of a single 850 mg tablet of metformin with food, compared to the same tablet strength administered fasting. The clinical relevance of these decreases is unknown.
                              Following a single oral dose of metformin hydrochloride extended-release tablets, USP, Cmax is achieved with a median value of 7 hours and a range of 4 hours to 8 hours. Peak plasma levels are approximately 20% lower compared to the same dose of metformin hydrochloride tablets, USP, however, the extent of absorption (as measured by AUC) is similar to metformin hydrochloride tablets, USP.
                              At steady state, the AUC and Cmax are less than dose proportional for metformin hydrochloride extended-release tablets, USP within the range of 500 mg to 2000 mg administered once daily. Peak plasma levels are approximately 0.6, 1.1, 1.4, and 1.8μg/mL for 500, 1000, 1500, and 2000 mg once-daily doses, respectively. The extent of metformin absorption (as measured by AUC) from metformin hydrochloride extended-release tablets, USP at a 2000 mg once-daily dose is similar to the same total daily dose administered as metformin hydrochloride tablets, USP 1000 mg twice daily. After repeated administration of metformin hydrochloride extended-release USP, metformin did not accumulate in plasma.
                              Within-subject variability in Cmax and AUC of metformin from metformin hydrochloride extended-release tablets, USP is comparable to that with metformin hydrochloride tablets, USP. Although the extent of metformin absorption (as measured by AUC) from the metformin hydrochloride extended-release tablet, USP, increased by approximately 50% when given with food, there was no effect of food on Cmax and Tmax of metformin. Both high and low fat meals had the same effect on the pharmacokinetics of metformin hydrochloride extended-release tablets, USP.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Distribution
                     
                        The apparent volume of distribution (V/F) of metformin following single oral doses of metformin hydrochloride 850 mg tablets, USP averaged 654 ± 358 L. Metformin is negligibly bound to plasma proteins in contrast to sulfonylureas, which are more than 90% protein bound. Metformin partitions into erythrocytes, most likely as a function of time. At usual clinical doses and dosing schedules of metformin hydrochloride, steady state plasma concentrations of metformin are reached within 24-48 hours and are generally <1 μg/mL. During controlled clinical trials of metformin hydrochloride tablets, USP, maximum metformin plasma levels did not exceed 5 μg/mL, even at maximum doses.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Metabolism and Elimination
                     
                        Intravenous single-dose studies in normal subjects demonstrate that metformin is excreted unchanged in the urine and does not undergo hepatic metabolism (no metabolites have been identified in humans) nor biliary excretion. Renal clearance (see Table 1) is approximately 3.5 times greater than creatinine clearance, which indicates that tubular secretion is the major route of metformin elimination. Following oral administration, approximately 90% of the absorbed drug is eliminated via the renal route within the first 24 hours, with a plasma elimination half-life of approximately 6.2 hours. In blood, the elimination half-life is approximately 17.6 hours, suggesting that the erythrocyte mass may be a compartment of distribution.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Special Populations
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Patients with Type 2 Diabetes
                           
                              In the presence of normal renal function, there are no differences between single- or multiple-dose pharmacokinetics of metformin between patients with type 2 diabetes and normal subjects (see Table 1), nor is there any accumulation of metformin in either group at usual clinical doses.
                              The pharmacokinetics of metformin hydrochloride extended-release tablets, USP in patients with type 2 diabetes are comparable to those in healthy normal adults.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Renal Insufficiency
                           
                              In patients with decreased renal function (based on measured creatinine clearance), the plasma and blood half-life of metformin is prolonged and the renal clearance is decreased in proportion to the decrease in creatinine clearance (see Table 1; also see 
                                    WARNINGS
                                 ).
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Hepatic Insufficiency
                           
                              No pharmacokinetic studies of metformin have been conducted in patients with hepatic insufficiency.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Geriatrics
                           
                              Limited data from controlled pharmacokinetic studies of metformin hydrochloride in healthy elderly subjects suggest that total plasma clearance of metformin is decreased, the half-life is prolonged, and Cmax is increased, compared to healthy young subjects.
                              From these data, it appears that the change in metformin pharmacokinetics with aging is primarily accounted for by a change in renal function (see Table 1). Metformin hydrochloride and metformin hydrochloride extended-release treatment should not be initiated in patients ≥ 80 years of age unless measurement of creatinine clearance demonstrates that renal function is not reduced. (See 
                                    WARNINGS
                                  and 
                                    DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION
                                 .)
                              


                           



                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Pediatrics
                           
                              After administration of a single oral metformin hydrochloride 500 mg tablet, USP with food, geometric mean metformin Cmax and AUC differed less than 5% between pediatric type 2 diabetic patients (12 to 16 years of age) and gender- and weight-matched healthy adults (20 to 45 years of age), all with normal renal function.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Gender
                           
                              Metformin pharmacokinetic parameters did not differ significantly between normal subjects and patients with type 2 diabetes when analyzed according to gender (males = 19, females = 16). Similarly, in controlled clinical studies in patients with type 2 diabetes, the antihyperglycemic effect of metformin hydrochloride tablets, USP was comparable in males and females.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Race
                           
                              No studies of metformin pharmacokinetic parameters according to race have been performed. In controlled clinical studies of metformin hydrochloride tablets, USP in patients with type 2 diabetes, the antihyperglycemic effect was comparable in whites (n = 249), blacks (n = 51) and Hispanics (n = 24).
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         