
               
               
               
                  12  CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
                  
                  12.1  Mechanism of ActionThe symptoms associated with benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH) 
are related to bladder outlet obstruction, which is comprised of two underlying 
components: static and dynamic. The static component is related to an increase 
in prostate size caused, in part, by a proliferation of smooth muscle cells in 
the prostatic stroma. However, the severity of BPH symptoms and the degree of 
urethral obstruction do not correlate well with the size of the prostate. The 
dynamic component is a function of an increase in smooth muscle tone in the 
prostate and bladder neck leading to constriction of the bladder outlet. Smooth 
muscle tone is mediated by the sympathetic nervous stimulation of alpha1 adrenoceptors, which are abundant in the prostate, prostatic 
capsule, prostatic urethra, and bladder neck. Blockade of these adrenoceptors 
can cause smooth muscles in the bladder neck and prostate to relax, resulting in 
an improvement in urine flow rate and a reduction in symptoms of BPH.
                  Tamsulosin, an alpha1 adrenoceptor blocking agent, 
exhibits selectivity for alpha1 receptors in the human 
prostate. At least three discrete alpha1 adrenoceptor 
subtypes have been identified: alpha1A, alpha1B, and alpha1D; their distribution 
differs between human organs and tissue. Approximately 70% of the alpha1 receptors in the human prostate are of the alpha1A subtype.
                  FLOMAX capsules are not intended for use as an antihypertensive drug.
                  
                  
                  12.2  PharmacodynamicsUrologic pharmacodynamic effects have been evaluated in 
neurologically impaired pediatric patients and in adults with BPH [
                        see Use in Specific Populations (8.4) and Clinical Studies (14)
                        
                     ].
                  
                  
                  12.3  PharmacokineticsThe pharmacokinetics of tamsulosin hydrochloride have been 
evaluated in adult healthy volunteers and patients with BPH after single and/or 
multiple administration with doses ranging from 0.1 mg to 1 mg. 
                  
                  
                  
                  
                     Absorption
                  
                  Absorption of tamsulosin hydrochloride from FLOMAX capsules 0.4 
mg is essentially complete (>90%) following oral administration under fasting 
conditions. Tamsulosin hydrochloride exhibits linear kinetics following single 
and multiple dosing, with achievement of steady-state concentrations by the 
fifth day of once-a-day dosing.
                  
                  
                  
                  
                     Effect of 
Food
                  
                  The time to maximum concentration (Tmax) 
is reached by 4 to 5 hours under fasting conditions and by 6 to 7 hours when 
FLOMAX capsules are administered with food. Taking FLOMAX capsules under fasted 
conditions results in a 30% increase in bioavailability (AUC) and 40% to 70% 
increase in peak concentrations (Cmax
                  
                  
                  
                     
                  
                  
                  
                  
                  
                     
                  
                  

               
               
            
         