
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  Endogenous estrogens are largely responsible for the development and maintenance of the female reproductive system and secondary sexual characteristics. Although circulating estrogens exist in a dynamic equilibrium of metabolic interconversions, estradiol is the principal intracellular human estrogen and is substantially more potent than its metabolites, estrone and estriol, at the receptor level.
                  The primary source of estrogen in normally cycling adult women is the ovarian follicle, which secretes 70 to 500 mcg of estradiol daily, depending on the phase of the menstrual cycle. After menopause, most endogenous estrogen is produced by conversion of androstenedione, secreted by the adrenal cortex, to estrone by peripheral tissues. Thus, estrone and the sulfate-conjugated form, estrone sulfate, are the most abundant circulating estrogens in postmenopausal women.
                  Estrogens act through binding to nuclear receptors in estrogen-responsive tissues. To date, two estrogen receptors have been identified. These vary in proportion from tissue to tissue.
                  Circulating estrogens modulate the pituitary secretion of the gonadotropins, luteinizing hormone (LH) and follicle stimulating hormone (FSH) through a negative feedback mechanism. Estrogens act to reduce the elevated levels of these hormones seen in postmenopausal women.
               
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Pharmacokinetics
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           A. Absorption
                           
                              Steady-state serum concentrations of estradiol are achieved in approximately 3 days following daily application of Elestrin® to the upper arm.
                              Pharmacokinetic parameters for estradiol on Day 14 following daily application of 0.87 g or 1.7 g of Elestrin® are summarized in 
                                    Table 1
                                 . The nominal mean delivery rates of estradiol using the baseline-adjusted average serum concentrations from pharmacokinetic studies using 0.87 g/day and 1.7 g/day are 0.012 mg/day and 0.041 mg/day, respectively.
                              


                              


Mean concentrations of estradiol over a 24-hour period on Day 14 are shown in Figure 1.
                              
                              Application of sunscreen 10 minutes before application of Elestrin® increased the exposure to estradiol by approximately 55%. No significant change in estradiol exposure was observed when sunscreen was applied 25 minutes after application of Elestrin. In the same study, prolonged (7 days) concomitant application of sunscreen to the site of Elestrin® application increased exposure to estradiol by about 2-fold, regardless of whether it was applied before or after application of Elestrin®.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           B. Distribution
                           
                              The distribution of exogenous estrogens is similar to that of endogenous estrogens. Estrogens are widely distributed in the body and are generally found in higher concentrations in the sex hormone target organs. Estrogens circulate in blood largely bound to sex hormone binding globulin (SHBG) and albumin.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           C. Metabolism
                           
                              Exogenous estrogens are metabolized in the same manner as endogenous estrogens. Circulating estrogens exist in a dynamic equilibrium of metabolic interconversions. These transformations take place mainly in the liver. Estradiol is converted reversibly to estrone, and both can be converted to estriol, which is the major urinary metabolite. Estrogens also undergo enterohepatic recirculation via sulfate and glucuronide conjugation in the liver, biliary secretion of conjugates into the intestine, and hydrolysis in the intestine followed by reabsorption.
                              In postmenopausal women, a significant proportion of the circulating estrogens exist as sulfate conjugates, especially estrone sulfate, which serves as a circulating reservoir for the formation of more active estrogens.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           D. Excretion
                           
                              Estradiol, estrone and estriol are excreted in the urine along with glucuronide and sulfate conjugates.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           E. Special Populations
                           
                              Elestrin® has been studied only in postmenopausal women. No pharmacokinetic studies were conducted in special populations, including patients with renal or hepatic impairment or any other special populations.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           F. Drug Interactions
                           
                              
                                 In vitro and in vivo studies have shown that estrogens are metabolized partially by cytochrome P450 3A4 (CYP3A4). Therefore, inducers or inhibitors of CYP3A4 may affect estrogen drug metabolism. Inducers of CYP3A4, such as St. John's Wort preparations (Hypericum perforatum), phenobarbital, carbamazepine, and rifampin, may reduce plasma concentrations of estrogens, possibly resulting in a decrease in therapeutic effects and/or changes in the uterine bleeding profile. Inhibitors of CYP3A4, such as erythromycin, clarithromycin, ketoconazole, itraconazole, ritonavir, and grapefruit juice, may increase plasma concentrations of estrogens and result in side effects.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           G. Estradiol Transfer
                           
                              The potential for estradiol transfer between treated postmenopausal female subjects and their untreated male partners was evaluated. Two and 8 hours after women applied 2.6 g Elestrin® to one arm (12 women per time point), they engaged in direct arm-to-arm contact with a male partner for 5 minutes. No significant changes in estradiol pharmacokinetic parameters were observed in the male partners after contact.
                              Less than 10% of the estradiol dose was measured on the skin at 2 and 8 hours after application. After washing the application site with soap and water at 8 hours after application, about 1% of the dose of estradiol was measurable.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     Figure 1 -- Mean Concentrations of Estradiol over 24-hour Period on Day 14
                     
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         