
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Epoprostenol has 2 major pharmacological actions: (1) direct vasodilation of pulmonary and systemic arterial vascular beds, and (2) inhibition of platelet aggregation.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        
                           Acute Hemodynamic Effects
                        
                        Acute intravenous infusions of FLOLAN for up to 15 minutes in patients with idiopathic or heritable PAH or PAH/SSD produce dose‑related increases in cardiac index (CI) and stroke volume (SV) and dose‑related decreases in pulmonary vascular resistance (PVR), total pulmonary resistance (TPR), and mean systemic arterial pressure (SAPm). The effects of FLOLAN on mean pulmonary artery pressure (PAPm) were variable and minor.
                        In humans, hemodynamic changes due to epoprostenol (e.g., increased heart rate, facial flushing) returned to baseline within 10 minutes of termination of 60-minute infusions of 1 to 16 ng/kg/min. This pharmacodynamic behavior is consistent with a short in vivo half-life and rapid clearance in man, as suggested by the results of animal and in vitro studies.
                        In animals, the vasodilatory effects reduce right- and left-ventricular afterload and increase cardiac output and stroke volume. The effect of epoprostenol on heart rate in animals varies with dose. At low doses, there is vagally-mediated bradycardia, but at higher doses, epoprostenol causes reflex tachycardia in response to direct vasodilation and hypotension. No major effects on cardiac conduction have been observed. Additional pharmacologic effects of epoprostenol in animals include bronchodilation, inhibition of gastric acid secretion, and decreased gastric emptying.
                        
                           Drug Interactions
                        
                        Additional reductions in blood pressure may occur when FLOLAN is administered with diuretics, antihypertensive agents, or other vasodilators.
                        When other antiplatelet agents or anticoagulants are used concomitantly, there is a potential for FLOLAN to increase the risk of bleeding. However, patients receiving infusions of FLOLAN in clinical trials were maintained on anticoagulants without evidence of increased bleeding. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        
                           Absorption/Distribution
                        
                        Epoprostenol is rapidly hydrolyzed at neutral pH in blood and is also subject to enzymatic degradation. No available chemical assay is sufficiently sensitive and specific to assess the in vivo human pharmacokinetics of epoprostenol. Animal studies using tritium‑labeled epoprostenol have indicated a high clearance (93 mL/kg/min), small volume of distribution (357 mL/kg), and a short half‑life (2.7 minutes). During infusions in animals, steady‑state plasma concentrations of tritium‑labeled epoprostenol were reached within 15 minutes and were proportional to infusion rates.
                        
                           Metabolism
                        
                        Tritium‑labeled epoprostenol has been administered to humans in order to identify the metabolic products of epoprostenol. Epoprostenol is metabolized to 2 primary metabolites: 6‑keto-PGF1α (formed by spontaneous degradation) and 6,15-diketo-13,14-dihydro-PGF1α (enzymatically formed), both of which have pharmacological activity orders of magnitude less than epoprostenol in animal test systems. The recovery of radioactivity in urine and feces over a 1‑week period was 82% and 4% of the administered dose, respectively. Fourteen additional minor metabolites have been isolated from urine, indicating that epoprostenol is extensively metabolized in humans.
                        
                           Elimination
                        
                        The in vitro half‑life of epoprostenol in human blood at 37°C and pH 7.4 is approximately 6 minutes; therefore, the in vivo half‑life of epoprostenol in humans is expected to be no greater than 6 minutes.
                        
                           Drug Interactions
                        
                        In a pharmacokinetic substudy in patients with congestive heart failure receiving furosemide in whom therapy with FLOLAN was initiated, apparent oral clearance values for furosemide (n = 23) were decreased by 13% on the second day of therapy and returned to baseline values by Day 87. The change in furosemide clearance value is not likely to be clinically significant.
                        In a pharmacokinetic substudy in patients with congestive heart failure receiving digoxin in whom therapy with FLOLAN was initiated, apparent oral clearance values for digoxin (n = 30) were decreased by 15% on the second day of therapy and returned to baseline values by Day 87. Clinical significance of this interaction is not known.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         