
                     
                     
                     Drug Interactions
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                              Candesartan Cilexetil
                           
                           
                              No significant drug interactions have been reported in studies of candesartan cilexetil given with other drugs such as glyburide, nifedipine, digoxin, warfarin, hydrochlorothiazide, and oral contraceptives in healthy volunteers.  Because candesartan is not significantly metabolized by the cytochrome P450 system and at therapeutic concentrations has no effects on P450 enzymes, interactions with drugs that inhibit or are metabolized by those enzymes would not be expected.
                              Non-Steroidal Anti-Inflammatory Agents including Selective Cyclooxygenase-2 Inhibitors (COX-2 Inhibitors) In patients who are elderly, volume-depleted (including those on diuretic therapy), or with compromised renal function, co-administration of NSAIDs, including selective COX-2 inhibitors, with angiotensin II receptor antagonists, including candesartan, may result in deterioration of renal function, including possible acute renal failure.  These effects are usually reversible.  Monitor renal function periodically in patients receiving candesartan and NSAID therapy.
                                The antihypertensive effect of angiotensin II receptor antagonists, including candesartan may be attenuated by NSAIDs including selective COX-2 inhibitors.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Lithium − Reversible increases in serum lithium concentrations and toxicity have been reported during concomitant administration of lithium with ACE inhibitors, and with some angiotensin II receptor antagonists.  An increase in serum lithium concentration has been reported during concomitant administration of lithium with candesartan cilexetil, so careful monitoring of serum lithium levels is recommended during concomitant use.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                              Hydrochlorothiazide
                           
                           
                              When administered concurrently the following drugs may interact with thiazide diuretics:
                              
                                 Alcohol, barbiturates, or narcotics − Potentiation of orthostatic hypotension may occur.
                              
                                 Antidiabetic drugs (oral agents and insulin) − Dosage adjustment of the antidiabetic drug may be required.
                              
                                 Other antihypertensive drugs − Additive effect or potentiation.
                              
                                 Cholestyramine and colestipol resins − Absorption of hydrochlorothiazide is impaired in the presence of anionic exchange resins.  Single doses of either cholestyramine or colestipol resins bind the hydrochlorothiazide and reduce its absorption from the gastrointestinal tract by up to 85 and 43 percent, respectively.
                              
                                 Corticosteroids, ACTH − Intensified electrolyte depletion, particularly hypokalemia.
                              
                                 Pressor amines (eg, norepinephrine) − Possible decreased response to pressor amines but not sufficient to preclude their use.
                              
                                 Skeletal muscle relaxants, nondepolarizing (eg, tubocurarine) −Possible increased responsiveness to the muscle relaxant.
                              
                                 Lithium −Generally should not be given with diuretics.  Diuretic agents reduce the renal clearance of lithium and add a high risk of lithium toxicity.  Refer to the package insert for lithium preparations before use of such preparations with ATACAND HCT.
                              
                                 Non-steroidal Anti-inflammatory Drugs − In some patients, the administration of a non-steroidal anti-inflammatory agent can reduce the diuretic, natriuretic, and antihypertensive effects of loop, potassium-sparing and thiazide diuretics.  Therefore, when ATACAND HCT and non-steroidal anti-inflammatory agents are used concomitantly, the patient should be observed closely to determine if the desired effect of the diuretic is obtained.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               