
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           12.1 Mechanism of Action
                        
                     
                     
                        The mechanism of action of mesalamine is unknown, but appears to be topical rather than systemic. Mucosal production of arachidonic acid metabolites, both through the cyclooxygenase pathways, that is, prostanoids, and through the lipoxygenase pathways, that is, leukotrienes and hydroxyeicosatetraenoic acids, is increased in patients with chronic ulcerative colitis, and it is possible that mesalamine diminishes inflammation by blocking cyclooxygenase and inhibiting prostaglandin production in the colon.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           Absorption

                           Approximately 28% of mesalamine in mesalamine delayed-release formulations is absorbed after oral ingestion. The Tmax for mesalamine and its metabolite, is usually delayed, reflecting the delayed-release, and ranges from 4 to 16 hours. 
                        A high fat meal increased systemic exposure of mesalimine (geometric mean Cmax: ↑ 64%; AUC: ↑ 48%) and delayed the Tmax by 3.3 hours compared to results in the fasted state. A majority (85 - 90%) of subjects in the fed state had systemic exposures within the range noted in the fasted state, with the exception of a few that had much higher exposures due to unknown reasons. The observed differences in mesalamine exposure due to concomitant food intake are not considered to be clinically relevant at the total daily dose of 2.4 g/day. Therefore DELZICOL can be taken without regard to food.
                        
                           Metabolism

                           The absorbed mesalamine is rapidly acetylated in the gut mucosal wall and by the liver to N-acetyl-5-aminosalicylic acid.
                        
                           Excretion

                           Absorbed mesalamine is excreted mainly by the kidney as N-acetyl-5-aminosalicylic acid. Unabsorbed mesalamine is excreted in feces.
                        After intravenous administration, the elimination half-life of mesalamine is reported to be approximately 40 minutes. After oral dosing, the terminal t1/2 values for mesalamine and N-acetyl-5-aminosalicylic acid are usually about 12 hours, but are variable, ranging from 2 to 15 hours. There is a large inter-subject and intra-subject variability in the plasma concentrations of mesalamine and N-acetyl-5-aminosalicylic acid and in their terminal half-lives following administration of DELZICOL.
                        
                           Specific Populations

                           
                           Pediatric Patients

                           The pediatric data presented in Section 12 are from clinical trials conducted with mesalamine delayed-release 400 mg tablets. DELZICOL is bioequivalent to these mesalamine delayed-release tablets.
                        In a PK study evaluating 30, 60 and 90 mg/kg/day doses of mesalamine delayed-release 400 mg tablets administered twice daily for four weeks, the mean Cavg values of mesalamine in pediatric ulcerative colitis patients ranged from approximately 400 ng/mL to 2100 ng/mL based on data from all dose levels. 
                        In a study in pediatric ulcerative colitis patients (Study 3), mean plasma concentrations of mesalamine (based on sparse sampling) were 820 to 988 ng/mL at the low dose level (that is, 1.2, 2.0 or 2.4 g/day based on body weight strata of 17 to less than 33 kg, 33 to less than 54 kg, and 54 to 90 kg, respectively).
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         