
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Spinosad causes neuronal excitation in insects. After periods of hyperexcitation, lice become paralyzed and die.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        The pharmacodynamics of Spinosad Topical Suspension has not been studied.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        An open-label, single-center trial was conducted over a period of seven days to determine the pharmacokinetic profile of spinosad 1.8% in pediatric subjects with head lice infestation. Fourteen (14) subjects, 4 – 15 years of age, with head lice were enrolled into the trial. All subjects applied a single topical (scalp) treatment of spinosad 1.8% for 10 minutes, after which the test article was washed off, and subjects underwent plasma sampling. Results demonstrated that spinosad was below the limit of quantitation (3ng/mL) in all samples. Plasma concentration of benzyl alcohol was not determined in these subjects.
                        An open-label, two-center trial was conducted over a period of 23 days to determine the pharmacokinetic profile of spinosad 0.9% and the ingredient benzyl alcohol in pediatric subjects with a head lice infestation. Twenty-six (26) subjects between 6 months to 4 years of age were enrolled into the study per protocol. All subjects applied a single topical (scalp) treatment of spinosad 0.9% for 10 minutes, after which the test article was washed off, and subjects underwent plasma sampling over a 12 hour period. Plasma spinosad concentrations were below the limit of quantitation (3 ng/mL) in all samples.
                        Benzyl alcohol was quantifiable (above 1 μg/mL) in a total of 8 plasma samples in 6 out of 26 subjects (25%): four out of 12 subjects in the 6 months to <2 years age group and two out of 14 subjects in the 2 to 4 years age group. The highest observed concentration was 2.37 μg/mL. Benzyl alcohol concentrations at 12 hours post-treatment were below limit of quantification (1 μg/mL) for all subjects.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         