
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        The major pharmacologic actions of treprostinil are direct vasodilation of pulmonary and systemic arterial vascular beds, inhibition of platelet aggregation, and inhibition of smooth muscle cell proliferation.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        In a clinical trial of 240 healthy adult volunteers, single doses of inhaled treprostinil 54 µg (the target clinical dose) and 84 µg (supratherapeutic inhalation dose) prolonged the corrected QTc interval by approximately 10 msec.  The QTc effect dissipated rapidly as the concentration of treprostinil decreased.  Orenitram has not been evaluated in a thorough QTc study.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        In patients with PAH, pharmacokinetics of treprostinil is dose-proportional for systemic exposure (AUC0-t) over the dose range of 0.5 and 15 mg BID. Upon repeat administration with a BID regimen, the accumulation in the systemic exposures to treprostinil is minimal and results in a peak-to-trough ratio of approximately 7. However, a TID regimen will reduce the peak-to-trough fluctuations to approximately 2.5 for the same total daily dose.
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Absorption
                              
                              The absolute oral bioavailability of Orenitram is approximately 17%.  Maximum treprostinil concentrations occur between approximately 4 and 6 hours following Orenitram administration.
                              The absorption of Orenitram is affected by food.  The AUCinf of treprostinil was increased by 49% and the Cmax was increased by an average of 13% when Orenitram was administered following a high-fat, high-calorie meal compared to fasting conditions in healthy volunteers.  The relative bioavailability of treprostinil following oral administration of Orenitram 1 mg is not significantly altered by meal types ranging from 250 to 500 calories in healthy volunteers.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Distribution
                              
                              The treprostinil component of Orenitram is highly bound to human plasma proteins, approximately 96% over a treprostinil concentration range of 0.01-10 µg/mL.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Metabolism and Excretion
                              
                              In a study conducted in healthy volunteers using [14C] treprostinil, treprostinil was extensively metabolized on the side chain of the molecule via oxidation, oxidative cleavage, dehydration, and glucuronic acid conjugation. Treprostinil is primarily metabolized by CYP2C8 and to a lesser extent by CYP2C9.  No new metabolites are found upon oral administration compared to parenteral administration of treprostinil.  Only 1.13% and 0.19% is excreted as unchanged parent drug in the feces and urine, respectively.  Based on in vitro studies treprostinil does not inhibit or induce major CYP enzymes [see Drug Interactions (7.3)].
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Special Populations
                              
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Hepatic Impairment: In subjects with mild (n=8) hepatic impairment, administration of a single 1 mg dose of Orenitram resulted in a mean Cmax and an AUC0-inf that were 1.6- and 2.1-fold, respectively values seen in healthy subjects. With moderate impairment (n=8), the corresponding ratios were 4.0- and 4.8-fold, and with severe impairment (n=6), they were 4.8- and 7.6-fold [see Dosage and Administration (2.2), Contraindications (4), and Use in Specific Populations (8.6)].
                                       
                                    
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Renal Impairment: In patients with severe renal impairment requiring dialysis (n=8), administration of a single 1 mg dose of Orenitram pre- and post-dialysis resulted in an AUC 0-inf that was not significantly altered compared to healthy subjects.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Drug Interactions
                              
                              Results of drug interaction studies are shown in Figure 1. Only for the strong CYP2C8 inhibitor does the interaction affect dosing.
                              
                                 Figure 1: Impact of Co-Administered Drugs on the Systemic Exposure of Treprostinil 1 mg Compared to Orenitram Administered Alone
                              
                              
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Figure 1
                                 
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Warfarin: A drug interaction study was carried out with Remodulin co-administered with warfarin (25 mg/day) in healthy volunteers.  There was no clinically significant effect of either medication on the pharmacokinetics of treprostinil.  Additionally, treprostinil did not affect the pharmacokinetics or pharmacodynamics of warfarin.  The pharmacokinetics of R- and S- warfarin and the international normalized ratio (INR) in healthy subjects given a single 25 mg dose of warfarin were unaffected by continuous subcutaneous infusion of treprostinil at an infusion rate of 10 ng/kg/min.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         