
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  The analgesic action of acetaminophen involves peripheral influences, but the specific mechanism is as yet undetermined. Antipyretic activity is mediated through hypothalamic heat regulating centers. Acetaminophen inhibits prostaglandin synthetase. Therapeutic doses of acetaminophen have negligible effects on the cardiovascular or respiratory systems; however, toxic doses may cause circulatory failure and rapid, shallow breathing.
               
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        The behavior of the individual components is described below.
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Acetaminophen
                           
                              Acetaminophen is rapidly absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract and is distributed throughout most body tissues. The plasma half-life is 1.25 to 3 hours, but may be increased by liver damage and following overdosage. Elimination of acetaminophen is principally by liver metabolism (conjugation) and subsequent renal excretion of metabolites. Approximately 85% of an oral dose appears in the urine within 24 hours of administration, most as the glucuronide conjugate, with small amounts of other conjugates and unchanged drug.
                              See 
                                    OVERDOSAGE
                                  for toxicity information.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Phenyltoloxamine Citrate
                           
                              Phenyltoloxamine is an H1 blocking agent which interferes with the action of histamine primarily in capillaries surrounding mucous tissues and sensory nerves of the nasal and adjacent areas. It has the ability to interfere with certain areas of acetylcholine-inhibiting secretions in the nose, mouth and pharynx. It commonly causes CNS depression.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         