
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Mupirocin is an antibacterial drug [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.4)].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        
                           Absorption
                        
                        Following single or repeated intranasal applications of 0.2 grams of BACTROBAN nasal ointment 3 times daily for 3 days to 5 healthy adult male subjects, no evidence of systemic absorption of mupirocin was demonstrated. The dosage regimen used in this trial was for pharmacokinetic characterization only; see Dosage and Administration (2) for proper clinical dosing information.
                        In this trial, the concentrations of mupirocin in urine and of monic acid in urine and serum were below the limit of determination of the assay for up to 72 hours after the applications. The lowest levels of determination of the assay used were 50 ng/mL of mupirocin in urine, 75 ng/mL of monic acid in urine, and 10 ng/mL of monic acid in serum. Based on the detectable limit of the urine assay for monic acid, one can extrapolate that a mean of 3.3% (range: 1.2% to 5.1%) of the applied dose could be systemically absorbed from the nasal mucosa of adults.
                        The effect of concurrent application of BACTROBAN nasal ointment with other intranasal products has not been studied [see Dosage and Administration (2)].
                        
                           Elimination
                        
                        In a trial conducted in 7 healthy adult male subjects, the elimination half‑life after intravenous administration of mupirocin was 20 to 40 minutes for mupirocin and 30 to 80 minutes for monic acid.
                        
                           Metabolism: Following intravenous or oral administration, mupirocin is rapidly metabolized. The principal metabolite, monic acid, demonstrates no antibacterial activity. 
                        
                           Excretion: Monic acid is predominantly eliminated by renal excretion. 
                        
                           Special Populations
                        
                        
                           Pediatrics: The pharmacokinetic properties of mupirocin following intranasal application of BACTROBAN nasal ointment have not been adequately characterized in neonates or other children younger than 12 years, and in addition, the safety and efficacy of the product in children younger than 12 years have not been established.
                        
                           Renal Impairment:The pharmacokinetics of mupirocin have not been studied in individuals with renal insufficiency.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.4 Microbiology
                     
                        Mupirocin is an antibacterial agent produced by fermentation using the organism Pseudomonas fluorescens.
                        
                           Mechanism of Action
                        
                        Mupirocin inhibits bacterial protein synthesis by reversibly and specifically binding to bacterial isoleucyl‑transfer RNA (tRNA) synthetase.
                        Mupirocin is bactericidal at concentrations achieved by topical intranasal administration. Mupirocin is highly protein bound (>97%), and the effect of nasal secretions on the minimum inhibitory concentrations (MICs) of intranasally applied mupirocin has not been determined.
                        
                           Mechanism of Resistance
                        
                        When mupirocin resistance occurs, it results from the production of a modified isoleucyl‑tRNA synthetase, or the acquisition of, by genetic transfer, a plasmid mediating a new isoleucyl-tRNA synthetase. High‑level plasmid‑mediated resistance (MIC ≥512 mcg/mL) has been reported in increasing numbers of isolates of S. aureus and with higher frequency in coagulase‑negative staphylococci. Mupirocin resistance occurs with greater frequency in methicillin‑resistant than methicillin‑susceptible staphylococci.
                        
                           Cross Resistance
                        
                        Due to its mode of action, mupirocin does not demonstrate cross resistance with other classes of antimicrobial agents.
                        
                           Susceptibility Testing
                        
                        High-level mupirocin resistance (≥512 mcg/mL) may be determined using standard disk diffusion or broth microdilution tests1,2. The significance of these results, with regard to decolonization regimens, should be evaluated at each medical facility, in conjunction with laboratory, medical, and infection control staff. 
                        Correlation of BACTROBAN nasal ointment in vitro activity and MRSA nasal decolonization has been demonstrated in clinical trials [see Clinical Studies (14)].
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         