
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY

               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action

                     
                        In isolated nerve-muscle preparation, dantrolene has been shown to produce relaxation by affecting the contractile response of the muscle at a site beyond the myoneural junction. In skeletal muscle, dantrolene dissociates the excitation-contraction coupling, probably by interfering with the release of Ca++ from the sarcoplasmic reticulum.

                        In the anesthetic-induced malignant hyperthermia syndrome, evidence points to an intrinsic abnormality of skeletal muscle tissue. In affected humans, it has been postulated that “triggering agents” (e.g., general anesthetics and depolarizing neuromuscular blocking agents) produce a change within the cell which results in an elevated myoplasmic calcium. This elevated myoplasmic calcium activates acute cellular catabolic processes that cascade to the malignant hyperthermia crisis.

                        The addition of dantrolene to the “triggered” malignant hyperthermic muscle cell may reestablish a normal level of ionized calcium in the myoplasm. Inhibition of calcium release from the sarcoplasmic reticulum by dantrolene reestablishes the myoplasmic calcium equilibrium, increasing the percentage of bound calcium. In this way, physiologic, metabolic, and biochemical changes associated with the malignant hyperthermia crisis may be reversed or attenuated.

                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics

                     
                        The administration of intravenous dantrolene to human volunteers was associated with loss of grip strength and weakness in the legs, as well as subjective CNS complaints [see Warnings and Precautions (5.1)].

                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics

                     
                        The pharmacokinetics of RYANODEX was investigated in healthy volunteers following single-dose administration as an intravenous push over 60 seconds (dose range of 1 to 2.5 mg/kg), via a peripheral catheter.  There was a dose-proportional increase in plasma exposure of dantrolene and its metabolite, 5-hydroxydantrolene.  Table 2 presents pharmacokinetic parameters of dantrolene after administration of single RYANODEX dose of 2.5 mg/kg.  Time to peak dantrolene concentration was observed at the first time point collected (i.e. median Tmax is 1 minute post-dose).  The mean half-life (t1/2) for dantrolene was independent of the RYANODEX dose administered and ranged from 8.5 hours to 11.4 hours over the 1 to 2.5 mg/kg dose range.

                        


                        


When prophylactic intravenous dantrolene infusion was administered, whole blood dantrolene concentrations remained at a near steady state level for 3 or more hours after the infusion was completed.

                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Distribution
                              
                              Based on assays of whole blood and plasma, slightly greater amounts of dantrolene are associated with red blood cells than with the plasma fraction of blood. Significant amounts of dantrolene are bound to plasma proteins, mostly albumin, and this binding is readily reversible.  Binding to plasma protein is not significantly altered by diazepam, diphenylhydantoin, or phenylbutazone. Binding to plasma proteins is reduced by warfarin and clofibrate and increased by tolbutamide.

                              Information concerning the passage of dantrolene across the blood-brain barrier is not available.

                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Metabolism
                              
                              Dantrolene is found in measurable amounts in blood and urine. Its major metabolites in body fluids are 5-hydroxy dantrolene and an acetylamino metabolite of dantrolene. Another metabolite with an unknown structure appears related to the latter. Dantrolene may also undergo hydrolysis and subsequent oxidation forming nitrophenylfuroic acid.  Following RYANODEX 2.5 mg/kg dose administration in healthy volunteers, mean  peak plasma concentration for the primary metabolite, 5-hydroxydantrolene, was 640 ng/mL, and was achieved by approximately 24 hours post-dose, with an average metabolite-to-parent exposure ratio of 0.27 (AUC0-inf = 21.2 μg*h/mL). Median t1/2 for 5-hydroxydantrolene was 10 hours, the clearance was estimated to be 8.9 L/hr and the terminal phase volume of distribution was 144 L.

                              Dantrolene is metabolized by the liver, and it is possible that its metabolism may be enhanced by drugs known to induce hepatic microsomal enzymes. However, neither phenobarbital nor diazepam appears to affect dantrolene metabolism.

                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         