
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Isavuconazonium sulfate is the prodrug of isavuconazole, an azole antifungal [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.4)].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        
                           
                              Pharmacokinetic/Pharmacodynamic Relationship
                           
                        
                        In patients treated with CRESEMBA for invasive aspergillosis in a controlled trial, there was no significant association between plasma AUC or plasma isavuconazole concentration and efficacy.
                        
                           
                              Cardiac Electrophysiology
                           
                           
The effect on QTc interval of multiple doses of CRESEMBA capsules was evaluated. CRESEMBA was administered as 2 capsules (equivalent to 200 mg isavuconazole) three times daily on days 1 and 2 followed by either 2 capsules or 6 capsules (equivalent to 600 mg isavuconazole) once daily for 13 days in a randomized, placebo- and active-controlled (moxifloxacin 400 mg single dose), four-treatment-arm, parallel study in 160 healthy subjects.
                        Isavuconazole resulted in dose-related shortening of the QTc interval. For the 2-capsule dosing regimen, the least squares mean (LSM) difference from placebo was -13.1 msec at 2 hours postdose [90% CI: -17.1, -9.1 msec]. Increasing the dose to 6 capsules resulted in an LSM difference from placebo of -24.6 msec at 2 hours postdose [90% CI: -28.7, -20.4]. CRESEMBA was not evaluated in combination with other drugs that reduce the QTc interval, so the additive effects are not known.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        
                           
                              General Pharmacokinetics
                           
                           
In healthy subjects, the pharmacokinetics of isavuconazole following oral administration of CRESEMBA capsules at isavuconazole equivalent doses up to 600 mg per day (6 capsules) are dose proportional (Table 5). Based on a population pharmacokinetics analysis of healthy subjects and patients, the mean plasma half-life of isavuconazole was 130 hours and the mean volume of distribution (Vss) was approximately 450 L following intravenous administration.
                        


                        



                           
                              Absorption
                           
                           
After oral administration of CRESEMBA in healthy volunteers, the active moiety, isavuconazole, generally reaches maximum plasma concentrations (Cmax) 2 hours to 3 hours after single and multiple dosing. The absolute bioavailability of isavuconazole following oral administration of CRESEMBA is 98%. No significant concentrations of the prodrug or inactive cleavage product were seen in plasma after oral administration.
                        Following intravenous administration of CRESEMBA, maximal plasma concentrations of the prodrug and inactive cleavage product were detectable during infusion and declined rapidly following the end of administration. The prodrug was below the level of detection by 1.25 hours after the start of a 1 hour infusion. The total exposure of the prodrug based on AUC was less than 1% that of isavuconazole. The inactive cleavage product was quantifiable in some subjects up to 8 hours after the start of infusion. The total exposure of inactive cleavage product based on AUC was approximately 1.3% that of isavuconazole.
                        
                           
                              Effect of Food 
                           
                           
Coadministration of CRESEMBA equivalent to isavuconazole 400 mg oral dose with a high-fat meal reduced isavuconazole Cmax by 9% and increased AUC by 9%. CRESEMBA can be taken with or without food. 
                        
                           
                              Distribution
                           
                           
Isavuconazole is extensively distributed with a mean steady state volume of distribution (Vss) of approximately 450 L. Isavuconazole is highly protein bound (greater than 99%), predominantly to albumin.
                        
                           
                              Metabolism
                           
                           
In in vitro studies isavuconazonium sulfate is rapidly hydrolyzed in blood to isavuconazole by esterases, predominately by butylcholinesterase. Isavuconazole is a substrate of cytochrome P450 enzymes 3A4 and 3A5. 
                        Following single doses of [cyano 14C] isavuconazonium and [pyridinylmethyl 14C] isavuconazonium in humans, in addition to the active moiety (isavuconazole) and the inactive cleavage product, a number of minor metabolites were identified. Except for the active moiety isavuconazole, no individual metabolite was observed with an AUC greater than 10% of drug related material.
                        In vivo studies indicate that CYP3A4, CYP3A5 and subsequently uridine diphosphate-glucuronosyltransferases (UGT) are involved in the metabolism of isavuconazole.
                        
                           
                              Excretion
                           
                           
Following oral administration of radio-labeled isavuconazonium sulfate to healthy volunteers, a mean of 46.1% of the total radioactive dose was recovered in the feces and 45.5% was recovered in the urine.
                        Renal excretion of isavuconazole itself was less than 1% of the dose administered.  
                        The inactive cleavage product is primarily eliminated by metabolism and subsequent renal excretion of the metabolites. Renal elimination of intact cleavage product was less than 1% of the total dose administered. Following intravenous administration of radio-labeled cleavage product, 95% of the total radioactive dose was excreted in the urine.  
                        
                           
                              Special populations
                           
                        
                        
                           
                              Geriatric Patients
                           
                           
The AUC of isavuconazole following a single oral dose of CRESEMBA equivalent to 200 mg isavuconazole in elderly subjects (65 years and older) was similar to that in younger volunteers (18 years to 45 years). The AUC was similar between younger female and male subjects and between elderly and younger males.
                        Elderly female AUC estimates were 38% and 47% greater than AUC estimates obtained in elderly males and younger females, respectively. The pharmacokinetic difference in elderly females receiving CRESEMBA are not considered to be clinically significant. Therefore, no dose adjustment is required based on age and gender.
                        
                           
                              Pediatric Patients
                           
                           
The pharmacokinetics of CRESEMBA in pediatric patients have not been evaluated.
                        
                           
                              Race
                           
                           
A 2-compartment population pharmacokinetic model was developed to assess the pharmacokinetics of isavuconazole between healthy Western and Chinese subjects. Chinese subjects were found to have on average a 40% lower clearance compared to Western subjects (1.6 L/hr for Chinese subjects as compared to 2.6 L/hr for Western subjects) and therefore approximately 50% higher AUC than Western subjects. Body mass index (BMI) did not play a role in the observed differences. No dose adjustment is recommended for Chinese patients.
                        
                           
                              Gender
                           
                           
AUC estimates were similar between young female and male subjects (18 years to 45 years). There was a difference in AUC for elderly females, see Geriatric section above. No dose adjustment is required based on gender.
                        
                           
                              Renal Impairment
                           
                           
Total isavuconazole AUC and Cmax were not affected to a clinically meaningful extent in subjects with mild, moderate and severe renal impairment relative to healthy controls. No dose adjustment is necessary in patients with renal impairment.
                        Isavuconazole is not readily dialyzable. A dose adjustment is not warranted in patients with ESRD.
                        
                           
                              Hepatic Impairment
                           
                           
After a single dose of CRESEMBA equivalent to 100 mg of isavuconazole was administered to 32 patients with mild (Child-Pugh Class A) hepatic impairment and 32 patients with moderate (Child-Pugh Class B) hepatic impairment (16 intravenous and 16 oral patients per Child-Pugh Class), the least squares mean systemic exposure (AUC) increased 64% and 84% in the Child-Pugh Class A group and the Child-Pugh Class B group, respectively, relative to 32 age and weight-matched healthy subjects with normal hepatic function. Mean Cmax was 2% lower in the Child-Pugh Class A group and 30% lower in the Child-Pugh Class B group. The population pharmacokinetic evaluation of isavuconazole in healthy subjects and patients with mild and moderate hepatic impairment demonstrated that the mild and moderate hepatic impairment population had 40% and 48% lower isavuconazole clearance (CL) values, respectively, compared to the healthy population. It is recommended that the standard CRESEMBA loading dose and maintenance dose regimen be utilized in patients with mild to moderate hepatic disease. CRESEMBA has not been studied in patients with severe hepatic impairment (Child-Pugh Class C).
                        
                           Drug Interaction Studies
                        
                        Isavuconazole is a substrate of CYP3A4 and CYP3A5. In vitro, isavuconazole is an inhibitor of CYP3A4, CYP2C8, CYP2C9, CYP2C19, and CYP2D6. Isavuconazole is also an inhibitor of P-gp-, BCRP- and OCT2-mediated drug transporters. In vitro, isavuconazole is also an inducer of CYP3A4, CYP2B6, CYP2C8, and CYP2C9.
                        The effect of coadministration of drugs on the pharmacokinetics of isavuconazole and the effect of isavuconazole on the pharmacokinetics of co-administered drugs were studied after single and multiple doses of isavuconazole in healthy subjects.
                        The effects of ketoconazole, rifampin, lopinavir/ritonavir, and esomeprazole on isavuconazole are shown in Figure 1.
                        
                           Ketoconazole: As a strong CYP3A4 inhibitor, ketoconazole increased the isavuconazole Cmax by 9% and isavuconazole AUC by 422% after multiple dose administration of ketoconazole (200 mg twice daily) for 24 days and a single dose of CRESEMBA equivalent to 200 mg of isavuconazole. Isavuconazole is a sensitive CYP3A4 substrate and use with strong CYP3A4 inhibitors are contraindicated per Section 4 and Figure 1.
                        
                           Lopinavir/Ritonavir: Lopinavir/ritonavir (400 mg/100 mg twice daily) increased the Cmax and AUC of isavuconazole (clinical dose) 74% and 96%, respectively, with concurrent decreases in the mean AUCs of lopinavir and ritonavir by 27% and 31%, respectively.
                        
                           Rifampin: Rifampin (600 mg) decreased the mean Cmax and AUC of isavuconazole by 75% and 97%, respectively, when coadministered with multiple doses of CRESEMBA and thus, coadministration of CRESEMBA with strong CYP3A4 inducers is contraindicated.
                        
                           Figure 1. The Effect of Co-administered Drugs on Isavuconazole Exposure
                        
                        The effects of isavuconazole on ritonavir, lopinavir, prednisone, combined oral contraceptives (ethinyl estradiol and norethindrone), cyclosporine, atorvastatin, sirolimus, midazolam, and tacrolimus are shown in Figure 2.
                        
                           CYP3A4 Substrates: CRESEMBA increased the systemic exposure of sensitive CYP3A4 substrates midazolam, sirolimus and tacrolimus approximately 2-fold, and therefore CRESEMBA is a moderate inhibitor of CYP3A4.
                        
                           Figure 2. The Effect of Isavuconazole on Co-administered CYP3A4 Substrate Medications
                        
                        The effects of isavuconazole on other CYP substrates: caffeine, bupropion, methadone, repaglinide, warfarin, omeprazole, and dextromethorphan, are shown in Figure 3.  
                        
                           Figure 3. The Effect of Isavuconazole on Exposure of Co-administered CYP Substrate Medications
                        
                        The effects of isavuconazole on the substrates of UGT and transporters: mycophenolate mofetil (MMF), methotrexate, metformin, and digoxin are shown in Figure 4. 
                        
                           Figure 4. The Effect of Isavuconazole on Exposure on the Substrates of UGT and Transporters
                        
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           Figure 1. The Effect of Co-administered Drugs on Isavuconazole Exposure
                           
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           Figure 2. The Effect of Isavuconazole on Co-administered CYP3A4 Substrate Medications
                           
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           Figure 3. The Effect of Isavuconazole on Exposure of Co-administered CYP Substrate Medications
                           
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           Figure 4. The Effect of Isavuconazole on Exposure on the Substrates of UGT and Transporters 
                           
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.4 Microbiology
                     
                        
                           Mechanism of Action
                           
Isavuconazonium sulfate is the prodrug of isavuconazole, an azole antifungal drug. Isavuconazole inhibits the synthesis of ergosterol, a key component of the fungal cell membrane, through the inhibition of cytochrome P-450 dependent enzyme lanosterol 14-alpha-demethylase. This enzyme is responsible for the conversion of lanosterol to ergosterol. An accumulation of methylated sterol precursors and a depletion of ergosterol within the fungal cell membrane weakens the membrane structure and function. Mammalian cell demethylation is less sensitive to isavuconazole inhibition.
                        
                           Activity in vitro and in clinical infections:
                        
                        Isavuconazole has activity against most strains of the following microorganisms, both in vitro and in clinical infections: Aspergillus flavus, Aspergillus fumigatus, Aspergillus niger, and Mucorales such as Rhizopus oryzae and Mucormycetes species [see Clinical Studies (14)].
                        
                           Drug Resistance 
                           
There is a potential for development of resistance to isavuconazole.
                        The mechanism of resistance to isavuconazole, like other azole antifungals, is likely due to multiple mechanisms that include substitutions in the target gene CYP51. Changes in sterol profile and elevated efflux pump activity were observed, however, the clinical relevance of these findings is unclear.
                        In vitro and animal studies suggest cross-resistance between isavuconazole and other azoles. The relevance of cross-resistance to clinical outcome has not been fully characterized. However, patients failing prior azole therapy may require alternative antifungal therapy.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         