
               
               
               
                  
                     7  DRUG INTERACTIONS
                  
               
               
               
                  
                     
                         •	CYP2D6 enzyme inhibitors may increase nebivolol levels (7.1)
                         •	Reserpine or clonidine may produce excessive reduction of sympathetic activity. (7.2)
                         Both digitalis glycosides and ß-blockers slow atrioventricular conduction and decrease heart rate. Concomitant use can increase the risk of bradycardia. (7.3)
                         Verapamil- or diltiazem-type calcium channel blockers may cause excessive reductions in heart rate, blood pressure, and cardiac contractility. (7.4)
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                        
                           7.1 CYP2D6 Inhibitors
                        
                     
                     
                        
         Use caution when nebivolol is co-administered with CYP2D6 inhibitors (quinidine, propafenone, fluoxetine, paroxetine, etc.) [see 
         
                              Clinical Pharmacology (12.5)
                           
         ].
        
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                        
                           7.2 Hypotensive Agents
                        
                     
                     
                        Do not use nebivolol tablets with other ß-blockers. Closely monitor patients receiving catecholamine-depleting drugs, such as reserpine or guanethidine, because the added ß-blocking action of nebivolol may produce excessive reduction of sympathetic activity. In patients who are receiving nebivolol tablets and clonidine, discontinue nebivolol tablets for several days before the gradual tapering of clonidine.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                        
                           7.3 Digitalis Glycosides
                        
                     
                     
                        Both digitalis glycosides and ß-blockers slow atrioventricular conduction and decrease heart rate. Concomitant use can increase the risk of bradycardia.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                        
                           7.4 Calcium Channel Blockers
                        
                     
                     
                        Nebivolol can exacerbate the effects of myocardial depressants or inhibitors of AV conduction, such as certain calcium antagonists (particularly of the phenylalkylamine [verapamil] and benzothiazepine [diltiazem] classes), or antiarrhythmic agents, such as disopyramide.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         