
               
               
               
                  CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  Endogenous estrogens are largely responsible for the development and maintenance of the female reproductive system and secondary sexual characteristics. Although circulating estrogens exist in a dynamic equilibrium of metabolic interconversions, estradiol is the principal intracellular human estrogen and is substantially more potent than its metabolites, estrone and estriol at the receptor level. 
                  The primary source of estrogen in normally cycling adult women is the ovarian follicle, which secretes 70 to 500 mcg of estradiol daily, depending on the phase of the menstrual cycle. After menopause, most endogenous estrogen is produced by conversion of androstenedione, secreted by the adrenal cortex, to estrone in the peripheral tissues. Thus, estrone and the sulfate conjugated form, estrone sulfate, are the most abundant circulating estrogens in postmenopausal women.
                  Estrogens act through binding to nuclear receptors in estrogen-responsive tissues. To date, 2 estrogen receptors have been identified. These vary in proportion from tissue to tissue.
                  Circulating estrogens modulate the pituitary secretion of the gonadotropins, luteinizing hormone (LH), and follicle stimulating hormone (FSH) through a negative feedback mechanism. Estrogens act to reduce the elevated levels of these hormones seen in postmenopausal women.
               
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        Pharmacokinetics
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Absorption
                           
                           
                              
                                 Estradiol: Estrogens used in hormone therapy are well absorbed through the skin, mucous membranes, and gastrointestinal tract. Administration of CombiPatch every 3 to 4 days in postmenopausal women produces average steady-state estradiol serum concentrations of 45 to 50 pg/mL, which are equivalent to the normal ranges observed at the early follicular phase in premenopausal women. These concentrations are achieved within 12 to 24 hours following CombiPatch application. Minimal fluctuations in serum estradiol concentrations are observed following CombiPatch application, indicating consistent hormone delivery over the application interval.
                              In 1 study, serum concentrations of estradiol were measured in 40 healthy, postmenopausal women throughout 3 consecutive CombiPatch applications to the abdomen (each dose was applied for three 3.5-day periods). The corresponding pharmacokinetic parameters are summarized in Table 1.
                              


                              



                                 Norethindrone
                                 : Progestins used in hormone therapy are well absorbed through the skin, mucous membranes, and gastrointestinal tract. Norethindrone steady-state concentrations are attained within 24 hours of application of the CombiPatch transdermal delivery systems. Minimal fluctuations in serum norethindrone concentrations are observed following CombiPatch treatment, indicating consistent hormone delivery over the application interval. Serum concentrations of norethindrone increase linearly with increasing doses of NETA.
                              In 1 study, serum concentrations of norethindrone were measured in 40 healthy, postmenopausal women throughout 3 consecutive CombiPatch applications to the abdomen (each dose was applied for three 3.5-day periods). The corresponding pharmacokinetic parameters are summarized in Table 2.
                              


                           



                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Distribution
                           
                           
                              
                                 Estradiol: The distribution of exogenous estrogens is similar to that of endogenous estrogens. Estrogens are widely distributed in the body and are generally found in higher concentrations in the sex hormone target organs. Estrogens circulate in the blood largely bound to sex hormone-binding globulin (SHBG) and albumin.
                              
                                 Norethindrone
                                 : In plasma, norethindrone is bound approximately 90 percent to SHBG and albumin.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Metabolism
                           
                           
                              
                                 Estradiol: Exogenous estrogens are metabolized in the same manner as endogenous estrogens. Circulating estrogens exist in a dynamic equilibrium of metabolic interconversions. These transformations take place mainly in the liver. Estradiol is converted reversibly to estrone, and both can be converted to estriol, which is a major urinary metabolite. Estrogens also undergo enterohepatic recirculation via sulfate and glucuronide conjugation in the liver, biliary secretion of conjugates into the intestine, and hydrolysis in the intestine followed by reabsorption. In postmenopausal women a significant portion of the circulating estrogens exist as sulfate conjugates, especially estrone sulfate, which serves as a circulating reservoir for the formation of more active estrogens. 
                              
                                 Norethindrone
                                 : NETA is hydrolyzed to the active moiety, norethindrone, in most tissues including skin and blood. Norethindrone is primarily metabolized in the liver. 
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Excretion
                           
                           
                              
                                 Estradiol: Estradiol, estrone, and estriol are excreted in the urine along with glucuronide and sulfate conjugates. Estradiol has a short elimination half-life of approximately 2 to 3 hours; therefore, a rapid decline in serum levels is observed after the CombiPatch estradiol/NETA transdermal system is removed. Within 4 to 8 hours serum estradiol concentrations return to untreated, postmenopausal levels (less than 20 pg/mL).  
                              Concentration data from Phase II and III studies indicate that the pharmacokinetics of estradiol did not change over time, suggesting no evidence of the accumulation of estradiol following extended patch wear periods (up to 1 year).
                              
                                 Norethindrone
                                 : The elimination half-life of norethindrone is reported to be 6 to 8 hours. Norethindrone serum concentrations diminish rapidly and are less than 50 pg/mL within 48 hours after removal of the CombiPatch transdermal delivery system.
                              Concentration data from Phase II and III studies indicate that the pharmacokinetics of norethindrone did not change over time, suggesting no evidence of the accumulation of norethindrone following extended patch wear periods (up to 1 year).
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Special Populations
                           
                           
                              No pharmacokinetic studies were conducted in special populations, including patients with renal or hepatic impairment.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Drug Interactions
                           
                           
                              
                                 In vitro and in vivo studies have shown that estrogens are metabolized partially by cytochrome P450 3A4 (CYP3A4). Therefore, inducers or inhibitors of CYP3A4 may affect estrogen drug metabolism. Inducers of CYP3A4 such as St. John’s wort (Hypericum
                                  
                                 perforatum) preparations, phenobarbital, carbamazepine and rifampin may reduce plasma concentrations of estrogens, possibly resulting in a decrease in therapeutic effects and/or changes in the uterine bleeding profile. Inhibitors of CYP3A4 such as erythromycin, clarithromycin, ketoconazole, itraconazole, ritonavir and grapefruit juice may increase plasma concentrations of estrogens and may result in side effects.  
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Adhesion
                           
                           
                              Averaging across 6 clinical trials lasting 3 months to 1 year, of 1,287 patients treated, CombiPatch transdermal systems completely adhered to the skin nearly 90 percent of the time over the 3- to 4-day wear period. Less than 2 percent of the patients required reapplication or replacement of systems due to lifting or detachment. Two patients (0.2 percent) discontinued therapy during clinical trials due to adhesion failure.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         