
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
 

               
                  CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
                  
                  Pharmacodynamics
The mechanism of action of 
mirtazapine orally disintegrating tablets, as with other drugs effective in the 
treatment of major depressive disorder, is unknown.
 
Evidence gathered in 
preclinical studies suggests that mirtazapine enhances central noradrenergic and 
serotonergic activity. These studies have shown that mirtazapine acts as an 
antagonist at central presynaptic α2 adrenergic 
inhibitory autoreceptors and heteroreceptors, an action that is postulated to 
result in an increase in central noradrenergic and serotonergic 
activity.
 
Mirtazapine is a potent antagonist of 5-HT2 
and 5-HT3 receptors. Mirtazapine has no 
significant affinity for the 5-HT1A and 5-HT1B receptors.
 
Mirtazapine is a potent antagonist of 
histamine (H1) receptors, a property that may explain its 
prominent sedative effects.
 
Mirtazapine is a moderate peripheral α1 adrenergic antagonist, a property that may explain the 
occasional orthostatic hypotension reported in association with its 
use.
 
Mirtazapine is a moderate antagonist at muscarinic receptors, a 
property that may explain the relatively low incidence of anticholinergic side 
effects associated with its use.

                  

                  

                  Pharmacokinetics
Mirtazapine Orally 
Disintegrating Tablets are rapidly and completely absorbed following oral 
administration and have a half-life of about 20 to 40 hours. Peak plasma 
concentrations are reached within about 2 hours following an oral dose. The 
presence of food in the stomach has a minimal effect on both the rate and extent 
of absorption and does not require a dosage adjustment. Mirtazapine Orally 
Disintegrating Tablets are bioequivalent to mirtazapine 
tablets.
 
Mirtazapine is extensively metabolized after oral 
administration. Major pathways of biotransformation are demethylation and 
hydroxylation followed by glucuronide conjugation. In vitro 
data from human liver microsomes indicate that cytochrome 2D6 and 1A2 are 
involved in the formation of the 8-hydroxy metabolite of mirtazapine, whereas 
cytochrome 3A is considered to be responsible for the formation of the 
N-desmethyl and N-oxide metabolite. Mirtazapine has an absolute bioavailability 
of about 50 percent. It is eliminated predominantly via urine (75 percent) with 15 percent in feces. 
Several unconjugated metabolites possess pharmacological activity but are 
present in the plasma at very low levels. The (-) enantiomer has an elimination 
half-life that is approximately twice as long as the (+) enantiomer and 
therefore achieves plasma levels that are about three times as high as that of 
the (+) enantiomer.
 
Plasma levels are linearly related to dose over a 
dose range of 15 to 80 mg. The mean elimination half-life of mirtazapine after 
oral administration ranges from approximately 20 to 40 hours across age and 
gender subgroups, with females of all ages exhibiting significantly longer 
elimination half-lives than males (mean half-life of 37 hours for females vs. 26 
hours for males). Steady state plasma levels of mirtazapine are attained within 
5 days, with about 50 percent accumulation (accumulation ratio = 
1.5). 
 
Mirtazapine is approximately 85% bound to plasma proteins over a 
concentration range of 0.01 to 10 mcg/mL.

                  

                  
                  
                  
                  
               
               
            
         