
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Amoxicillin is an antibacterial drug [see Microbiology (12.4)
                           ].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Absorption
                              
                              Amoxicillin is stable in the presence of gastric acid and is rapidly absorbed after oral administration. The effect of food on the absorption of amoxicillin from the suspension of amoxicillin has been partially investigated. The 400 mg formulation has been studied only when administered at the start of a light meal.
                              Orally administered doses of amoxicillin suspension, 125 mg/5 mL and 250 mg/5 mL, result in average peak blood levels 1 to 2 hours after administrtion in the range of 1.5 mcg/mL to 3 mcg/mL and 3.5 mcg/mL to 5 mcg/mL, respectively.
                              Oral administration of single doses of 400 mg chewable tablets and 400 mg/5 mL suspension of amoxicillin to 24 adult volunteers yielded comparable phamacokinetic data:
                              


                           



                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Distribution
                              
                              Amoxicillin diffuses readily into most body tissues and fluids, with the exception of brain and spinal fluid, except when meninges are inflamed. In blood serum, amoxicillin is approximately 20% protein-bound. Following a 1 gram dose and utilizing a special skin window technique to determine levels of the antibiotic, it was noted that therapeutic levels were found in the interstitial fluid.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Metabolism and Excretion
                              
                              The half-life of amoxicillin is 61.3 minutes. Approximately 60% of an orally administered dose of amoxicillin is excreted in the urine within 6 to 8 hours. Detectable serum levels are observed up to 8 hours after an orally administered dose of amoxicillin. Since most of the amoxicillin is excreted unchanged in the urine, its excretion can be delayed by concurrent administration of probenecid [see DRUG INTERACTIONS (7.1)
                                 ].
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.4 Microbiology
                     
                     
                        
                           
                              To reduce the development of drug-resistant bacteria and maintain the effectiveness of amoxicillin for oral suspension and other antibacterial drugs, amoxicillin for oral suspension should be used only to treat infections that are proven or strongly suspected to be caused by bacteria. 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Mechanism of Action
                              
                              Amoxicillin is similar to penicillin in its bactericidal action against susceptible bacteria during the stage of active multiplication. It acts through the inhibition of cell wall biosynthesis that leads to the death of the bacteria.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Method of Resistance
                              
                              Resistance to amoxicillin is mediated primarily through enzymes called beta-lactamases that cleave the beta-lactam ring of amoxicillin, rendering it inactive.
                              Amoxicillin has been shown to be active against most isolates of the bacteria listed below, both in vitro and in clinical infections as described in the INDICATIONS AND USAGE section.
                              


                           



                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Susceptibility Test Methods
                                 
(Susceptibility to amoxicillin can be determined using ampicillin powder and a 10 mcg ampicillin disk.)
                              When available, clinical microbiology should provide the results of in vitro susceptibility test results for antimicrobial drugs used in resident hospitals to the physician as periodic reports that describe the susceptibility profile of nosocomial and community-acquired pathogens. These reports should aid the physician in selecting an antimicrobial drug product for treatment.
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Dilution Techniques
                                    
                                    Quantitative methods are used to determine antimicrobial minimum inhibitory concentrations (MICs). These MICs provide estimates of the susceptibility of bacteria to antimicrobial compounds. The MICs should be determined using a standardized procedure. Standardized procedures are based on dilution methods (broth or agar)2,3 or equivalent with standardized inoculum concentrations and standardized concentrations of ampicillin powder. The MIC values should be interpreted according to the criteria in Table 4.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Diffusion Techniques
                                    
                                    Quantitative methods that require measurement of zone diameters also provide reproducible estimates of the susceptibility of bacteria to antimicrobial compounds. One such standardized procedure3 requires the use of standardized inoculum concentrations. This procedure uses paper disks impregnated with 10 mcg ampicillin to test the susceptibility of bacteria to ampicillin. Interpretation involves correlation of the diameter obtained in the disk test with the MIC for amoxicillin. Reports from the laboratory providing results of the standard single-disk susceptibility test with a 10 mcg ampicillin disk should be interpreted according to the criteria listed in Table 4.
                                    


                                    


A report of "Susceptible" indicates that the pathogen is likely to be inhibited if the antimicrobial compound in the blood reaches the concentration that are usually achievable. A report of "Intermediate" indicates that the result should be considered equivocal, and, if the microorganism is not fully susceptible to alternative, clinically feasible drugs, the test should be repeated. The intermediate category implies possible clinical applicability in body sites where the drug is physiologically concentrated or in situations where high dosage of drug can be used. The intermediate category also provides a buffer zone, which prevents small uncontrolled technical factors from causing major discrepancies in interpretation. A report of "Resistant" indicates that the pathogen is not likely to be inhibited if the antimicrobial compound in the blood reaches the concentrations that are usually achievable; other therapy(ies) are likely to be preferred.
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                       
                                       
                                          
                                             Quality Control
                                          
                                          Susceptibility techniques require use of laboratory control microorganisms to control the technical aspects of the laboratory standardized procedures.2,3,4 Standard ampicillin powder should provide the MIC values described below. For the diffusion technique using the 10 mcg ampicillin disk, the criteria are provided in Table 5.
                                          


                                       



                                       
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                       
                                       
                                          
                                             Susceptibility Testing for Helicobacter pylori
                                             
                                          
                                          Amoxicillin in vitro susceptibility testing methods for determining minimum inhibitory concentrations (MICs) and zone sizes have not been standardized, validated, or approved for testing H. pylori. Specimens for H. pylori and clarithromycin susceptibility test results should be obtained on isolates from patients who fail triple therapy. If clarithromycin resistance is found, a non-clarithromycin-containing regimen should be used.
                                       
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         