
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  Mechanism of ActionThe precise mechanism(s) by which zonisamide exerts its 
antiseizure effect is unknown. Zonisamide demonstrated anticonvulsant activity 
in several experimental models. In animals, zonisamide was effective against 
tonic extension seizures induced by maximal electroshock but ineffective against 
clonic seizures induced by subcutaneous pentylenetetrazol. Zonisamide raised the 
threshold for generalized seizures in the kindled rat model and reduced the 
duration of cortical focal seizures induced by electrical stimulation of the 
visual cortex in cats. Furthermore, zonisamide suppressed both interictal spikes 
and the secondarily generalized seizures produced by cortical application of 
tungstic acid gel in rats or by cortical freezing in cats. The relevance of 
these models to human epilepsy is unknown.
                  Zonisamide may produce these effects through action at sodium and calcium 
channels. In vitro pharmacological studies suggest 
that zonisamide blocks sodium channels and reduces voltage-dependent, transient 
inward currents (T-type Ca2+ currents), consequently 
stabilizing neuronal membranes and suppressing neuronal hypersynchronization. 
In vitro binding studies have demonstrated that 
zonisamide binds to the GABA/benzodiazepine receptor ionophore complex in an 
allosteric fashion which does not produce changes in chloride flux. Other in vitro studies have demonstrated that zonisamide (10 to 
30 mcg/mL) suppresses synaptically-driven electrical activity without affecting 
postsynaptic GABA or glutamate responses (cultured mouse spinal cord neurons) or 
neuronal or glial uptake of [3H]-GABA (rat hippocampal 
slices). Thus, zonisamide does not appear to potentiate the synaptic activity of 
GABA. In vivo microdialysis studies demonstrated that 
zonisamide facilitates both dopaminergic and serotonergic neurotransmission. 

                  Zonisamide is a carbonic anhydrase inhibitor. The contribution of this 
pharmacological action to the therapeutic effects of zonisamide is unknown. 
However, as a carbonic anhydrase inhibitor, zonisamide may cause metabolic 
acidosis (see 
                        WARNINGS, Metabolic 
Acidosis
                      subsection).
                  
                  
                  PharmacokineticsFollowing a 200 to 400 mg oral zonisamide dose, peak plasma 
concentrations (range: 2 to 5 mcg/mL) in normal volunteers occur within 2 to 6 
hours. In the presence of food, the time to maximum concentration is delayed, 
occurring at 4 to 6 hours, but food has no effect on the bioavailability of 
zonisamide. Zonisamide extensively binds to erythrocytes, resulting in an 
eight-fold higher concentration of zonisamide in red blood cells (RBC) than in 
plasma. The pharmacokinetics of zonisamide are dose proportional in the range of 
200 to 400 mg, but the Cmax and AUC increase 
disproportionately at 800 mg, perhaps due to saturable binding of zonisamide to 
RBC. Once a stable dose is reached, steady state is achieved within 14 days. The 
elimination half-life of zonisamide in plasma is about 63 hours. The elimination 
half-life of zonisamide in RBC is approximately 105 hours.
                  The apparent volume of distribution (V/F) of zonisamide is about 1.45 L/kg 
following a 400 mg oral dose. Zonisamide, at concentrations of 1 to 7 mcg/mL, is 
approximately 40% bound to human plasma proteins. Protein binding of zonisamide 
is unaffected in the presence of therapeutic concentrations of phenytoin, 
phenobarbital or carbamazepine.
                  
                  
                  Metabolism and ExcretionFollowing oral administration of 14C-zonisamide to healthy volunteers, only zonisamide was 
detected in plasma. Zonisamide is excreted primarily in urine as parent drug and 
as the glucuronide of a metabolite. Following multiple dosing, 62% of the 14C dose was recovered in the urine, with 3% in the feces by 
day 10. Zonisamide undergoes acetylation to form N-acetyl zonisamide and 
reduction to form the open ring metabolite, 2–sulfamoylacetyl phenol (SMAP). Of 
the excreted dose, 35% was recovered as zonisamide, 15% as N-acetyl zonisamide, 
and 50% as the glucuronide of SMAP. Reduction of zonisamide to SMAP is mediated 
by cytochrome P450 isozyme 3A4 (CYP3A4). Zonisamide does not induce its own 
metabolism. Plasma clearance of zonisamide is approximately 0.3 to 0.35 
mL/min/kg in patients not receiving enzyme-inducing antiepilepsy drugs (AEDs). 
The clearance of zonisamide is increased to 0.5 mL/min/kg in patients 
concurrently on enzyme-inducing AEDs.
                  Renal clearance is about 3.5 mL/min. The clearance of an oral dose of 
zonisamide from RBC is 2 mL/min.
                  
                  
                  Special Populations
                  
                  
                  Renal Insufficiency
                  Single 300 mg zonisamide doses were administered to three groups 
of volunteers. Group 1 was a healthy group with a creatinine clearance ranging 
from 70 to 152 mL/min. Group 2 and Group 3 had creatinine clearances ranging 
from 14.5 to 59 mL/min and 10 to 20 mL/min, respectively. Zonisamide renal 
clearance decreased with decreasing renal function (3.42, 2.5, 2.23 mL/min, 
respectively). Marked renal impairment (creatinine clearance < 20 mL/min) was 
associated with an increase in zonisamide AUC of 35% (see 
                        DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION
                      section).
                  
                  
                  
                  Hepatic Disease
                  The pharmacokinetics of zonisamide in patients with impaired 
liver function have not been studied (see 
                        DOSAGE 
AND ADMINISTRATION
                      section).
                  
                  
                  
                  Age
                  The pharmacokinetics of a 300 mg single dose of zonisamide was 
similar in young (mean age 28 years) and elderly subjects (mean age 69 
years).
                  
                  
                  
                  Gender and Race
                  Information on the effect of gender and race on the 
pharmacokinetics of zonisamide is not available.
                  
                  
                  
                  Interactions of Zonisamide with 
Other Antiepilepsy Drugs (AEDs)
                  Concurrent medication with drugs that either induce or inhibit 
CYP3A4 may alter serum concentrations of zonisamide. Concomitant administration 
of phenytoin and carbamazepine increases zonisamide plasma clearance from 0.3 to 
0.35 mL/min/kg to 0.35 to 0.5 mL/min/kg. The half-life of zonisamide is 
decreased to 27 hours by phenytoin, to 38 hours by phenobarbital and 
carbamazepine, and to 46 hours by valproate. Plasma protein binding of phenytoin 
and carbamazepine was not affected by zonisamide administration (see 
                        PRECAUTIONS, Drug Interactions
                      
subsection).
                  
                  
                  
                  Interactions of Zonisamide with 
Other Carbonic Anhydrase Inhibitors:
                  Concomitant use of zonisamide, a 
carbonic anhydrase inhibitor, with any other carbonic anhydrase inhibitor (e.g., 
topiramate, acetazolamide or dichlorphenamide), may increase the severity of 
metabolic acidosis and may also increase the risk of kidney stone formation. 
Therefore, if zonisamide is given concomitantly with 
another carbonic anhydrase inhibitor, the patient should be monitored for the 
appearance or worsening of metabolic acidosis (see 
                        PRECAUTIONS, Drug Interactions
                      subsection).
                  
                  
                  Clinical StudiesThe effectiveness of zonisamide as adjunctive therapy (added to 
other antiepilepsy drugs) has been established in three multicenter, 
placebo-controlled, double blind, 3-month clinical trials (two domestic, one 
European) in 499 patients with refractory partial onset seizures with or without 
secondary generalization. Each patient had a history of at least four partial 
onset seizures per month in spite of receiving one or two antiepilepsy drugs at 
therapeutic concentrations. The 499 patients (209 women, 290 men) ranged in age 
from 13 to 68 years with a mean age of about 35 years. In the two US studies, 
over 80% of patients were Caucasian; 100% of patients in the European study were 
Caucasian. Zonisamide or placebo was added to the existing therapy. The primary 
measure of effectiveness was median percent reduction from baseline in partial 
seizure frequency. The secondary measure was proportion of patients achieving a 
50% or greater seizure reduction from baseline (responders). The results 
described below are for all partial seizures in the intent-to-treat 
populations.
                  In the first study (n = 203), all patients had a 1-month baseline observation 
period, then received placebo or zonisamide in one of two dose escalation 
regimens; either 1) 100 mg/day for five weeks, 200 mg/day for one week, 300 
mg/day for one week, and then 400 mg/day for five weeks; or 2) 100 mg/day for 
one week, followed by 200 mg/day for five weeks, then 300 mg/day for one week, 
then 400 mg/day for five weeks. This design allowed a 100 mg vs. placebo 
comparison over weeks 1 to 5, and a 200 mg vs. placebo comparison over weeks 2 
to 6; the primary comparison was 400 mg (both escalation groups combined) vs. 
placebo over weeks 8 to 12. The total daily dose was given as twice a day 
dosing. Statistically significant treatment differences favoring zonisamide were 
seen for doses of 100, 200, and 400 mg/day.
                  In the second (n = 152) and third (n = 138) studies, patients had a 2 to 3 
month baseline, then were randomly assigned to placebo or zonisamide for three 
months. Zonisamide was introduced by administering 100 mg/day for the first 
week, 200 mg/day the second week, then 400 mg/day for two weeks, after which the 
dose (zonisamide or placebo) could be adjusted as necessary to a maximum dose of 
20 mg/kg/day or a maximum plasma level of 40 mcg/mL. In the second study, the 
total daily dose was given as twice a day dosing; in the third study, it was 
given as a single daily dose. The average final maintenance doses received in 
the studies were 530 and 430 mg/day in the second and third studies, 
respectively. Both studies demonstrated statistically significant differences 
favoring zonisamide for doses of 400 to 600 mg/day, and there was no apparent 
difference between once daily and twice daily dosing (in different studies). 
Analysis of the data (first 4 weeks) during titration demonstrated statistically 
significant differences favoring zonisamide at doses between 100 and 400 mg/day. 
The primary comparison in both trials was for any dose over Weeks 5 to 12.
                  
                  


                  



                  *p<0.05 compared to placebo

                  
                  


                  




                  *p<0.05 compared to placebo
               
               
                  
                     image of figure 1
                     
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        Figure 1 presents the proportion of patients (X-axis) whose percentage 
reduction from baseline in the all partial seizure rate was at least as great as 
that indicated on the Y-axis in the second and third placebo-controlled trials. 
A positive value on the Y-axis indicates an improvement from baseline (i.e., a 
decrease in seizure rate), while a negative value indicates a worsening from 
baseline (i.e., an increase in seizure rate). Thus, in a display of this type, 
the curve for an effective treatment is shifted to the left of the curve for 
placebo. The proportion of patients achieving any particular level of reduction 
in seizure rate was consistently higher for the zonisamide groups compared to 
the placebo groups. For example, Figure 1 indicates that approximately 27% of 
patients treated with zonisamide experienced a 75% or greater reduction, 
compared to approximately 12% in the placebo groups.1
                        Figure 1 Proportion of Patients Achieving Differing 
Levels of Seizure Reduction in Zonisamide and Placebo Groups in Studies 2 and 
3
                        
                        No differences in efficacy based on age, sex or race, as measured by a change 
in seizure frequency from baseline, were detected.
                     
                  
               
            
         