
                     
                     
                     Drug/Drug Interactions
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Propranolol Hydrochloride
                              
                           
                           
                              Patients receiving catecholamine-depleting drugs such as reserpine should be closely observed if propranolol hydrochloride and hydrochlorothiazide is administered. The added catecholamine-blocking action may produce an excessive reduction of resting sympathetic nervous activity, which may result in hypotension, marked bradycardia, vertigo, syncopal attacks, or orthostatic hypotension.
                              Caution should be exercised when patients receiving a beta-blocker are administered a calcium-channel blocking drug, especially intravenous verapamil, for both agents may depress myocardial contractility or atrioventricular conduction. On rare occasions, the concomitant intravenous use of a beta-blocker and verapamil has resulted in serious adverse reactions, especially in patients with severe cardiomyopathy, congestive heart failure, or recent myocardial infarction.
                              Both digitalis glycosides and beta-blockers slow atrioventricular conduction and decrease heart rate. Concomitant use can increase the risk of bradycardia.
                              Blunting of the antihypertensive effect of beta-adrenoceptor blocking agents by nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs has been reported.
                              Hypotension and cardiac arrest have been reported with the concomitant use of propranolol and haloperidol.
                              
                                 Aluminum hydroxide gel greatly reduces intestinal absorption of propranolol.
                              
                                 Alcohol, when used concomitantly with propranolol, may increase plasma levels of propranolol.
                              
                                 Phenytoin, phenobarbitone, and rifampin accelerate propranolol clearance.
                              
                                 Chlorpromazine, when used concomitantly with propranolol, results in increased plasma levels of both drugs.
                              
                                 Antipyrine and lidocaine have reduced clearance when used concomitantly with propranolol.
                              
                                 Thyroxine may result in a lower than expected T3 concentration when used concomitantly with propranolol.
                              
                                 Cimetidine decreases the hepatic metabolism of propranolol, delaying elimination and increasing blood levels.
                              
                                 Theophylline clearance is reduced when used concomitantly with propranolol.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Hydrochlorothiazide
                              
                           
                           
                              Thiazide drugs may increase the responsiveness to tubocurarine.
                              Thiazides may decrease arterial responsiveness to norepinephrine. This diminution is not sufficient to preclude effectiveness of the pressor agent for therapeutic use.
                              Insulin requirements in diabetic patients may be increased, decreased, or unchanged.
                              Hypokalemia may develop during concomitant use of corticosteroids or ACTH.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               