
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  Butalbital, Acetaminophen, Caffeine and Codeine Phosphate 
Capsules is a combination drug product intended as a treatment for tension 
headache.
                  Butalbital, Acetaminophen, and Caffeine Tablets, USP consists of a fixed 
combination of butalbital 50 mg, acetaminophen 325 mg, and caffeine 40 mg. The 
role each component plays in the relief of the complex of symptoms known as 
tension headache is incompletely understood.
                  
                  PharmacokineticsThe behavior of the individual components is described below.
                  
                     Codeine
                  
                  Codeine is readily absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract. It is rapidly 
distributed from the intravascular spaces to the various body tissues, with 
preferential uptake by parenchymatous organs such as the liver, spleen and 
kidney. Codeine crosses the blood-brain barrier, and is found in fetal tissue 
and breast milk. The plasma concentration does not correlate with brain 
concentration or relief of pain; however, codeine is not bound to plasma 
proteins and does not accumulate in body tissues.
                  The plasma half-life is about 2.9 hours. The elimination of codeine is 
primarily via the kidneys, and about 90% of an oral dose is excreted by the 
kidneys within 24 hours of dosing. The urinary secretion products consist of 
free and glucuronide conjugated codeine (about 70%), free and conjugated 
norcodeine (about 10%), free and conjugated morphine (about 10%), normorphine 
(about 4%), and hydrocodone (1%). The remainder of the dose is excreted in the 
feces.
                  At therapeutic doses, the analgesic effect reaches a peak within 2 hours and 
persists between 4 and 6 hours.
                  See OVERDOSAGE for 
toxicity information.
                  
                     Butalbital
                  
                  Butalbital is well absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract and is expected 
to distribute to most tissues in the body. Barbiturates in general may appear in 
breast milk and readily cross the placental barrier. They are bound to plasma 
and tissue proteins to a varying degree and binding increases directly as a 
function of lipid solubility.
                  Elimination of butalbital is primarily via the kidney (59%-88% of the dose) 
as unchanged drug or metabolites. The plasma half-life is about 35 hours. 
Urinary excretion products include parent drug (about 3.6% of the dose), 
5-isobutyl-5-(2,3-dihydroxypropyl) barbituric acid (about 24% of the dose), 
5-allyl-5(3-hydroxy-2-methyl-1-propyl) barbituric acid (about 4.8% of the dose), 
products with the barbituric acid ring hydrolyzed with excretion of urea (about 
14% of the dose), as well as unidentified materials. Of the material excreted in 
the urine, 32% is conjugated.
                  The in vitro plasma protein binding of butalbital 
is 45% over the concentration range of 0.5-20 mcg/mL. This falls within the 
range of plasma protein binding (20%-45%) reported with other barbiturates such 
as phenobarbital, pentobarbital, and secobarbital sodium. The plasma-to-blood 
concentration ratio was almost unity indicating that there is no preferential 
distribution of butalbital into either plasma or blood cells.
                  See OVERDOSAGE for 
toxicity information.
                  
                     Caffeine
                  
                  Like most xanthines, caffeine is rapidly absorbed and distributed in all body 
tissues and fluids, including the CNS, fetal tissues, and breast milk.
                  Caffeine is cleared through metabolism and excretion in the urine. The plasma 
half-life is about 3 hours. Hepatic biotransformation prior to excretion results 
in about equal amounts of 1-methylxanthine and 1-methyluric acid. Of the 70% of 
the dose that is recovered in the urine, only 3% is unchanged drug.
                  See OVERDOSAGE for 
toxicity information.
                  
                     Acetaminophen
                  
                  Acetaminophen is rapidly absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract and is 
distributed throughout most body tissues. The plasma half-life is 1.25-3 hours, 
but may be increased by liver damage and following overdosage. Elimination of 
acetaminophen is principally by liver metabolism (conjugation) and subsequent 
renal excretion of metabolites. Approximately 85% of an oral dose appears in the 
urine within 24 hours of administration, most as the glucuronide conjugate, with 
small amounts of other conjugates and unchanged drug.
                  See OVERDOSAGE for 
toxicity information.
               
               
            
         