
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  Mechanism of Action
                  CADUETCADUET is a combination of two drugs, a dihydropyridine calcium 
channel blocker amlodipine and an HMG-CoA reductase inhibitor atorvastatin. The 
amlodipine component of CADUET inhibits the transmembrane influx of calcium ions 
into vascular smooth muscle and cardiac muscle. The atorvastatin component of 
CADUET is a selective, competitive inhibitor of HMG-CoA reductase (statin), the 
rate-limiting enzyme that converts 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-coenzyme A to 
mevalonate, a precursor of sterols, including cholesterol.
                  
                  AmlodipineExperimental data suggest that amlodipine binds to both 
dihydropyridine and nondihydropyridine binding sites. The contractile processes 
of cardiac muscle and vascular smooth muscle are dependent upon the movement of 
extracellular calcium ions into these cells through specific ion channels. 
Amlodipine inhibits calcium ion influx across cell membranes selectively, with a 
greater effect on vascular smooth muscle cells than on cardiac muscle cells. 
Negative inotropic effects can be detected in vitro 
but such effects have not been seen in intact animals at therapeutic doses. 
Serum calcium concentration is not affected by amlodipine.
                  Amlodipine is a peripheral arterial vasodilator that acts directly on 
vascular smooth muscle to cause a reduction in peripheral vascular resistance 
and reduction in blood pressure.
                  The precise mechanisms by which amlodipine relieves angina have not been 
fully delineated, but are thought to include the following:
                  Exertional Angina: In patients with exertional angina, amlodipine reduces the 
total peripheral resistance (afterload) against which the heart works and 
reduces the rate pressure product, and thus myocardial oxygen demand, at any 
given level of exercise.
                  Vasospastic Angina: Amlodipine has been demonstrated to block constriction 
and restore blood flow in coronary arteries and arterioles in response to 
calcium, potassium epinephrine, serotonin, and thromboxane A2 analog in experimental animal models and in human coronary 
vessels in vitro. This inhibition of coronary spasm 
is responsible for the effectiveness of amlodipine in vasospastic (Prinzmetal's 
or variant) angina.
                  
                  AtorvastatinCholesterol and triglycerides circulate in the bloodstream as 
part of lipoprotein complexes. With ultracentrifugation, these complexes 
separate into HDL (high-density lipoprotein), IDL (intermediate-density 
lipoprotein), LDL (low-density lipoprotein), and VLDL (very-low-density 
lipoprotein) fractions. Triglycerides (TG) and cholesterol in the liver are 
incorporated into VLDL and released into the plasma for delivery to peripheral 
tissues. LDL is formed from VLDL and is catabolized primarily through the 
high-affinity LDL receptor.
                  Clinical and pathologic studies show that elevated plasma levels of total 
cholesterol (total-C), LDL-cholesterol (LDL-C), and apolipoprotein B (apo B) 
promote human atherosclerosis and are risk factors for developing cardiovascular 
disease, while increased levels of HDL-C are associated with a decreased 
cardiovascular risk.
                  Epidemiologic investigations have established that cardiovascular morbidity 
and mortality vary directly with the level of total-C and LDL-C, and inversely 
with the level of HDL-C.
                  In animal models, atorvastatin lowers plasma cholesterol and lipoprotein 
levels by inhibiting HMG-CoA reductase and cholesterol synthesis in the liver 
and by increasing the number of hepatic LDL receptors on the cell-surface to 
enhance uptake and catabolism of LDL; atorvastatin also reduces LDL production 
and the number of LDL particles.
                  Atorvastatin reduces total-C, LDL-C, and apo B in patients with homozygous 
and heterozygous familial hypercholesterolemia (FH), nonfamilial forms of 
hypercholesterolemia, and mixed dyslipidemia. Atorvastatin also reduces VLDL-C 
and TG and produces variable increases in HDL-C and apolipoprotein A-1. 
Atorvastatin reduces total-C, LDL-C, VLDL-C, apo B, TG, and non-HDL-C, and 
increases HDL-C in patients with isolated hypertriglyceridemia. Atorvastatin 
reduces intermediate density lipoprotein cholesterol (IDL-C) in patients with 
dysbetalipoproteinemia.
                  Like LDL, cholesterol-enriched triglyceride-rich lipoproteins, including 
VLDL, intermediate density lipoprotein (IDL), and remnants, can also promote 
atherosclerosis. Elevated plasma triglycerides are frequently found in a triad 
with low HDL-C levels and small LDL particles, as well as in association with 
non-lipid metabolic risk factors for coronary heart disease. As such, total 
plasma TG has not consistently been shown to be an independent risk factor for 
CHD. Furthermore, the independent effect of raising HDL or lowering TG on the 
risk of coronary and cardiovascular morbidity and mortality has not been 
determined.
                  
                  
                  Pharmacokinetics and Metabolism
                  Absorption
                  Studies with amlodipineAfter oral administration of therapeutic doses of amlodipine 
alone, absorption produces peak plasma concentrations between 6 and 12 hours. 
Absolute bioavailability has been estimated to be between 64% and 90%.
                  
                  Studies with atorvastatinAfter oral administration alone, atorvastatin is rapidly 
absorbed; maximum plasma concentrations occur within 1 to 2 hours. Extent of 
absorption increases in proportion to atorvastatin dose. The absolute 
bioavailability of atorvastatin (parent drug) is approximately 14% and the 
systemic availability of HMG-CoA reductase inhibitory activity is approximately 
30%. The low systemic availability is attributed to presystemic clearance in 
gastrointestinal mucosa and/or hepatic first-pass metabolism. Plasma 
atorvastatin concentrations are lower (approximately 30% for Cmax and AUC) 
following evening drug administration compared with morning. However, LDL-C 
reduction is the same regardless of the time of day of drug administration (see 

                        DOSAGE AND 
ADMINISTRATION
                     ).
                  
                  Studies with CADUETFollowing oral administration of CADUET peak plasma 
concentrations of amlodipine and atorvastatin are seen at 6 to 12 hours and 1 to 
2 hours post dosing, respectively. The rate and extent of absorption 
(bioavailability) of amlodipine and atorvastatin from CADUET are not 
significantly different from the bioavailability of amlodipine and atorvastatin 
administered separately (see above).
                  The bioavailability of amlodipine from CADUET was not affected by food. Food 
decreases the rate and extent of absorption of atorvastatin from CADUET by 
approximately 32% and 11%, respectively, as it does with atorvastatin when given 
alone. LDL-C reduction is similar whether atorvastatin is given with or without 
food.
                  
                  Distribution
                  Studies with amlodipine
                     Ex vivo studies have shown that 
approximately 93% of the circulating amlodipine drug is bound to plasma proteins 
in hypertensive patients. Steady-state plasma levels of amlodipine are reached 
after 7 to 8 days of consecutive daily dosing.
                  
                  Studies with atorvastatinMean volume of distribution of atorvastatin is approximately 381 
liters. Atorvastatin is ≥98% bound to plasma proteins. A blood/plasma ratio of 
approximately 0.25 indicates poor drug penetration into red blood cells. Based 
on observations in rats, atorvastatin calcium is likely to be secreted in human 
milk (see 
                        CONTRAINDICATIONS, Pregnancy and 
Lactation, and 
                        PRECAUTIONS, Nursing Mothers
                     ).
                  
                  Metabolism
                  Studies with amlodipineAmlodipine is extensively (about 90%) converted to inactive 
metabolites via hepatic metabolism.
                  
                  Studies with atorvastatinAtorvastatin is extensively metabolized to ortho- and 
parahydroxylated derivatives and various beta-oxidation products. In vitro inhibition of HMG-CoA reductase by ortho- and 
parahydroxylated metabolites is equivalent to that of atorvastatin. 
Approximately 70% of circulating inhibitory activity for HMG-CoA reductase is 
attributed to active metabolites. In vitro studies 
suggest the importance of atorvastatin metabolism by cytochrome P450 3A4, 
consistent with increased plasma concentrations of atorvastatin in humans 
following coadministration with erythromycin, a known inhibitor of this isozyme 
(see 
                        PRECAUTIONS, Drug 
Interactions
                     ). In animals, the ortho-hydroxy metabolite undergoes 
further glucuronidation.
                  
                  Excretion
                  Studies with amlodipineElimination from the plasma is biphasic with a terminal 
elimination half-life of about 30–50 hours. Ten percent of the parent amlodipine 
compound and 60% of the metabolites of amlodipine are excreted in the 
urine.
                  
                  Studies with atorvastatinAtorvastatin and its metabolites are eliminated primarily in bile 
following hepatic and/or extra-hepatic metabolism; however, the drug does not 
appear to undergo enterohepatic recirculation. Mean plasma elimination half-life 
of atorvastatin in humans is approximately 14 hours, but the half-life of 
inhibitory activity for HMG-CoA reductase is 20 to 30 hours due to the 
contribution of active metabolites. Less than 2% of a dose of atorvastatin is 
recovered in urine following oral administration.
                  
                  
                  Specific Populations
                  Geriatric
                  Studies with amlodipineElderly patients have decreased clearance of amlodipine with a 
resulting increase in AUC of approximately 40–60%, and a lower initial dose of 
amlodipine may be required.
                  
                  Studies with atorvastatinPlasma concentrations of atorvastatin are higher (approximately 
40% for Cmax and 30% for AUC) in healthy elderly subjects (age ≥65 years) than 
in young adults. Clinical data suggest a greater degree of LDL-lowering at any 
dose of atorvastatin in the elderly population compared to younger adults (see 

                        PRECAUTIONS
                     , 
                        Geriatric Use
                     ).
                  
                  Pediatric
                  Studies with amlodipineSixty-two hypertensive patients aged 6 to 17 years received doses 
of amlodipine between 1.25 mg and 20 mg. Weight-adjusted clearance and volume of 
distribution were similar to values in adults.
                  
                  Studies with atorvastatinPharmacokinetic data in the pediatric population are not 
available.
                  
                  Gender
                  Studies with atorvastatinPlasma concentrations of atorvastatin in women differ from those 
in men (approximately 20% higher for Cmax and 10% lower for AUC); however, there 
is no clinically significant difference in LDL-C reduction with atorvastatin 
between men and women.
                  
                  Renal Impairment 
                  Studies with amlodipineThe pharmacokinetics of amlodipine are not significantly 
influenced by renal impairment. Patients with renal failure may therefore 
receive the usual initial amlodipine dose.
                  
                  Studies with atorvastatinRenal disease has no influence on the plasma concentrations or 
LDL-C reduction of atorvastatin; thus, dose adjustment of atorvastatin in 
patients with renal dysfunction is not necessary (see 
                        DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION
                      and 
                        WARNINGS, Skeletal 
Muscle
                     ).
                  
                  HemodialysisWhile studies have not been conducted in patients with end-stage 
renal disease, hemodialysis is not expected to clear atorvastatin or amlodipine 
since both drugs are extensively bound to plasma proteins.
                  
                  Hepatic ImpairmentAtorvastatin is contraindicated in patients with active liver 
disease.
                  
                  Studies with amlodipineElderly patients and patients with hepatic insufficiency have 
decreased clearance of amlodipine with a resulting increase in AUC of 
approximately 40–60%.
                  
                  Studies with atorvastatinIn patients with chronic alcoholic liver disease, plasma 
concentrations of atorvastatin are markedly increased. Cmax and AUC are each 
4-fold greater in patients with Childs-Pugh A disease. Cmax and AUC of 
atorvastatin are approximately 16-fold and 11-fold increased, respectively, in 
patients with Childs-Pugh B disease (see 
                        CONTRAINDICATIONS
                     ).
                  
                  Heart Failure
                  Studies with amlodipineIn patients with moderate to severe heart failure, the increase 
in AUC for amlodipine was similar to that seen in the elderly and in patients 
with hepatic insufficiency.
                  
                  Pharmacokinetic Studies of Atorvastatin and 
Co-Administered Drugs


                  


*     Data given as x-fold change represent a simple ratio between co-administration 
and atorvastatin alone (i.e., 1-fold = no change). Data given as % change 
represent % difference relative to atorvastatin alone (i.e., 0% = no change). 

                  †     See WARNINGS, Skeletal Muscle and PRECAUTIONS, Drug Interactions for 
clinical significance.

                  ‡     Greater increases in AUC (up to 2.5-fold) and/or Cmax (up to 71%) have been reported 
with excessive grapefruit consumption (≥ 750 mL – 1.2 liters per day). 

                  §     Single sample taken 8-16 h post dose.

                  ¶     Due to the dual interaction mechanism of rifampin, simultaneous co-administration of 
atorvastatin with rifampin is recommended, as delayed administration of 
atorvastatin after administration of rifampin has been associated with a 
significant reduction in atorvastatin plasma concentrations.

                  

                  

                  

                  

               
               
            
         