
               
               
               DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
                  The following interactions are from a published review and include reports concerning both oral and topical salicylate administration. The relationship of these interactions to the use of Salicylic Acid is not known.
                  I. Due to the competition of salicylate with other drugs for binding to serum albumin the following drug interactions may occur:
                  


                  


II. Drugs changing salicylate levels by altering renal tubular reabsorption:
                  


                  


III. Drugs with complicated interactions with salicylates:
                  


                  


The following alterations of laboratory tests have been reported during salicylate therapy:
                  


               



               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Pregnancy category C
                     
                        Salicylic Acid has been shown to be teratogenic in rats and monkeys. It is difficult to extrapolate from oral doses of acetylsalicylic acid used in these studies to topical administration as the oral dose to monkeys may represent six times the maximal daily human dose of salicylic acid when applied topically over a large body surface. There are no adequate and well-controlled studies in pregnant women. Salicylic Acid should be used during pregnancy only if the potential benefit justifies the potential risk to the fetus.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Nursing Mothers
                     
                        Because of the potential for serious adverse reactions in nursing infants from the mother’s use of Salicylic Acid, a decision should be made whether to discontinue nursing or to discontinue the drug, taking into account the importance of the drug to the mother. If used by nursing mothers, it should not be used on the chest area to avoid the accidental contamination of the child.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Carcinogenesis, Mutagenesis, Impairment of Fertility
                     
                        No data are available concerning potential carcinogenic or reproductive effects of Salicylic Acid has been shown to lack mutagenic potential in the Ames Salmonella test.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         