
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY

               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action

                     
                        NAMZARIC capsules contain two approved medications: memantine hydrochloride extended-release and donepezil hydrochloride. Each of those medications is postulated to have a different mechanism in Alzheimer's disease.

                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Memantine
                              
                              Persistent activation of central nervous system NMDA receptors by the excitatory amino acid glutamate has been hypothesized to contribute to the symptomatology of Alzheimer's disease. Memantine is postulated to exert its therapeutic effect through its action as a low to moderate affinity uncompetitive (open channel) NMDA receptor antagonist which binds preferentially to the NMDA receptor-operated cation channels. There is no evidence that memantine prevents or slows neurodegeneration in patients with Alzheimer's disease.

                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Donepezil
                              
                              Current theories on the pathogenesis of the cognitive signs and symptoms of Alzheimer's disease attribute some of them to a deficiency of cholinergic neurotransmission. Donepezil is postulated to exert its therapeutic effect by enhancing cholinergic function. This is accomplished by increasing the concentration of acetylcholine in the central nervous system through reversible inhibition of its hydrolysis by acetylcholinesterase. There is no evidence that donepezil prevents or slows neurodegeneration in patients with Alzheimer's disease.

                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics

                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 NAMZARIC
                              
                              NAMZARIC was bioequivalent to co-administration of individual memantine hydrochloride extended-release and donepezil hydrochloride.

                              Exposure (AUC and Cmax) of memantine and donepezil following NAMZARIC administration in the fed or fasted state was similar. Further, exposure of memantine and donepezil following NAMZARIC administration as intact capsule or capsule contents sprinkled on applesauce was similar in healthy subjects.

                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Memantine Hydrochloride
                              
                              Memantine is well absorbed after oral administration and has linear pharmacokinetics over the therapeutic dose range. It is excreted predominantly unchanged in urine and has a terminal elimination half-life of about 60-80 hours. In a study comparing 28 mg once-daily memantine hydrochloride extended-release to 10 mg twice-daily memantine hydrochloride, Cmax and AUC0-24 values were 48% and 33% higher for the memantine hydrochloride extended-release dosage regimen, respectively.

                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Absorption
                                    
                                    After multiple dose administration of memantine hydrochloride extended-release, memantine peak concentrations occur around 9-12 hours postdose. There is no difference in the absorption of memantine hydrochloride extended-release when the capsule is taken intact or when the contents are sprinkled on applesauce.

                                    After single-dose administration, there is no difference in memantine exposure, based on Cmax or AUC, for memantine hydrochloride extended-release when the drug product is administered with food or on an empty stomach. However, peak plasma concentrations are achieved about 18 hours after administration with food versus approximately 25 hours after administration on an empty stomach.

                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Distribution
                                    
                                    The mean volume of distribution of memantine is 9-11 L/kg and the plasma protein binding is low (45%).

                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Metabolism
                                    
                                    Memantine undergoes partial hepatic metabolism. The hepatic microsomal CYP450 enzyme system does not play a significant role in the metabolism of memantine.

                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Elimination
                                    
                                    Memantine is excreted predominantly in the urine, unchanged, and has a terminal elimination half-life of about 60-80 hours. About 48% of administered drug is excreted unchanged in urine; the remainder is converted primarily to three polar metabolites which possess minimal NMDA receptor antagonistic activity: the N-glucuronide conjugate, 6-hydroxy memantine, and 1-nitroso-deaminated memantine. A total of 74% of the administered dose is excreted as the sum of the parent drug and the N-glucuronide conjugate. Renal clearance involves active tubular secretion moderated by pH dependent tubular reabsorption.

                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Pharmacokinetics in Special Populations
                              
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Renal Impairment
                                    
                                    Memantine pharmacokinetics were evaluated following single oral administration of 20 mg memantine hydrochloride in 8 subjects with mild renal impairment (creatinine clearance, CLcr, > 50 – 80 mL/min), 8 subjects with moderate renal impairment (CLcr 30 – 49 mL/min), 7 subjects with severe renal impairment (CLcr 5 – 29 mL/min) and 8 healthy subjects (CLcr > 80 mL/min) matched as closely as possible by age, weight and gender to the subjects with renal impairment. Mean AUC0-∞ increased by 4%, 60%, and 115% in subjects with mild, moderate, and severe renal impairment, respectively, compared to healthy subjects. The terminal elimination half-life increased by 18%, 41%, and 95% in subjects with mild, moderate, and severe renal impairment, respectively, compared to healthy subjects [see Dosage and Administration (2.3) and Use in Specific Populations (8.6)].

                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Hepatic Impairment
                                    
                                    Memantine pharmacokinetics were evaluated following the administration of single oral doses of 20 mg in 8 subjects with moderate hepatic impairment (Child-Pugh Class B, score 7-9) and 8 subjects who were age-, gender-, and weight-matched to the hepatically-impaired subjects. There was no change in memantine exposure (based on Cmax and AUC) in subjects with moderate hepatic impairment as compared with healthy subjects. However, terminal elimination half-life increased by about 16% in subjects with moderate hepatic impairment as compared with healthy subjects. The pharmacokinetics of memantine has not been evaluated in patients with severe hepatic impairment.

                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Gender
                                    
                                    Following multiple dose administration of memantine hydrochloride 20 mg daily, females had about 45% higher exposure than males, but there was no difference in exposure when body weight was taken into account.

                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Elderly
                                    
                                    The pharmacokinetics of memantine in young and elderly subjects are similar.

                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Drug-Drug Interactions
                              
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Use with Cholinesterase Inhibitors
                                    
                                    Coadministration of memantine with the AChE inhibitor donepezil hydrochloride did not affect the pharmacokinetics of either compound. Furthermore, memantine did not affect AChE inhibition by donepezil. In a 24-week controlled clinical study in patients with moderate to severe Alzheimer's disease, the adverse event profile observed with a combination of memantine immediate-release and donepezil was similar to that of donepezil alone.

                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Effect of Memantine on the Metabolism of Other Drugs
                                    
                                    
                                       In vitro studies conducted with marker substrates of CYP450 enzymes (CYP1A2, -2A6, -2C9, -2D6, -2E1, -3A4) showed minimal inhibition of these enzymes by memantine. In addition, in vitro studies indicate that at concentrations exceeding those associated with efficacy, memantine does not induce the cytochrome P450 isozymes CYP1A2, -2C9, -2E1 and -3A4/5. No pharmacokinetic interactions with drugs metabolized by these enzymes are expected.

                                    Pharmacokinetic studies evaluated the potential of memantine for interaction with warfarin and bupropion. Memantine did not affect the pharmacokinetics of the CYP2B6 substrate bupropion or its metabolite hydroxybupropion. Furthermore, memantine did not affect the pharmacokinetics or pharmacodynamics of warfarin as assessed by prothrombin INR.

                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Effect of Other Drugs on Memantine
                                    
                                    Memantine is predominantly renally eliminated, and drugs that are substrates and/or inhibitors of the CYP450 system are not expected to alter the pharmacokinetics of memantine. A single dose of bupropion did not affect the pharmacokinetics of memantine at steady state.

                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Drugs Eliminated via Renal Mechanisms
                                    
                                    Because memantine is eliminated in part by tubular secretion, coadministration of drugs that use the same renal cationic system, including hydrochlorothiazide (HCTZ), triamterene (TA), metformin, cimetidine, ranitidine, quinidine, and nicotine, could potentially result in altered plasma levels of both agents. However, coadministration of memantine hydrochloride and HCTZ/TA did not affect the bioavailability of either memantine or TA, and the bioavailability of HCTZ decreased by 20%. In addition, coadministration of memantine hydrochloride with the antihyperglycemic drug Glucovance® (glyburide and metformin hydrochloride) did not affect the pharmacokinetics of memantine, metformin, and glyburide. Furthermore, memantine did not modify the serum glucose lowering effect of Glucovance®, indicating the absence of a pharmacodynamic interaction.

                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Drugs Highly Bound to Plasma Proteins
                                    
                                    Because the plasma protein binding of memantine is low (45%), an interaction with drugs that are highly bound to plasma proteins, such as warfarin and digoxin, is unlikely.

                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Donepezil Hydrochloride
                              
                              Pharmacokinetics of donepezil are linear over a dose range of 1-10 mg given once daily. The rate and extent of absorption of donepezil hydrochloride tablets are not influenced by food.

                              Donepezil is absorbed with a relative oral bioavailability of 100% and reaches peak plasma concentrations in 3 to 4 hours.

                              The elimination half-life of donepezil is about 70 hours, and the mean apparent plasma clearance (Cl/F) is 0.13 – 0.19 L/hr/kg. Following multiple dose administration, donepezil accumulates in plasma by 4-7 fold, and steady state is reached within 15 days. The steady-state volume of distribution is 12 - 16 L/kg. Donepezil is approximately 96% bound to human plasma proteins, mainly to albumins (about 75%) and alpha-1-acid glycoprotein (about 21%) over the concentration range of 2-1000 ng/mL.

                              Donepezil is both excreted in the urine intact and extensively metabolized to four major metabolites, two of which are known to be active, and a number of minor metabolites, not all of which have been identified. Donepezil is metabolized by CYP 450 isoenzymes 2D6 and 3A4 and undergoes glucuronidation. Following administration of 14C-labeled donepezil, plasma radioactivity, expressed as a percent of the administered dose, was present primarily as intact donepezil (53%) and as 6-O-desmethyl donepezil (11%), which has been reported to inhibit AChE to the same extent as donepezil in vitro and was found in plasma at concentrations equal to about 20% of donepezil. Approximately 57% and 15% of the total radioactivity was recovered in urine and feces, respectively, over a period of 10 days, while 28% remained unrecovered, with about 17% of the donepezil dose recovered in the urine as unchanged drug. Examination of the effect of CYP2D6 genotype in Alzheimer's patients showed differences in clearance values among CYP2D6 genotype subgroups. When compared to the extensive metabolizers, poor metabolizers had a 31.5% slower clearance and ultra-rapid metabolizers had a 24% faster clearance. These results suggest CYP2D6 has a minor role in the metabolism of donepezil.

                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Renal Impairment
                                    
                                    In a study of 11 patients with moderate to severe renal impairment (CLcr < 18 mL/min/ 1.73 m2) the clearance of donepezil hydrochloride did not differ from 11 age- and sex-matched healthy subjects.

                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Hepatic Disease
                                    
                                    In a study of 10 patients with stable alcoholic cirrhosis, the clearance of donepezil hydrochloride was decreased by 20% relative to 10 healthy age- and sex-matched subjects.

                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Age
                                    
                                    No formal pharmacokinetic study was conducted to examine age-related differences in the pharmacokinetics of donepezil hydrochloride. Population pharmacokinetic analysis suggested that the clearance of donepezil in patients decreases with increasing age. When compared with 65-year old, subjects, 90-year old subjects have a 17% decrease in clearance, while 40-year old subjects have a 33% increase in clearance. The effect of age on donepezil clearance may not be clinically significant.

                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Gender and Race
                                    
                                    No specific pharmacokinetic study was conducted to investigate the effects of gender and race on the disposition of donepezil hydrochloride. However, retrospective pharmacokinetic analysis and population pharmacokinetic analysis of plasma donepezil concentrations measured in patients with Alzheimer's disease indicate that gender and race (Japanese and Caucasians) did not affect the clearance of donepezil hydrochloride to an important degree.

                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Body weight
                                    
                                    There was a relationship noted between body weight and clearance. Over the range of body weight from 50 kg to 110 kg, clearance increased from 7.77 L/h to 14.04 L/h, with a value of 10 L/h for 70 kg individuals.

                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Drug-Drug Interactions
                              
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Effect of Donepezil hydrochloride on the Metabolism of Other Drugs
                                    
                                    No in vivo clinical trials have investigated the effect of donepezil hydrochloride on the clearance of drugs metabolized by CYP3A4 (e.g., cisapride, terfenadine) or by CYP2D6 (e.g., imipramine). However, in vitro studies show a low rate of binding to these enzymes (mean Ki about 50-130 μM), that, given the therapeutic plasma concentrations of donepezil (164 nM), indicates little likelihood of interference. Based on in vitro studies, donepezil shows little or no evidence of direct inhibition of CYP2B6, CYP2C8, and CYP2C19 at clinically relevant concentrations.

                                    Whether donepezil hydrochloride has any potential for enzyme induction is not known. Formal pharmacokinetic studies evaluated the potential of donepezil hydrochloride for interaction with theophylline, cimetidine, warfarin, digoxin, and ketoconazole. No effects of donepezil hydrochloride on the pharmacokinetics of these drugs were observed.

                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Effect of Other Drugs on the Metabolism of Donepezil hydrochloride
                                    
                                    A small effect of CYP2D6 inhibitors was identified in a population pharmacokinetic analysis of plasma donepezil concentrations measured in patients with Alzheimer's disease. Donepezil clearance was reduced by approximately 17% in patients taking 10 or 23 mg in combination with a known CYP2D6 inhibitor. This result is consistent with the conclusion that CYP2D6 is a minor metabolic pathway of donepezil.

                                    Formal pharmacokinetic studies demonstrated that the metabolism of donepezil hydrochloride is not significantly affected by concurrent administration of digoxin or cimetidine.

                                    An in vitro study showed that donepezil was not a substrate of P-glycoprotein.

                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Drugs Highly Bound to Plasma Proteins
                                    
                                    Drug displacement studies have been performed in vitro between this highly bound drug (96%) and other drugs such as furosemide, digoxin, and warfarin. Donepezil hydrochloride at concentrations of 0.3-10 micrograms/mL did not affect the binding of furosemide (5 micrograms/mL), digoxin (2 ng/mL), and warfarin (3 micrograms/mL) to human albumin. Similarly, the binding of donepezil hydrochloride to human albumin was not affected by furosemide, digoxin, and warfarin.

                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         