
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS

               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           Combined use with NMDA antagonists: use with caution (7.2)

                           NAMZARIC may interfere with anticholinergic medications (7.4)

                           Concomitant administration of succinylcholine, similar neuromuscular blocking agents, or cholinergic agonists may lead to synergistic effect (7.5)

                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 Use of Memantine with Drugs That Make the Urine Alkaline

                     
                        The clearance of memantine was reduced by about 80% under alkaline urine conditions at pH 8. Therefore, alterations of urine pH towards the alkaline condition may lead to an accumulation of the drug with a possible increase in adverse reactions. Urine pH is altered by diet, drugs (e.g., carbonic anhydrase inhibitors, sodium bicarbonate) and clinical state of the patient (e.g., renal tubular acidosis or severe infections of the urinary tract). Hence, memantine should be used with caution under these conditions.

                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 Use of Memantine with Other N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) Antagonists

                     
                        The combined use of memantine hydrochloride with other NMDA antagonists (amantadine, ketamine, and dextromethorphan) has not been systematically evaluated and such use should be approached with caution.

                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3 Effect of Other Drugs on the Metabolism of Donepezil

                     
                        Inhibitors of CYP3A4 (e.g., ketoconazole) and CYP2D6 (e.g., quinidine), inhibit donepezil metabolism in vitro. Whether there is a clinical effect of quinidine is not known.

                        Inducers of CYP3A4 (e.g., phenytoin, carbamazepine, dexamethasone, rifampin, and phenobarbital) could increase the rate of elimination of donepezil.

                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4 Use of Donepezil with Anticholinergics

                     
                        Because of their mechanism of action, cholinesterase inhibitors, including donepezil hydrochloride, have the potential to interfere with the activity of anticholinergic medications.

                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.5 Use of Donepezil with Cholinomimetics and Other Cholinesterase Inhibitors

                     
                        A synergistic effect may be expected when cholinesterase inhibitors, including donepezil hydrochloride, are given concurrently with succinylcholine, similar neuromuscular blocking agents, or cholinergic agonists such as bethanechol.

                     
                     
                  
               
            
         