
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 Monoamine Oxidase Inhibitors (MAOI)
                     
                        Do not use MAOIs intended to treat psychiatric disorders with desvenlafaxine or within 7 days of stopping treatment with desvenlafaxine. Do not use desvenlafaxine within 14 days of stopping an MAOI intended to treat psychiatric disorders. In addition, do not start desvenlafaxine in a patient who is being treated with linezolid or intravenous methylene blue[see Dosage and Administration (2.6 ), Contraindications (4) and Warnings and Precautions (5.2)].
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 Serotonergic Drugs
                     
                        Based on the mechanism of action of desvenlafaxine and the potential for serotonin syndrome, caution is advised when desvenlafaxine is co-administered with other drugs that may affect the serotonergic neurotransmitter systems[see Dosage and Administration (2.6), Contraindications (4) and Warnings and Precautions (5.2)].
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3 Drugs that Interfere with Hemostasis (e.g., NSAIDs, Aspirin, and Warfarin)
                     
                        Serotonin release by platelets plays an important role in hemostasis. Epidemiological studies of case-control and cohort design that have demonstrated an association between use of psychotropic drugs that interfere with serotonin reuptake and the occurrence of upper gastrointestinal bleeding. These studies have also shown that concurrent use of an NSAID or aspirin may potentiate this risk of bleeding. Altered anticoagulant effects, including increased bleeding, have been reported when SSRIs and SNRIs are co-administered with warfarin. Patients receiving warfarin therapy should be carefully monitored when desvenlafaxine is initiated or discontinued [see Warnings and Precautions (5.4)].
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4 Potential for Desvenlafaxine to Affect Other Drugs
                     
                         Based on in vitro data, no dose adjustment is required for desvenlafaxine when used concomitantly with inhibitors of CYP3A4 and CYP1A1, 1A2, 2A6, 2D6, 2C8, 2C9, 2C19, 2E1, and the P-glycoprotein transporter. Clinical studies have demonstrated no clinically significant pharmacokinetic interaction between desvenlafaxine and strong CYP 3A4 inhibitors (Figure 1).
                        

                        

                        
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           Figure 1
                           
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.5 Potential for Desvenlafaxine to Affect Other Drugs
                     
                        Clinical studies have shown that desvenlafaxine does not have a clinically relevant effect on CYP2D6 metabolism at the dose of 100 mg daily (Figure 2). Substrates primarily metabolized by CYP2D6 (e.g., desipramine , atomoxetine, dextromethorphan, metoprolol, nebivolol, perphenazine, tolterodine) should be dosed at the original level when co-administered with desvenlafaxine 100 mg or lower or when desvenlafaxine is discontinued. Reduce the dose of these substrates by up to one-half if co-administered with 400 mg of desvenlafaxine. 
                        No additional dose adjustment is required for concomitant use of substrates of CYP3A4, 1A2, 2A6, 2C8, 2C9, and 2C19 isozymes, and P-glycoprotein transporter. Clinical studies have demonstrated no clinically significant pharmacokinetic interaction between desvenlafaxine and CYP3A4 substrates (Figure 2). 
                        Clinical studies have shown that desvenlafaxine (100 mg daily) does not have a clinically relevant effect on tamoxifen and aripiprazole, compounds that are metabolized by a combination of both CYP2D6 and CYP3A4 enzymes (Figure 2). 
                        
                           In vitro studies showed minimal inhibitory effect of desvenlafaxine on the CYP2D6 isoenzyme. 
                        
                           In vitro, desvenlafaxine does not inhibit or induce the CYP3A4 isozyme. 
                        
                           In vitro, desvenlafaxine does not inhibit CYP1A2, 2A6, 2C8, 2C9, and 2C19, isozymes, and P-glycoprotein transporter and would not be expected to affect the pharmacokinetics of drugs that are substrates of these CYP isozymes and transporter.
                        
                        

                     
                     
                     
                        
                           Figure 2
                           
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.6 Other Drugs Containing Desvenlafaxine or Venlafaxine
                     
                        Avoid use of desvenlafaxine with other desvenlafaxine-containing products or venlafaxine products. The concomitant use of desvenlafaxine with other desvenlafaxine-containing products or venlafaxine will increase desvenlafaxine blood levels and increase dose-related adverse reactions [see Adverse Reactions (6)]. 
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.7 Ethanol
                     
                        A clinical study has shown that desvenlafaxine does not increase the impairment of mental and motor skills caused by ethanol. However, as with all CNS-active drugs, patients should be advised to avoid alcohol consumption while taking desvenlafaxine. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.8 Drug-Laboratory Test Interactions
                     
                        False-positive urine immunoassay screening tests for phencyclidine (PCP) and amphetamine have been reported in patients taking desvenlafaxine. This is due to lack of specificity of the screening tests. False positive test results may be expected for several days following discontinuation of desvenlafaxine therapy. Confirmatory tests, such as gas chromatography/mass spectrometry, will distinguish desvenlafaxine from PCP and amphetamine.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         