
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Systemic Absorption
                     
                        A systemic absorption study was performed in which Ciprofloxacin Ophthalmic Solution was administered in each eye every two hours while awake for two days followed by every four hours while awake for an additional 5 days. The maximum reported plasma concentration of ciprofloxacin was less than 5 ng/mL. The mean concentration was usually less than 2.5 ng/mL.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Microbiology
                     
                        Ciprofloxacin has activity against a wide range of gram-negative and gram-positive organisms. The bactericidal action of ciprofloxacin results from interference with the enzyme DNA gyrase which is needed for the synthesis of bacterial DNA.
                                    in vitro
                        
                        Ciprofloxacin has been shown to be active against most strains of the following organisms both and in clinical infections. (See section).
                                    in vitro
                           INDICATIONS AND USAGE
                        
                        
                           Gram-Positive
                        
                        
                           Staphylococcus aureus
                        
                        
                           Staphylococcus epidermidis
                        
                        
                           Streptococcus pneumoniae
                        
                        (Viridans Group)
                                    Streptococcus
                        
                        
                           Gram-Negative
                        
                        
                           Haemophilus influenzae
                        
                        
                           Pseudomonas aeruginosa
                        
                        
                           Serratia marcescens
                        
                        Ciprofloxacin has been shown to be active against most strains of the following organisms, however,
                                    in vitro
                           the clinical significance of these data is unknown:
                        
                        
                           Gram-Positive
                        
                        (Many strains are only moderately susceptible)
                                    Enterococcus faecalis
                        
                        
                           Staphylococcus haemolyticus
                        
                        
                           Staphylococcus hominis
                        
                        
                           Staphylococcus saprophyticus
                        
                        
                           Streptococcus pyogenes
                        
                        
                           Gram-Negative
                        
                        
                           Acinetobacter calcoaceticus subsp. anitratus
                        
                        
                           Aeromonas caviae
                        
                        
                           Aeromonas hydrophila
                        
                        
                           Brucella melitensis
                        
                        
                           Campylobacter coli
                        
                        
                           Campylobacter jejuni
                        
                        
                           Citrobacter diversus
                        
                        
                           Citrobacter freundii
                        
                        
                           Edwardsiella tarda
                        
                        
                           Enterobacter aerogenes
                        
                        
                           Enterobacter cloacae
                        
                        
                           Escherichia coli
                        
                        
                           Haemophilus ducreyi
                        
                        
                           Haemophilus parainfluenzae
                        
                        
                           Klebsiella pneumoniae
                        
                        
                           Klebsiella oxytoca
                        
                        
                           Legionella pneumophila
                        
                        
                           Moraxella (Branhamella) catarrhalis
                        
                        
                           Morganella morganii
                        
                        
                           Neisseria gonorrhoeae
                        
                        
                           Neisseria meningitidis
                        
                        
                           Pasteurella multocida
                        
                        
                           Proteus mirabilis
                        
                        
                           Proteus vulgaris
                        
                        
                           Providencia rettgeri
                        
                        
                           Providencia stuartii
                        
                        
                           Salmonella enteritidis
                        
                        
                           Salmonella typhi
                        
                        
                           Shigella sonneii
                        
                        
                           Shigella flexneri
                        
                        
                           Vibrio cholerae
                        
                        
                           Vibrio parahaemolyticus
                        
                        
                           Vibrio vulnificus
                        
                        
                           Yersinia enterocolitica
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Other Organisms
                     
                        (only moderately susceptible) and (only moderately susceptible).
                                    Chlamydia trachomatis
                           Mycobacterium tuberculosis
                        
                        Most strains of and some strains of are resistant to ciprofloxacin as are most anaerobic bacteria, including and
                                    Pseudomonas cepacia
                           Pseudomonas maltophilia
                           Bacteroides fragilis
                           Clostridium difficile.
                        
                        The minimal bactericidal concentration (MBC) generally does not exceed the minimal inhibitory concentration (MIC) by more than a factor of 2. Resistance to ciprofloxacin usually develops slowly (multiple-step mutation).
                                    in vitro
                        
                        Ciprofloxacin does not cross-react with other antimicrobial agents such as beta-lactams or aminoglycosides; therefore, organisms resistant to these drugs may be susceptible to ciprofloxacin.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Clinical Studies
                     
                        Following therapy with Ciprofloxacin Ophthalmic Solution, 76% of the patients with corneal ulcers and positive bacterial cultures were clinically cured and complete re-epithelialization occurred in about 92% of the ulcers.
                        In 3 and 7 day multicenter clinical trials, 52% of the patients with conjunctivitis and positive conjunctival cultures were clinically cured and 70-80% had all causative pathogens eradicated by the end of treatment.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         