
               
               
               DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
                  Drug Interactions
                  Rifampin
              Enzyme Induction: Rifampin is known to induce certain cytochrome
              P-450 enzymes. Coadministration of RIFATER, because it contains rifampin, with
              drugs that undergo biotransformation through these metabolic pathways may
              accelerate elimination. To maintain optimum therapeutic blood levels, dosages of
              drugs metabolized by these enzymes may require adjustment when starting or
              stopping concomitantly administered rifampin.
            Rifampin has been reported to accelerate the metabolism of the following drugs:
            anticonvulsants (eg, phenytoin), antiarrhythmics (eg, disopyramide, mexiletine,
            quinidine, tocainide), anticoagulants, antifungals (eg, fluconazole,
            itraconazole, ketoconazole), barbiturates, beta-blockers, calcium channel
            blockers (eg, diltiazem, nifedipine, verapamil), chloramphenicol, ciprofloxacin,
            corticosteroids, cyclosporine, cardiac glycoside preparations, clofibrate, oral
            contraceptives, dapsone, diazepam, haloperidol, oral hypoglycemic agents
            (sulfonylureas), methadone, narcotic analgesics, nortriptyline, progestins, and
            theophylline. It may be necessary to adjust dosages of these drugs if they are
            given concurrently with RIFATER since it contains rifampin.

                  
Rifampin has been observed to increase the requirements for anticoagulant drugs
            of the coumarin type. In patients receiving anticoagulants and RIFATER
            concurrently, it is recommended that the prothrombin time be performed daily or
            as frequently as necessary to establish and maintain the required dose of
            anticoagulant.

                  
Concurrent use of ketoconazole and rifampin has resulted in decreased serum
            concentration of both drugs. Concurrent use of rifampin and enalapril has
            resulted in decreased concentrations of enalaprilat, the active metabolite of
            enalapril. Since RIFATER contains rifampin, dosage adjustments should be made if
            RIFATER is concurrently administered with ketoconazole or enalapril if indicated
            by the patient's clinical condition.

                  

                  Other Interactions
              Concomitant antacid administration may reduce the absorption of
              rifampin. Daily doses of RIFATER, because it contains rifampin, should be given
              at least 1 hour before the ingestion of antacids.
            
                  
              Probenecid and cotrimoxazole have been reported to increase the blood level
              of rifampin.
            
                  
              When rifampin is given concomitantly with either halothane or isoniazid the
              potential for hepatotoxicity is increased. The concomitant use of RIFATER,
              because it contains both rifampin and isoniazid, and halothane should be
              avoided. Patients receiving both rifampin and isoniazid as in RIFATER should be
              monitored closely for hepatotoxicity. See the boxed WARNING.
            
                  
              Plasma concentrations of sulfapyridine may be reduced following the
              concomitant administration of sulfasalazine and RIFATER, because it contains
              rifampin. This finding may be the result of alteration in the colonic bacteria
              responsible for the reduction of sulfasalazine to sulfapyridine and
              mesalamine. 

                  
                  
              Isoniazid
            
                  
              Enzyme Inhibition: Isoniazid is known to inhibit certain
              cytochrome P-450 enzymes. Coadministration of isoniazid with drugs that undergo
              biotransformation through these metabolic pathways may decrease elimination.
              Consequently, dosages of drugs metabolized by these enzymes may require
              adjustment when starting or stopping concomitantly administered RIFATER, because
              it contains isoniazid, to maintain optimum therapeutic blood levels.
Isoniazid has been reported to inhibit the metabolism of the following drugs:
              anticonvulsants (eg, carbamazepine, phenytoin, primidone, valproic acid),
              benzodiazepines (eg, diazepam), haloperidol, ketoconazole, theophylline, and
              warfarin. It may be necessary to adjust the dosages of these drugs if they are
              given concurrently with RIFATER because it contains isoniazid. The impact of the
              competing effects of rifampin and isoniazid on the metabolism of these drugs is
              unknown.
            
                  Other Interactions
              Concomitant antacid administration may reduce the absorption of
              isoniazid. Ingestion with food may also reduce the absorption of isoniazid.
              Daily doses of RIFATER, because it contains isoniazid, should be given on an
              empty stomach at least 1 hour before the ingestion of antacids or food.
            
                  
              Corticosteroids (eg, prednisolone) may decrease the serum concentration of
              isoniazid by increasing acetylation rate and/or renal clearance.
              Para-aminosalicylic acid may increase the plasma concentration and elimination
              half-life of isoniazid by competition of acetylating enzymes.
            
                  
                  Pharmacodynamic Interactions
              Daily ingestion of alcohol may be associated with a higher
              incidence of isoniazid hepatitis. Isoniazid, when given concomitantly with
              rifampin, has been reported to increase the hepatotoxicity of both drugs.
              Patients receiving both rifampin and isoniazid as in RIFATER should be monitored
              closely for hepatotoxicity.
            
                  
              The CNS effects of meperidine (drowsiness), cycloserine (dizziness,
              drowsiness), and disulfiram (acute behavioral and coordination changes) may be
              exaggerated when concomitant RIFATER, because it contains isoniazid, is given.
              Concurrent RIFATER, because it contains isoniazid, and levodopa administration
              may produce symptoms of excess catecholamine stimulation (agitation, flushing,
              palpitations) or lack of levodopa effect.
            
                  
              Isoniazid may produce hyperglycemia and lead to loss of glucose control in
              patients on oral hypoglycemics.
            
                  
              Fast acetylation of isoniazid may produce high concentrations of hydrazine
              that facilitate deflorination of enflurane. Renal function should be monitored
              in patients receiving both RIFATER and enflurane.
            
                  Food Interactions
              Because isoniazid has some monoamine oxidase inhibiting activity,
              an interaction with tyramine-containing foods (cheese, red wine) may occur.
              Diamine oxidase may also be inhibited, causing exaggerated response (eg,
              headache, sweating, palpitations, flushing, hypotension) to foods containing
              histamine (eg, skipjack, tuna, other tropical fish). Tyramine- and
              histamine-containing foods should be avoided by patients receiving RIFATER.
            
                  
                  

                  

               
               
            
         