
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
                  General
                  Rifampin
              Rifampin is readily absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract.
              Peak serum levels in normal adults and pediatric populations vary widely from
              individual to individual. Following a single 600 mg oral dose of rifampin in
              healthy adults, the peak serum level averages 7 mcg/mL but may vary from 4 to 32
              mcg/mL. Absorption of rifampin is reduced when the drug is ingested with food.
            
                  
              In normal subjects, the biological half-life of rifampin in serum averages about
              3 hours after a 600 mg oral dose, with increases up to 5.1 hours reported after
              a 900 mg dose. With repeated administration, the half-life decreases and reaches
              average values of approximately 2 to 3 hours. The half-life does not differ in
              patients with renal failure at doses not exceeding 600 mg daily and,
              consequently, no dosage adjustment is required. The half-life of rifampin at a
              dose of 720 mg daily has not been established in patients with renal failure.
              Following a single 900 mg oral dose of rifampin in patients with varying degrees
              of renal insufficiency, the half-life increased from 3.6 hours in normal
              subjects to 5.0, 7.3, and 11.0 hours in patients with glomerular filtration
              rates of 30–50 mL min, less than 30 mL/min, and in anuric patients,
              respectively. Refer to the WARNINGS section for
              information regarding patients with hepatic insufficiency.
            
                  
              After absorption, rifampin is rapidly eliminated in the bile, and an
              enterohepatic circulation ensues. During this process, rifampin undergoes
              progressive deacetylation so that nearly all the drug in the bile is in this
              form in about 6 hours. This metabolite has antibacterial activity. Intestinal
              reabsorption is reduced by deacetylation, and elimination is facilitated. Up to
              30percent of a dose is excreted in the urine, with about half as unchanged drug.
            
                  
              Rifampin is widely distributed throughout the body. It is present in
              effective concentrations in many organs and body fluids, including cerebrospinal
              fluid. Rifampin is about 80% protein bound. Most of the unbound fraction is not
              ionized and therefore is diffused freely in tissues.
            
                  Isoniazid
              After oral administration, isoniazid is readily absorbed from the
              GI tract and produces peak blood levels within 1 to 2 hours. It diffuses readily
              into all body fluids (cerebrospinal, pleural, and ascitic fluids), tissues,
              organs, and excreta (saliva, sputum, and feces). Isoniazid is not substantially
              bound to plasma proteins. The drug also passes through the placental barrier and
              into milk in concentrations comparable to those in the plasma. The plasma
              half-life of isoniazid in patients with normal renal and hepatic function ranges
              from 1–4 hours, depending on the rate of metabolism. From 50percent to 70percent of a dose
              of isoniazid is excreted in the urine within 24 hours, mostly as
              metabolites.
            
                  
              Isoniazid is metabolized in the liver mainly by acetylation and
              dehydrazination. The rate of acetylation is genetically determined.
              Approximately 50percent of African Americans and Caucasians are "slow inactivators"
              and the rest are "rapid inactivators"; the majority of Eskimos and Asians are
              "rapid inactivators." The rate of acetylation does not significantly alter the
              effectiveness of isoniazid. However, slow acetylation may lead to higher blood
              levels of the drug, and thus, an increase in toxic reactions.
            
                  
              Pyridoxine (B6) deficiency is sometimes observed in
              adults with high doses of isoniazid and is probably due to its competition with
              pyridoxal phosphate for the enzyme apotryptophanase.
            
                  
                  Pyrazinamide
              Pyrazinamide is well absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract and
              attains peak plasma concentrations within 2 hours. Plasma concentrations
              generally range from 30 to 50 mcg mL with doses of 20 to 25 mg kg. It is widely
              distributed in body tissues and fluids including the liver, lungs, and
              cerebrospinal fluid (CSF). The CSF concentration is approximately equal to
              concurrent steady-state plasma concentrations in patients with inflamed
              meninges. Pyrazinamide is approximately 10percent bound to plasma proteins. The plasma
              half-life of pyrazinamide is 9 to 10 hours in patients with normal renal and
              hepatic function. The half-life of the drug may be prolonged in patients with
              impaired renal or hepatic function. Pyrazinamide is hydrolyzed in the liver to
              its major active metabolite, pyrazinoic acid. Pyrazinoic acid is hydroxylated to
              the main excretory product, 5-hydroxypyrazinoic acid.
            
                  
              Within 24 hours, approximately 70percent of an oral dose of pyrazinamide is
              excreted in urine, mainly by glomerular filtration. About 4percent to 14percent of the dose
              is excreted as unchanged drug; the remainder is excreted as metabolites.
            
                  RIFATER
              In a single-dose bioavailability study of five RIFATER tablets
              (Treatment A, n=23) versus RIFADIN 600 mg, isoniazid 250 mg, and pyrazinamide
              1500 mg (Treatment B, n=24) administered concurrently in normal subjects, there
              was no difference in extent of absorption, as measured by the area under the
              plasma concentration versus time curve (AUC), of all three components. However,
              the mean peak plasma concentration of rifampin was approximately 18percent lower
              following the single-dose administration of RIFATER tablets as compared to
              RIFADIN
            
               
               
            
         