
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        The local mechanism by which continuously released levonorgestrel enhances contraceptive effectiveness of Mirena has not been conclusively demonstrated. Studies of Mirena prototypes have suggested several mechanisms that prevent pregnancy: thickening of cervical mucus preventing passage of sperm into the uterus, inhibition of sperm capacitation or survival, and alteration of the endometrium.
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        Mirena has mainly local progestogenic effects in the uterine cavity. The high local levels of levonorgestrel1 lead to morphological changes including stromal pseudodecidualization, glandular atrophy, a leukocytic infiltration and a decrease in glandular and stromal mitoses. 
                        Ovulation is inhibited in some women using Mirena. In a 1-year study approximately 45% of menstrual cycles were ovulatory and in another study after 4 years 75% of cycles were ovulatory.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Absorption
                           
                              Low doses of levonorgestrel are administered into the uterine cavity with the Mirena intrauterine delivery system. Initially, levonorgestrel is released at a rate of approximately 20 mcg/day. This rate decreases progressively to half that value after 5 years. A stable serum concentration, without peaks and troughs, of levonorgestrel of 150–200 pg/mL occurs after the first few weeks following insertion of Mirena. Levonorgestrel concentrations after long-term use of 12, 24, and 60 months were 180±66 pg/mL, 192±140 pg/mL, and 159±59 pg/mL, respectively. 
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Distribution
                           
                              The apparent volume of distribution of levonorgestrel is reported to be approximately 1.8 L/kg. It is about 97.5 to 99% protein-bound, principally to sex hormone binding globulin (SHBG) and, to a lesser extent, serum albumin. 
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Metabolism
                           
                              Following absorption, levonorgestrel is conjugated at the 17β-OH position to form sulfate conjugates and, to a lesser extent, glucuronide conjugates in serum. Significant amounts of conjugated and unconjugated 3α, 5β- tetrahydrolevonorgestrel are also present in serum, along with much smaller amounts of 3α, 5α-tetrahydrolevonorgestrel and 16βhydroxylevonorgestrel. Levonorgestrel and its phase I metabolites are excreted primarily as glucuronide conjugates. Metabolic clearance rates may differ among individuals by several-fold, and this may account in part for wide individual variations in levonorgestrel concentrations seen in individuals using levonorgestrel–containing contraceptive products.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Excretion
                           
                              About 45% of levonorgestrel and its metabolites are excreted in the urine and about 32% are excreted in feces, mostly as glucuronide conjugates. The elimination half-life of levonorgestrel after daily oral doses is approximately 17 hours. 
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Specific Populations
                           
                              Pediatric: Safety and efficacy of Mirena have been established in women of reproductive age. Use of this product before menarche is not indicated.
                              
                              Geriatric: Mirena has not been studied in women over age 65 and is not currently approved for use in this population.
                              
                              Race: No studies have evaluated the effect of race on pharmacokinetics of Mirena. 
                              Hepatic Impairment: No studies were conducted to evaluate the effect of hepatic disease on the disposition of Mirena.
                              
                              Renal Impairment: No formal studies were conducted to evaluate the effect of renal disease on the disposition of Mirena. 
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Drug-Drug Interactions
                           
                              No drug-drug interaction studies were conducted with Mirena [see Drug Interactions (7)].
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         