
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  Erythromycin diffuses readily into most body fluids. In the absence of meningeal inflammation, low concentrations are normally achieved in the spinal fluid but the passage of the drug across the blood-brain barrier increases in meningitis. Erythromycin crosses the placental barrier and is excreted in breast milk. Erythromycin is not removed by peritoneal dialysis or hemodialysis.
                  In the presence of normal hepatic function, erythromycin is concentrated in the liver and is excreted in the bile; the effect of hepatic dysfunction on biliary excretion of erythromycin is not known. From 12 to 15 percent of intravenously administered erythromycin is excreted in active form in the urine.
                  Intravenous infusion of 500 mg of erythromycin lactobionate at a constant rate over 1 hour in fasting adults produced a mean serum erythromycin level of approximately 7 mcg/mL at 20 minutes, 10 mcg/mL at 1 hour, 2.6 mcg/mL at 2.5 hours, and 1 mcg/mL at 6 hours.
                  
                     Microbiology
                  
                  Erythromycin is a macrolide antibiotic with activity against Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria. 
                  
                     Mechanism of Action
                  
                  Erythromycin acts by inhibition of protein synthesis by binding 50 S ribosomal subunits of susceptible organisms. It does not affect nucleic acid synthesis. 
                  
                     Interactions with Other Antibiotics
                  
                  Antagonism has been demonstrated in vitro between erythromycin and clindamycin, lincomycin and chloramphenicol.
                  Many strains of Haemophilus influenzae are resistant to erythromycin, but are susceptible to erythromycin and sulfonamides used concomitantly.
                  
                     Development of Resistance
                  
                  Resistance to erythromycin in S. aureus may emerge during therapy. 
                  Erythromycin has been shown to be active against most strains of the following organisms both in vitro and in clinical infections (see 
                        INDICATIONS AND USAGE
                     ):
                  
                     Gram-positive bacteria Aerobic
                     

                     Corynebacterium diphtheriae 
                     

                     Corynebacterium minutissimum
                     

                     Staphylococcus aureus (methicillin-susceptible strains only)

                     Streptococcus pneumoniae
                     

                     Streptococcus pyogenes 
                  
                     Gram-negative bacteria
                     

                     Legionella pneumophila
                     

                     Neisseria gonorrhoeae
                  
                  
                     Other Microorganisms
                     

                     Mycoplasma pneumoniae
                  
                  At least 90 percent of the following microorganisms exhibit an in vitro minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) less than or equal to the susceptible breakpoint for erythromycin. However, the efficacy of erythromycin in treating clinical infections due to these microorganisms has not been established in adequate and well-controlled trials.
                  
                     Gram-negative bacteria
                     

                     Moraxella catarrhalis
                  
                  
                     Susceptibility Testing
                     
When available, the clinical microbiology laboratory should provide cumulative results of the in vitro susceptibility test results for antimicrobial drugs used in resident hospitals to the physician as periodic reports that describe the susceptibility profile of nosocomial and community-acquired pathogens. These reports should aid the physician in selecting the most effective antimicrobial.
                  
                     Dilution techniques
                     
Quantitative methods are used to determine antimicrobial minimum inhibitory concentrations (MICs). These MICs provide estimates of the susceptibility of bacteria to antimicrobial compounds. The MICs should be determined using a standardized procedure. Standardized procedures are based on a dilution method (broth or agar)1 or equivalent with standardized inoculum concentrations and standardized concentrations of erythromycin powder. The MIC values should be interpreted according to the criteria provided in Table 1.
                  
                     Diffusion technique
                     
Quantitative methods that require measurement of zone diameters also provide reproducible estimates of the susceptibility of bacteria to antimicrobial compounds. One such standardized procedure2 requires the use of standardized inoculum concentrations. This procedure uses paper disks impregnated with 15 mcg of erythromycin to test the susceptibility of microorganisms to erythromycin. The disk diffusion interpretive criteria are provided in Table 1. 
                  


                  


A report of Susceptible indicates that the antimicrobial is likely to inhibit growth of the pathogen if the antimicrobial compound in the blood reaches the concentrations usually achievable. A report of Intermediate indicates that the result should be considered equivocal, and, if the microorganism is not fully susceptible to alternative, clinically feasible drugs, the test should be repeated. This category implies possible clinical applicability in body sites where the drug is physiologically concentrated or in situations where a high dosage of drug can be used. This category also provides a buffer zone, which prevents small, uncontrolled technical factors from causing major discrepancies in interpretation. A report of Resistant indicates that the antimicrobial is not likely to inhibit growth of the pathogen if the antimicrobial compound in the blood reaches the concentrations usually achievable and other therapy should be selected.
                  
                     Quality Control
                     
Standardized susceptibility test procedures require the use of quality control microorganisms to control the technical aspects of the test procedures3. Standard Erythromycin powder should provide the following range of values noted in Table 2.
                  


