
               
               
               Drug Interaction
               
                  
                  
                     ACE-inhibitors
                  
                  Reports suggest that NSAIDs may diminish the antihypertensive 
effect of ACE-inhibitors. This interaction should be given consideration in 
patients taking NSAIDs concomitantly with ACE-inhibitors.
                  
                  
                  
                     Antacids and 
Sucralfate
                  
                  Concomitant administration of some antacids (magnesium oxide or 
aluminum hydroxide) and sucralfate can delay the absorption of naproxen.
                  
                  
                  
                     Aspirin
                  
                  When naproxen as NAPROSYN, EC-NAPROSYN, ANAPROX, ANAPROX DS or 
NAPROSYN Suspension is administered with aspirin, its protein binding is 
reduced, although the clearance of free NAPROSYN, EC-NAPROSYN, ANAPROX, ANAPROX 
DS or NAPROSYN Suspension is not altered. The clinical significance of this 
interaction is not known; however, as with other NSAIDs, concomitant 
administration of naproxen and naproxen sodium and aspirin is not generally 
recommended because of the potential of increased adverse effects.
                  
                  
                  
                     Cholestyramine
                  
                  As with other NSAIDs, concomitant administration of 
cholestyramine can delay the absorption of naproxen.
                  
                  
                  
                     Diuretics
                  
                  Clinical studies, as well as postmarketing observations, have 
shown that NAPROSYN, EC-NAPROSYN, ANAPROX, ANAPROX DS and NAPROSYN Suspension 
can reduce the natriuretic effect of furosemide and thiazides in some patients. 
This response has been attributed to inhibition of renal prostaglandin 
synthesis. During concomitant therapy with NSAIDs, the patient should be 
observed closely for signs of renal failure (see Warnings: Renal Effects), as well as to assure 
diuretic efficacy.
                  
                  
                  
                     Lithium
                  
                  NSAIDs have produced an elevation of plasma lithium levels and a 
reduction in renal lithium clearance. The mean minimum lithium concentration 
increased 15% and the renal clearance was decreased by approximately 20%. These 
effects have been attributed to inhibition of renal prostaglandin synthesis by 
the NSAID. Thus, when NSAIDs and lithium are administered concurrently, subjects 
should be observed carefully for signs of lithium toxicity.
                  
                  
                  
                     Methotrexate
                  
                  NSAIDs have been reported to competitively inhibit methotrexate 
accumulation in rabbit kidney slices. Naproxen, naproxen sodium and other 
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs have been reported to reduce the tubular 
secretion of methotrexate in an animal model. This may indicate that they could 
enhance the toxicity of methotrexate. Caution should be used when NSAIDs are 
administered concomitantly with methotrexate.
                  
                  
                  
                     Warfarin
                  
                  The effects of warfarin and NSAIDs on GI bleeding are 
synergistic, such that users of both drugs together have a risk of serious GI 
bleeding higher than users of either drug alone. No significant interactions 
have been observed in clinical studies with naproxen and coumarin-type 
anticoagulants. However, caution is advised since interactions have been seen 
with other nonsteroidal agents of this class. The free fraction of warfarin may 
increase substantially in some subjects and naproxen interferes with platelet 
function.
                  
                  
                  
                     Selective 
Serotonin Reuptake Inhibitors (SSRIs)
                  
                  There is an increased risk of gastrointestinal bleeding when 
selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) are combined with NSAIDs. 
Caution should be used when NSAIDs are administered concomitantly with 
SSRIs.
                  
                  Other Information Concerning Drug InteractionsNaproxen is highly bound to plasma albumin; it thus has a 
theoretical potential for interaction with other albumin-bound drugs such as 
coumarin-type anticoagulants, sulphonylureas, hydantoins, other NSAIDs, and 
aspirin. Patients simultaneously receiving naproxen and a hydantoin, 
sulphonamide or sulphonylurea should be observed for adjustment of dose if 
required.
                  Naproxen and other nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs can reduce the 
antihypertensive effect of propranolol and other beta-blockers.
                  Probenecid given concurrently increases naproxen anion plasma levels and 
extends its plasma half-life significantly.
                  Due to the gastric pH elevating effects of H2-blockers, sucralfate and intensive antacid therapy, 
concomitant administration of EC-NAPROSYN is not recommended.
                  
                  Drug/Laboratory Test InteractionNaproxen may decrease platelet aggregation and prolong bleeding 
time. This effect should be kept in mind when bleeding times are determined.
                  The administration of naproxen may result in increased urinary values for 
17-ketogenic steroids because of an interaction between the drug and/or its 
metabolites with m-di-nitrobenzene used in this assay. Although 
17-hydroxy-corticosteroid measurements (Porter-Silber test) do not appear to be 
artifactually altered, it is suggested that therapy with naproxen be temporarily 
discontinued 72 hours before adrenal function tests are performed if the 
Porter-Silber test is to be used.
                  Naproxen may interfere with some urinary assays of 5-hydroxy indoleacetic 
acid (5HIAA).
                  
                  CarcinogenesisA 2-year study was performed in rats to evaluate the carcinogenic 
potential of naproxen at rat doses of 8, 16, and 24 mg/kg/day (50, 100, and 150 
mg/m2). The maximum dose used was 0.28 times the systemic 
exposure to humans at the recommended dose. No evidence of tumorigenicity was 
found.
                  
                  Pregnancy
                  Teratogenic Effects
                  Pregnancy Category CReproduction studies have been performed in rats at 20 mg/kg/day 
(125 mg/m2/day, 0.23 times the human systemic exposure), 
rabbits at 20 mg/kg/day (220 mg/m2/day, 0.27 times the 
human systemic exposure), and mice at 170 mg/kg/day (510 mg/m2/day, 0.28 times the human systemic exposure) with no evidence 
of impaired fertility or harm to the fetus due to the drug. However, animal 
reproduction studies are not always predictive of human response. There are no 
adequate and well-controlled studies in pregnant women. NAPROSYN, EC-NAPROSYN, 
ANAPROX, ANAPROX DS and NAPROSYN Suspension should be used in pregnancy only if 
the potential benefit justifies the potential risk to the fetus. 
                  
                  Nonteratogenic EffectsThere is some evidence to suggest that when inhibitors of 
prostaglandin synthesis are used to delay preterm labor there is an increased 
risk of neonatal complications such as necrotizing enterocolitis, patent ductus 
arteriosus and intracranial hemorrhage. Naproxen treatment given in late 
pregnancy to delay parturition has been associated with persistent pulmonary 
hypertension, renal dysfunction and abnormal prostaglandin E levels in preterm 
infants. Because of the known effects of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs on 
the fetal cardiovascular system (closure of ductus arteriosus), use during 
pregnancy (particularly late pregnancy) should be avoided.
                  
                  Labor and DeliveryIn rat studies with NSAIDs, as with other drugs known to inhibit 
prostaglandin synthesis, an increased incidence of dystocia, delayed 
parturition, and decreased pup survival occurred. Naproxen-containing products 
are not recommended in labor and delivery because, through its prostaglandin 
synthesis inhibitory effect, naproxen may adversely affect fetal circulation and 
inhibit uterine contractions, thus increasing the risk of uterine hemorrhage. 
The effects of NAPROSYN, EC-NAPROSYN, ANAPROX, ANAPROX DS and NAPROSYN 
Suspension on labor and delivery in pregnant women are unknown.
                  
                  
                  Nursing MothersThe naproxen anion has been found in the milk of lactating women 
at a concentration equivalent to approximately 1% of maximum naproxen 
concentration in plasma. Because of the possible adverse effects of 
prostaglandin-inhibiting drugs on neonates, use in nursing mothers should be 
avoided.
                  
                  Pediatric UseSafety and effectiveness in pediatric patients below the age of 2 
years have not been established. Pediatric dosing recommendations for juvenile 
arthritis are based on well-controlled studies (see Dosage and Administration). There are no adequate 
effectiveness or dose-response data for other pediatric conditions, but the 
experience in juvenile arthritis and other use experience have established that 
single doses of 2.5 to 5 mg/kg (as naproxen suspension, see Dosage and Administration
                        
                     ), with total daily dose not 
exceeding 15 mg/kg/day, are well tolerated in pediatric patients over 2 years of 
age.
                  
                  Geriatric UseStudies indicate that although total plasma concentration of 
naproxen is unchanged, the unbound plasma fraction of naproxen is increased in 
the elderly. Caution is advised when high doses are required and some adjustment 
of dosage may be required in elderly patients. As with other drugs used in the 
elderly, it is prudent to use the lowest effective dose.
                  Experience indicates that geriatric patients may be particularly sensitive to 
certain adverse effects of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs. Elderly or 
debilitated patients seem to tolerate peptic ulceration or bleeding less well 
when these events do occur. Most spontaneous reports of fatal GI events are in 
the geriatric population (see Warnings).
                  Naproxen is known to be substantially excreted by the kidney, and the risk of 
toxic reactions to this drug may be greater in patients with impaired renal 
function. Because elderly patients are more likely to have decreased renal 
function, care should be taken in dose selection, and it may be useful to 
monitor renal function. Geriatric patients may be at a greater risk for the 
development of a form of renal toxicity precipitated by reduced prostaglandin 
formation during administration of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (see Warnings: Renal Effects). 
               
               
            
         