
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  Nitrofurantoin macrocrystals is a larger
crystal form of nitrofurantoin. The absorption of nitrofurantoin macrocrystals
is slower and its excretion somewhat less when compared to
nitrofurantoin. Blood concentrations at therapeutic dosage are usually
low. It is highly soluble in urine, to which it may impart a brown color.
                  Following a dose regimen of 100 mg q.i.d. for 7 days, average urinary drug recoveries (0 to 24 hours) on day 1 and day 7 were 37.9% and 35%.
                  Unlike many drugs, the presence of food or agents delaying gastric emptying can increase the bioavailability of nitrofurantoin macrocrystals, 
presumably by allowing better dissolution in gastric juices.
               
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Microbiology
                     
                        Nitrofurantoin is bactericidal in urine at therapeutic
doses. The mechanism of the antimicrobial action of nitrofurantoin is unusual among antibacterials. Nitrofurantoin is reduced by bacterial flavoproteins to reactive intermediates which inactivate or alter bacterial ribosomal proteins and other macromolecules. As a result of such inactivations, the vital biochemical processes of protein synthesis, aerobic energy metabolism, DNA synthesis, RNA synthesis, and cell wall synthesis are inhibited. The broad-based nature of this mode of action may explain the lack of acquired bacterial resistance to nitrofurantoin, as the necessary multiple and simultaneous mutations of the target macromolecules would likely be lethal to the bacteria. Development of resistance to nitrofurantoin has not been a significant problem since its introduction in 1953. Cross-resistance with antibiotics and sulfonamides has not been observed, and transferable resistance is, at most, a very rare phenomenon.
                        Nitrofurantoin, in the form of nitrofurantoin macrocrystals, has been shown to be active against most strains of the following bacteria both in vitro and in clinical infections: (See INDICATIONS AND USAGE.)
                        
                           
                              Gram-Positive Aerobes:
                           
                           

                           Staphylococcus aureus
                           
Enterococci (e.g., Enterococcus faecalis)
                        
                        
                           
                              Gram-Negative Aerobes:
                           
                           

                           Escherichia coli
                        
                        NOTE: Some strains of Enterobacter species and Klebsiella species are resistant to nitrofurantoin.
                        Nitrofurantoin also demonstrates in vitro against the following microorganisms, although the clinical significance of these data with respect to treatment with nitrofurantoin macrocrystals is unknown:
                        
                           
                              Gram-Positive Aerobes:
                           
                           
Coagulase-negative staphylococci (including Staphylococcus epidermidis and Staphylococcus saprophyticus)
                           

                           Streptococcus agalactiae
                           
Group D streptococci
Viridans group streptococci
                        
                           
                              Gram-Negative Aerobes:
                           
                           

                           Citrobacter amalonaticus
Citrobacter diversus
Citrobacter freundii
Klebsiella oxytoca
Klebsiella ozaenae
                        
                        Nitrofurantoin is not active against most strains of Proteus species or Serratia species. It has no activity against Pseudomonas species.
                        Antagonism has been demonstrated in vitro between nitrofurantoin and quinolone antimicrobial agents. The clinical significance of this finding is unknown.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Susceptibility Tests
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Dilution Techniques
                           
                              Quantitative methods are used to determine antimicrobial minimal inhibitory concentrations (MIC's). These MIC's provide estimates of the susceptibility of bacteria to antimicrobial compounds. The MIC's should be determined using a standardized procedure. Standardized procedures are based on a dilution method1 (broth or agar) or equivalent with standardized inoculum concentrations and standardized concentrations of nitrofurantoin powder. The MIC values should be interpreted according to the following criteria:
                              


                              


A report of "Susceptible" indicates that the pathogen is likely to be inhibited if the antimicrobial compound in the urine reaches the concentrations usually achievable. A report of "Intermediate" indicates that the result should be considered equivocal, and, if the microorganism is not fully susceptible to alternative, clinically feasible drugs, the test should be repeated. This category implies possible clinical applicability in body sites where the drug is physiologically concentrated or in situations where high dosage of drug can be used. This category also provides a buffer zone which prevents small uncontrolled technical factors from causing major discrepancies in interpretation. A report of "Resistant" indicates that the pathogen is not likely to be inhibited if the antimicrobial compound in the urine reaches the concentrations usually achievable; other therapy should be selected.
                              Standardized susceptibility test procedures require the use of laboratory control microorganisms to control the technical aspects of the laboratory procedures. Standard nitrofurantoin powder should provide the following MIC  values:
                              


                           



                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Diffusion Techniques
                           
                              Quantitative methods that require measurement
of zone diameters also provide reproducible estimates of the susceptibility of bacteria to antimicrobial compounds. One such standardized procedure2 requires the use of standardized inoculum concentrations. This procedure uses paper disks impregnated with 300 mcg nitrofurantoin to test the susceptibility of microorganisms to nitrofurantoin.
                              Reports from the laboratory providing results of the standard single-disk susceptibility test with a 300 mcg nitrofurantoin disk should
be interpreted according to the following criteria:
                              


                              


Interpretation should be as stated above for results using dilution techniques. Interpretation involves correlation of the diameter obtained in the disk test with the MIC for nitrofurantoin.
                              As with standardized dilution techniques, diffusion methods require the use of laboratory control microorganisms that are used to control the technical aspects of the laboratory procedures. For the diffusion technique, the 300 mcg nitrofurantoin disk should provide the following zone diameters in these laboratory test quality control strains:
                              


