
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Albuterol sulfate is a beta2-adrenergic agonist. The pharmacologic effects of albuterol sulfate are attributable to activation of beta2-adrenergic receptors on airway smooth muscle. Activation of beta2-adrenergic receptors leads to the activation of adenylcyclase and to an increase in the intracellular concentration of cyclic-3',5’‑adenosine monophosphate (cyclic AMP).  This increase of cyclic AMP is associated with the activation of protein kinase A, which in turn inhibits the phosphorylation of myosin and lowers intracellular ionic calcium concentrations, resulting in muscle relaxation.  Albuterol relaxes the smooth muscle of all airways, from the trachea to the terminal bronchioles. Albuterol acts as a functional antagonist to relax the airway irrespective of the spasmogen involved, thus protecting against all bronchoconstrictor challenges. Increased cyclic AMP concentrations are also associated with the inhibition of release of mediators from mast cells in the airway. While it is recognized that beta2-adrenergic receptors are the predominant receptors on bronchial smooth muscle, data indicate that there are beta-receptors in the human heart, 10% to 50% of which are cardiac beta2-adrenergic receptors. The precise function of these receptors has not been established [see Warnings and Precautions (5.4)].
                        Albuterol has been shown in most controlled clinical trials to have more effect on the respiratory tract, in the form of bronchial smooth muscle relaxation, than isoproterenol at comparable doses while producing fewer cardiovascular effects.  However, inhaled albuterol, like other beta-adrenergic agonist drugs, can produce a significant cardiovascular effect in some patients, as measured by pulse rate, blood pressure, symptoms, and/or electrocardiographic changes [see Warnings and Precautions (5.4)].
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        In a pharmacodynamic (PD) trial conducted in 47 patients, the PD and safety profiles were similar for PROAIR RESPICLICK and ProAir HFA. Comparable changes from baseline in the PD measures (serum glucose and potassium concentrations, QTcB, QTcF, heart rate, systolic blood pressure, and diastolic blood pressure) were observed following cumulative dose administration up to 1440 mcg of both PROAIR RESPICLICK and ProAir HFA. The overall safety, efficacy and PD profile of PROAIR RESPICLICK and ProAir HFA were comparable.
                        In a single-dose Phase 2 study also assessing PD, 71 patients using PROAIR RESPICLICK had bronchodilator efficacy that was significantly greater than placebo and comparable to that of ProAir HFA at administered doses of 90 and 180 mcg in adolescent and adult subjects with persistent asthma.
                        
                           Cardiac Electrophysiology
                        
                        As with other beta2-adrenergic agonists, PROAIR RESPICLICK prolonged QT intervals following a 1440 mcg cumulative dose. The prolongation was comparable to that of ProAir HFA.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        
                           Absorption
                        
                        Albuterol was rapidly absorbed into the systemic circulation with peak plasma concentrations occurring at half an hour following single- or multiple-dose oral inhalation(s) of PROAIR RESPICLICK. In a cumulative dose study, the AUC0-t was comparable between PROAIR RESPICLICK group and ProAir HFA group; Cmax value was approximately one-third higher in PROAIR RESPICLICK group than ProAir HFA group. 
                        
                           Distribution
                        
                        The volume of distribution has not been determined for PROAIR RESPICLICK. Published literature suggests that albuterol exhibits low in vitro plasma protein binding (10%).
                        
                           Elimination 
                        
                        The accumulation ratio (~1.6 fold) was observed following one week QID dosing. The corresponding effective half-life was approximately 5 hours, which was consistent with the elimination half-life following both single- or multiple-dose administration.
                        
                           Metabolism
                        
                        Information available in the published literature suggests that the primary enzyme responsible for the metabolism of albuterol in humans is SULTIA3 (sulfotransferase). When racemic albuterol was administered either intravenously or via inhalation after oral charcoal administration, there was a 3- to 4-fold difference in the area under the concentration-time curves between the (R)- and (S)-albuterol enantiomers, with (S)-albuterol concentrations being consistently higher. However, without charcoal pretreatment, after either oral or inhalation administration the differences were 8- to 24-fold, suggesting that the (R)-albuterol is preferentially metabolized in the gastrointestinal tract, presumably by SULTIA3.
                        
                           Excretion
                        
                        The primary route of elimination of albuterol is through renal excretion (80% to 100%) of either the parent compound or the primary metabolite.  Less than 20% of the drug is detected in the feces.  Following intravenous administration of racemic albuterol, between 25% and 46% of the (R)-albuterol fraction of the dose was excreted as unchanged (R)-albuterol in the urine.
                        
                           Specific Populations
                        
                        
                           Age: No pharmacokinetic studies for PROAIR RESPICLICK have been conducted in neonates or elderly subjects.
                        
                           Sex: The influence of sex on the pharmacokinetics of PROAIR RESPICLICK has not been studied.
                        
                           Race: The influence of race on the pharmacokinetics of PROAIR RESPICLICK has not been studied. 
                        
                           Renal Impairment: The effect of renal impairment on the pharmacokinetics of albuterol was evaluated in 5 subjects with creatinine clearance of 7 to 53 mL/min, and the results were compared with those from healthy volunteers.  Renal disease had no effect on the half-life, but there was a 67% decline in albuterol clearance.  Caution should be used when administering high doses of PROAIR RESPICLICK to patients with renal impairment [see Use in Specific Populations (8.5)].
                        
                           Hepatic Impairment: The effect of hepatic impairment on the pharmacokinetics of PROAIR RESPICLICK has not been evaluated.
                        
                           Drug Interaction Studies:  In vitro and in vivo drug interaction studies have not been conducted with PROAIR RESPICLICK.  Known clinically significant drug interactions are outlined in Drug Interactions (7).
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         