
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Binding of the PD-1 ligands, PD-L1 and PD-L2, to the PD-1 receptor found on T cells, inhibits T cell proliferation and cytokine production. Upregulation of PD-1 ligands occurs in some tumors and signaling through this pathway can contribute to inhibition of active T-cell immune surveillance of tumors. Pembrolizumab is a monoclonal antibody that binds to the PD-1 receptor and blocks its interaction with PD-L1 and PD-L2, releasing PD-1 pathway-mediated inhibition of the immune response, including the anti-tumor immune response. In syngeneic mouse tumor models, blocking PD-1 activity resulted in decreased tumor growth.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        The pharmacokinetics of pembrolizumab was studied in 479 patients who received doses of 1 to 10 mg/kg every 2 weeks or 2 to 10 mg/kg every 3 weeks. Based on a population pharmacokinetic analysis, the mean [% coefficient of variation (CV%)] clearance (CL) is 0.22 L/day (28%) and the mean (CV%) elimination half-life (t1/2) is 26 days (24%). Steady-state concentrations of pembrolizumab were reached by 18 weeks of repeated dosing with an every 3-week regimen and the systemic accumulation was 2.1-fold. The peak concentration (Cmax), trough concentration (Cmin), and area under the plasma concentration versus time curve at steady state (AUCss) of pembrolizumab increased dose proportionally in the dose range of 2 to 10 mg/kg every 3 weeks.
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Specific Populations: The effects of various covariates on the pharmacokinetics of pembrolizumab were assessed in population pharmacokinetic analyses. The CL of pembrolizumab increased with increasing body weight; the resulting exposure differences were adequately addressed by the administration of a weight-based dose. The following factors had no clinically important effect on the CL of pembrolizumab: age (range 18 to 94 years), gender, renal impairment, mild hepatic impairment, and tumor burden. The effect of race could not be assessed due to limited data available in non-White patients.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Renal Impairment: The effect of renal impairment on the CL of pembrolizumab was evaluated by population pharmacokinetic analyses in patients with mild (eGFR 60 to 89 mL/min/1.73 m2; n=210), moderate (eGFR 30 to 59 mL/min/1.73 m2; n=43), or severe (eGFR 15 to 29 mL/min/1.73 m2; n=2) renal impairment compared to patients with normal (eGFR greater than or equal to 90 mL/min/1.73 m2; n=221) renal function. No clinically important differences in the CL of pembrolizumab were found between patients with renal impairment and patients with normal renal function [see Use in Specific Populations (8.6)].
                              
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Hepatic Impairment: The effect of hepatic impairment on the CL of pembrolizumab was evaluated by population pharmacokinetic analyses in patients with mild hepatic impairment (TB less than or equal to ULN and AST greater than ULN or TB between 1 and 1.5 times ULN and any AST; n=59) compared to patients with normal hepatic function (TB and AST less than or equal to ULN; n=410). No clinically important differences in the CL of pembrolizumab were found between patients with mild hepatic impairment and normal hepatic function. KEYTRUDA has not been studied in patients with moderate (TB greater than 1.5 to 3 times ULN and any AST) or severe (TB greater than 3 times ULN and any AST) hepatic impairment [see Use in Specific Populations (8.7)].
                              
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         