
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
                  Other short-acting sympathomimetic aerosol bronchodilators should not be used concomitantly with albuterol. If additional adrenergic drugs are to be administered by any route, they should be used with caution to avoid deleterious cardiovascular effects.
               
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           Beta-blockers: May block bronchodilatory effects of beta-agonists and produce severe bronchospasm. Patients with asthma should not normally be treated with beta-blockers. (7.1)
                           Diuretics: Electrocardiographic changes and/or hypokalemia associated with diuretics may worsen with concomitant beta-agonists. Consider monitoring potassium levels. (7.2)
                           Monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOs) or tricyclic antidepressants: May potentiate effect of albuterol on the vascular system. Consider alternative therapy in patients taking MAOs or tricyclic antidepressants. (7.4)
                        
                        
                           Revised: June 2009
                        
                        
                           VNT:6PI
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 Beta-Blockers
                     
                        Beta-adrenergic receptor blocking agents not only block the pulmonary effect of beta-agonists, such as VENTOLIN HFA, but may produce severe bronchospasm in patients with asthma. Therefore, patients with asthma should not normally be treated with beta-blockers. However, under certain circumstances, e.g., as prophylaxis after myocardial infarction, there may be no acceptable alternatives to the use of beta-adrenergic blocking agents in patients with asthma. In this setting, cardioselective beta-blockers should be considered, although they should be administered with caution.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 Diuretics
                     
                        The ECG changes and/or hypokalemia that may result from the administration of nonpotassium-sparing diuretics (such as loop or thiazide diuretics) can be acutely worsened by beta-agonists, especially when the recommended dose of the beta-agonist is exceeded. Although the clinical relevance of these effects is not known, caution is advised in the coadministration of beta-agonists with nonpotassium-sparing diuretics. Consider monitoring potassium levels.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3 Digoxin
                     
                        Mean decreases of 16% to 22% in serum digoxin levels were demonstrated after single-dose intravenous and oral administration of albuterol, respectively, to normal volunteers who had received digoxin for 10 days. The clinical relevance of these findings for patients with obstructive airway disease who are receiving inhaled albuterol and digoxin on a chronic basis is unclear. Nevertheless, it would be prudent to carefully evaluate the serum digoxin levels in patients who are currently receiving digoxin and albuterol.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4 Monoamine Oxidase Inhibitors or Tricyclic Antidepressants
                     
                        VENTOLIN HFA should be administered with extreme caution to patients being treated with monoamine oxidase inhibitors or tricyclic antidepressants, or within 2 weeks of discontinuation of such agents, because the action of albuterol on the vascular system may be potentiated. Consider alternative therapy in patients taking MAOs or tricyclic antidepressants.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         