
               
               
               7  DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           Agents that induce CYP3A4 enzymatic activity may alter the metabolism of buprenorphine but the clinical significance of these interactions is not known. (7.1)
                           
                           CNS depressants may interact with Butrans resulting in respiratory and CNS depression – use caution in prescribing Butrans for patients receiving benzodiazepines or other depressants and warn patients against concomitant self-administration/misuse. (7.2)
                           
                           Muscle relaxants may enhance the action of Butrans and produce an increased degree of respiratory depression. (7.2)
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1  Metabolic Drug Interactions
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           CYP3A4 Inhibitors
                           
                              Co-administration of ketoconazole, a strong CYP3A4 inhibitor, with Butrans, did not have any effect on Cmax and AUC of buprenorphine. Based on this observation, pharmacokinetics of Butrans is not expected to be affected by co-administration of CYP3A4 inhibitors.
                              However, certain protease inhibitors (PIs) with CYP3A4 inhibitory activity such as atazanavir and atazanavir/ritonavir resulted in elevated levels of buprenorphine and norbuprenorphine following sublingual administration of buprenorphine and naloxone. Patients in this study reported increased sedation, and symptoms of opiate excess have been found in post-marketing reports of patients receiving sublingual buprenorphine and atazanavir with and without ritonavir concomitantly. It should be noted that atazanavir is both a CYP3A4 and UGT1A1 inhibitor. As such, the drug-drug interaction potential for buprenorphine with CYP3A4 inhibitors is likely to be dependent on the route of administration as well as the specificity of enzyme inhibition 
                                    [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)]
                                 .
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           CYP3A4 Inducers
                           
                              The interaction between buprenorphine and CYP3A4 enzyme inducers has not been studied; therefore it is recommended that patients receiving Butrans be closely monitored for reduced efficacy if inducers of CYP3A4 (e.g. phenobarbital, carbamazepine, phenytoin, rifampin) are co-administered 
                                    [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)]
                                 .
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2  Non-Metabolic Drug Interactions
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Benzodiazepines
                           
                              There have been a number of reports regarding coma and death associated with the misuse and abuse of the combination of buprenorphine and benzodiazepines. In many, but not all of these cases, buprenorphine was misused by self-injection of crushed buprenorphine tablets. Preclinical studies have shown that the combination of benzodiazepines and buprenorphine altered the usual ceiling effect on buprenorphine-induced respiratory depression, making the respiratory effects of buprenorphine appear similar to those of full opioid agonists. Prescribe Butrans with caution to patients taking benzodiazepines or other drugs that act on the central nervous system regardless of whether these drugs are taken on the advice of a physician or are being abused/misused. Warn patients that it is extremely dangerous to self-administer benzodiazepines while taking Butrans, and caution patients to use benzodiazepines concurrently with Butrans only as directed by their physician.
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Skeletal Muscle Relaxants
                           
                              Butrans, like other opioids, may interact with skeletal muscle relaxants to enhance neuromuscular blocking action and increase respiratory depression.
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         