
               
               
               12  CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1  Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Buprenorphine is a partial agonist at mu opioid receptors. Buprenorphine is also an antagonist at kappa opioid receptors, an agonist at delta opioid receptors, and a partial agonist at ORL-1 (nociceptin) receptors. Its clinical actions result from binding to the opioid receptors.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2  Pharmacodynamics
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Central Nervous System Effects
                           
                              Buprenorphine binds to and dissociates from the mu opioid receptor slowly.
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Cardiovascular Effects
                           
                              Buprenorphine may cause a reduction in blood pressure
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Electrophysiology
                           
                              The effect of Butrans 10 mcg/hour and 2 x Butrans 20 mcg/hour on QTc interval was evaluated in a double-blind (Butrans vs. placebo), randomized, placebo and active-controlled (moxifloxacin 400 mg, open label), parallel-group, dose-escalating, single-dose study in 132 healthy male and female subjects aged 18 to 55 years. The dose escalation sequence for Butrans during the titration period was: Butrans 5 mcg/hour for 3 days, then Butrans 10 mcg/hour for 3 days, then Butrans 20 mcg/hour for 3 days, then 2 x Butrans 20 mcg/hour for 4 days. The QTc evaluation was performed during the third day of Butrans 10 mcg/hour and the fourth day of 2 x Butrans 20 mcg/hour when the plasma levels of buprenorphine were at steady state for the corresponding doses 
                                    [see Warnings and Precautions (5.4)]
                                 .
                              There was no clinically meaningful effect on mean QTc with a Butrans dose of 10 mcg/hour. A Butrans dose of 40 mcg/hour (given as two 20 mcg/hour Butrans Transdermal Systems) prolonged mean QTc by a maximum of 9.2 (90% CI: 5.2-13.3) msec across the 13 assessment time points.
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Endocrine Effects
                           
                              Opioids may influence the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal or -gonadal axes. Some changes that can be seen include an increase in serum prolactin, and decreases in plasma cortisol and testosterone. Clinical symptoms may be manifest from these hormonal changes.
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Other Effects
                           
                              Buprenorphine causes dose-related miosis and produces urinary retention in some patients.
                              In-vitro and animal studies indicate various effects of naturally occurring opioids, such as morphine, on components of the immune system. The clinical significance of these findings is unknown. Whether buprenorphine, a semi-synthetic opioid, has immunological effects similar to morphine is unknown.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3  Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        Each Butrans system provides delivery of buprenorphine for 7 days. Steady state was achieved during the first application by Day 3 (see Figure 2).
                        
                        
                           
                              Figure 2

								Mean (SD) Buprenorphine Plasma Concentrations Following Three Consecutive Applications of Butrans 10 mcg/hour (N = 36 Healthy Subjects)
                           
                        
                        Butrans 5, 10, and 20 mcg/hour provide dose-proportional total buprenorphine exposures (AUC) following 7-day applications. Butrans single 7-day application and steady-state pharmacokinetic parameters are summarized in Table 6. Plasma buprenorphine concentrations after titration showed no further change over the 60-day period studied. After removal of Butrans, mean buprenorphine concentrations decrease approximately 50% within 10 - 24 hours, followed by decline with an apparent terminal half-life of approximately 26 hours.
                        


                     



                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Absorption
                           
                              Transdermal delivery studies showed that intact human skin is permeable to buprenorphine. In clinical pharmacology studies, the median time for Butrans 10 mcg/hour to deliver quantifiable buprenorphine concentrations (≥25 pg/mL) was approximately 17 hours. The absolute bioavailability of Butrans relative to IV administration, following a 7-day application, is approximately 15% for all doses (Butrans 5, 10, and 20 mcg/hour).
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Distribution
                           
                              Buprenorphine is approximately 96% bound to plasma proteins, mainly to alpha- and beta-globulin.
                              Studies of IV buprenorphine have shown a large volume of distribution (approximately 430 L), implying extensive distribution of buprenorphine.
                              Following IV administration, buprenorphine and its metabolites are secreted into bile and excreted in urine. CSF buprenorphine concentrations appear to be approximately 15-25% of concurrent plasma concentrations.
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Metabolism
                           
                              Buprenorphine metabolism in the skin following Butrans application is negligible. Following transdermal application, buprenorphine is eliminated via hepatic metabolism, with subsequent biliary excretion and renal excretion of soluble metabolites.
                              Buprenorphine primarily undergoes N-dealkylation by CYP3A4 to norbuprenorphine and glucuronidation by UGT-isoenzymes (mainly UGT1A1 and 2B7) to buprenorphine 3-O-glucuronide. Norbuprenorphine, the major metabolite, is also glucuronidated (mainly UGT1A3) prior to excretion.
                              Norbuprenorphine is the only known active metabolite of buprenorphine. It has been shown to be a respiratory depressant in rats, but only at concentrations at least 50-fold greater than those observed following application to humans of Butrans 20 mcg/hour.
                              Since metabolism and excretion of buprenorphine occur mainly via hepatic elimination, reductions in hepatic blood flow induced by some general anesthetics (e.g., halothane) and other drugs may result in a decreased rate of hepatic elimination of the drug, resulting in increased plasma concentrations.
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Excretion
                           
                              Following intramuscular administration of 2 mcg/kg dose of buprenorphine, approximately 70% of the dose was excreted in feces within 7 days. Approximately 27% was excreted in urine. The total clearance of buprenorphine is approximately 55 L/hour in postoperative patients.
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Drug Interactions
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Effect of CYP3A4 inhibitors
                                 
                                    In a drug-drug interaction study, Butrans 10 mcg/hour (single dose x 7 days) was co-administered with 200 mg ketoconazole, a strong CYP3A4 inhibitor or ketoconazole placebo twice daily for 11 days and the pharmacokinetics of buprenorphine and its metabolites were evaluated. Plasma buprenorphine concentrations did not accumulate during co-medication with ketoconazole 200 mg twice daily. Based on the results from this study, metabolism during therapy with Butrans is not expected to be affected by co-administration of CYP3A4 inhibitors 
                                          [see Drug Interactions (7.1)]
                                       .
                                    Antiretroviral agents have been evaluated for CYP3A4 mediated interactions with sublingual buprenorphine. Nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors (NRTIs) and non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors (NNRTIs) do not appear to have clinically significant interactions with buprenorphine. However, certain protease inhibitors (PIs) with CYP3A4 inhibitory activity such as atazanavir and atazanavir/ritonavir resulted in elevated levels of buprenorphine and norbuprenorphine when buprenorphine and naloxone were administered sublingually. Cmax and AUC for buprenorphine increased by up to 1.6 and 1.9 fold, and Cmax and AUC for norbuprenorphine increased by up to 1.6 and 2.0 fold respectively, when sublingual buprenorphine was administered with these PIs. Patients in this study reported increased sedation, and symptoms of opiate excess have been found in post-marketing reports of patients receiving buprenorphine and atazanavir with and without ritonavir concomitantly. It should be noted that atazanavir is both a CYP3A4 and UGT1A1 inhibitor. As such, the drug-drug interaction potential for buprenorphine with CYP3A4 inhibitors is likely to be dependent on the route of administration as well as the specificity of enzyme inhibition 
                                          [see Drug Interactions (7.1)]
                                       .
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Effect of CYP3A4 inducers on buprenorphine
                                 
                                    The interaction between buprenorphine and CYP3A4 inducers has not been studied.
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Application Site
                                 
                                    A study in healthy subjects demonstrated that the pharmacokinetic profile of buprenorphine delivered by Butrans 10 mcg/hour is similar when applied to the upper outer arm, upper chest, upper back, or the side of the chest 
                                          [see Dosage and Administration (2.3)]
                                       .
                                    The reapplication of Butrans 10 mcg/hour after various rest periods to the same application site in healthy subjects showed that the minimum rest period needed to avoid variability in drug absorption is 3 weeks (21 days) 
                                          [see Dosage and Administration (2.3)]
                                       .
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 External Heat
                                 
                                    In a study of healthy subjects, application of a heating pad directly on the Butrans 10 mcg/hour system caused a 26% - 55% increase in blood concentrations of buprenorphine. Concentrations returned to normal within 5 hours after the heat was removed. For this reason, applying heating pads directly to the Butrans system during system wear should be avoided 
                                          [see Warnings and Precautions (5.11)]
                                       .
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Endotoxin Challenge
                                 
                                    Fever may increase the permeability of the skin, leading to increased buprenorphine concentrations during Butrans treatment. As a result, febrile patients are at increased risk for the possibility of Butrans-related reactions during treatment with Butrans. Monitor patients with febrile illness for adverse effects and consider dose adjustment 
                                          [see Warnings and Precautions (5.10)]
                                       . In a crossover study of healthy subjects receiving endotoxin or placebo challenge during Butrans 10 mcg/hour wear, the AUC and Cmax were similar despite a physiologic response of mild fever to endotoxin.
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Flux Determination
                                 
                                    Buprenorphine flux for the 7-day application period was established to be 5, 10, and 20 mcg/hour, for Butrans containing 5, 10, and 20 mg of buprenorphine, respectively.
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Specific Populations
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Gender
                                 
                                    In a pooled data analysis utilizing data from several studies that administered Butrans 10 mcg/hour to healthy subjects, no differences in buprenorphine Cmax and AUC or body-weight normalized Cmax and AUC were observed between males and females treated with Butrans 
                                          [see Use In Specific Populations (8.8)]
                                       .
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Geriatric
                                 
                                    Following a single application of Butrans 10 mcg/hour to 12 healthy young adults (mean age 32 years) and 12 healthy elderly subjects (mean age 72 years), the pharmacokinetic profile of Butrans was similar in healthy elderly and healthy young adult subjects, though the elderly subjects showed a trend toward higher plasma concentrations immediately after Butrans removal. Both groups eliminated buprenorphine at similar rates after system removal 
                                          [see Dosage and Administration (2.4) and Use In Specific Populations (8.5)]
                                       .
                                    In a study of healthy young subjects, healthy elderly subjects, and elderly subjects treated with thiazide diuretics, Butrans at a fixed dose-escalation schedule (Butrans 5 mcg/hour for 3 days, followed by Butrans 10 mcg/hour for 3 days and Butrans 20 mcg/hour for 7 days) produced similar mean plasma concentration vs. time profiles for each of the three subject groups. There were no significant differences between groups in buprenorphine Cmax or AUC 
                                          [see Dosage and Administration (2.4) and Use In Specific Populations (8.5)]
                                       .
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Pediatrics
                                 
                                    Butrans has not been studied in children and is not recommended for pediatric use.
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Renal Impairment
                                 
                                    No studies in patients with renal impairment have been performed with Butrans.
                                    In an independent study, the effect of impaired renal function on buprenorphine pharmacokinetics after IV bolus and after continuous IV infusion administrations was evaluated. It was found that plasma buprenorphine concentrations were similar in patients with normal renal function and in patients with impaired renal function or renal failure. In a separate investigation of the effect of intermittent hemodialysis on buprenorphine plasma concentrations in chronic pain patients with end-stage renal disease who were treated with a transdermal buprenorphine product (marketed outside the US) up to 70 mcg/hour, no significant differences in buprenorphine plasma concentrations before or after hemodialysis were observed 
                                          [see Dosage and Administration (2.4) and Use In Specific Populations (8.7)]
                                       .
                                    No notable relationship was observed between estimated creatinine clearance rates and steady-state buprenorphine concentrations among patients during Butrans therapy 
                                          [see Use In Specific Populations (8.7)]
                                       .
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Hepatic Impairment
                                 
                                    The pharmacokinetics of buprenorphine following an IV infusion of 0.3 mg of buprenorphine was compared in 8 patients with mild impairment (Child-Pugh A), 4 patients with moderate impairment (Child-Pugh B) and 12 subjects with normal hepatic function. Buprenorphine and norbuprenorphine exposure did not increase in the mild and moderate hepatic impairment patients.
                                    Butrans has not been evaluated in patients with severe (Child-Pugh C) hepatic impairment 
                                          [see Dosage and Administration (2.6), Warnings and Precautions (5.8) and Use In Specific Populations (8.6)]
                                       .
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     Butrans Figure 2
                     
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         