
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Rotigotine is a non-ergoline dopamine agonist. The precise mechanism of action of rotigotine as a treatment for Parkinson's disease is unknown, although it is thought to be related to its ability to stimulate dopamine receptors within the caudate-putamen in the brain. The precise mechanism of action of rotigotine as a treatment for Restless Legs Syndrome is unknown but is thought to be related to its ability to stimulate dopamine receptors.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Cardiac Electrophysiology
                              
                              There is no indication of a QT/QTc prolonging effect of NEUPRO in doses up to 24 mg/24 hours. The effects of NEUPRO at doses up to 24 mg/24 hours (supratherapeutic doses) on the QT/QTc interval was evaluated in a double-blind, randomized, placebo- and positive-controlled (moxifloxacin 400 mg IV, single dose), parallel-group trial with an overall treatment period of 52 days in male and female patients with advanced-stage Parkinson's disease. Assay sensitivity was confirmed by significant QTc prolongation by moxifloxacin.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        On average, approximately 45% of the rotigotine from the patch is released within 24 hours (0.2 mg/cm2). Rotigotine is primarily eliminated in the urine as inactive conjugates. After removal of the patch, plasma levels decreased with a terminal half-life of 5 to 7 hours. The pharmacokinetic profile showed a biphasic elimination with an initial half-life of 3 hours.
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Absorption and Bioavailability
                              
                              When single doses of 8 mg/24 hours are applied to the trunk, there is an average lag time of approximately 3 hours until drug is detected in plasma (range 1 to 8 hours). Tmax typically occurs between 15 to 18 hours post dose but can occur from 4 to 27 hours post dose. However, there is no characteristic peak concentration observed. Rotigotine displays dose-proportionality over a daily dose range of 1 mg/24 hours to 24 mg/24 hours. In the clinical studies of rotigotine effectiveness, the transdermal system application site was rotated from day to day (abdomen, thigh, hip, flank, shoulder, or upper arm) and the mean measured plasma concentrations of rotigotine were stable over the 6 months of maintenance treatment. Relative bioavailability for the different application sites at steady-state was evaluated in subjects with Parkinson's disease. In a single trial conducted in patients with early-stage Parkinson's disease, differences in bioavailability ranged from less than 1% (abdomen vs. hip) to 46% (shoulder vs. thigh) with shoulder application showing higher bioavailability.
                              Because rotigotine is administered transdermally, food should not affect absorption.
                              In a 14-day clinical study with rotigotine administered to healthy subjects, steady-state plasma concentrations were achieved within 2 to 3 days of daily dosing.
                              Average NEUPRO plasma concentrations (±95% CI) in patients with early-stage Parkinson's disease are shown in Figure 2 after application of a 8 mg/24 hours transdermal system to 1 of 6 application sites (shoulder, upper arm, flank, hip, abdomen, or thigh) on 2 different days during the maintenance phase.
                              


                           



                           
                           
                              
                                 Figure 1
                                 
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Distribution
                              
                              The weight normalized apparent volume of distribution (Vd/F) in humans is approximately 84 L/kg after repeated dose administration.
                              The binding of rotigotine to human plasma proteins is approximately 92% in vitro and 89.5% in vivo.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Metabolism and Elimination
                              
                              Rotigotine is extensively metabolized by conjugation and N-dealkylation. After intravenous dosing the predominant metabolites in human plasma are sulfate conjugates of rotigotine, glucuronide conjugates of rotigotine, sulfate conjugates of the N-despropyl-rotigotine and conjugates of N-desthienylethyl-rotigotine. Multiple CYP isoenzymes, sulfotransferases and two UDP-glucuronosyltransferases catalyze the metabolism of rotigotine.
                              After removal of the patch, plasma levels decreased with a terminal half-life of 5 to 7 hours. The pharmacokinetic profile showed a biphasic elimination with an initial half-life of 3 hours.
                              Rotigotine is primarily excreted in urine (approximately 71%) as inactive conjugates of the parent compound and N-desalkyl metabolites. A smaller proportion is excreted in feces (approximately 23%). The major metabolites found in urine were rotigotine sulfate (16% to 22% of the absorbed dose), rotigotine glucuronide (11% to 15%), and N-despropyl-rotigotine sulfate metabolite (14% to 20%) and N-desthienylethyl-rotigotine sulfate metabolite (10% to 21%). Approximately 11% is renally eliminated as other metabolites. A small amount of unconjugated rotigotine is renally eliminated (less than 1% of the absorbed dose).
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Drug Interaction Studies
                              
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       CYP Interactions
                                    
                                    
                                       In vitro studies indicate that multiple CYP-isoforms are capable of catalyzing the metabolism of rotigotine. In human liver microsomes, no extensive inhibition of the metabolism of rotigotine was observed when co-incubated with CYP isoform specific inhibitors. If an individual CYP isoform is inhibited, other isoforms can catalyze rotigotine metabolism.
                                    Rotigotine, the 5-O-glucuronide and its desalkyl and monohydroxy metabolites were analyzed for interactions with the human CYP isoenzymes CYP1A2, CYP2C9, CYP2C19, CYP2D6, and CYP3A4 in vitro. Based on these results, no risk for inhibition of CYP1A2, CYP2C9, and CYP3A4 catalyzed metabolism of other drugs is predicted at therapeutic rotigotine concentrations. There is a low risk of inhibition of CYP2C19 and CYP2D6 catalyzed metabolism of other drugs at therapeutic concentrations.
                                    In human hepatocytes in vitro, there was no indication for induction of CYP1A2, CYP2B6, CYP2C9, CYP2C19, and CYP3A4.
                                    Rotigotine is metabolized by multiple sulfotransferases and two UDP-glucuronosyltransferases (UGT1A9 and UGT2B15). These multiple pathways make it unlikely that inhibition of any one pathway would alter rotigotine concentrations significantly.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Protein Displacement, Warfarin
                                    
                                    
                                       In vitro, no potential for displacement of warfarin by rotigotine (and vice versa) from their respective human serum albumin binding sites was detected.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Digoxin
                                    
                                    The effect of rotigotine on the pharmacokinetics of digoxin has been investigated in vitro in Caco-2 cells. Rotigotine did not influence the P-glycoprotein-mediated transport of digoxin. Therefore, rotigotine would not be expected to affect the pharmacokinetics of digoxin.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Cimetidine
                                    
                                    Co-administration of rotigotine (up to 4 mg/24 hours) with cimetidine (400 mg twice daily), an inhibitor of CYP1A2, CYP2C19, CYP2D6, and CYP3A4, did not alter the steady-state pharmacokinetics of rotigotine in healthy subjects.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Levodopa/Carbidopa
                                    
                                    Co-administration of levodopa/carbidopa (100/25 mg twice daily) with rotigotine (4 mg/24 hours) had no effect on the steady-state pharmacokinetics of rotigotine; rotigotine had no effect on the pharmacokinetics of levodopa/carbidopa.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Oral Contraception
                                    
                                    Co-administration of rotigotine (3 mg/24 hours) did not affect the pharmacodynamics and pharmacokinetics of oral contraceptives (0.03 mg ethinylestradiol, 0.15 mg levonorgestrel).
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Omeprazole
                                    
                                    Co-administration of the CYP2C19 selective inhibitor omeprazole (40 mg/day) had no effect on the steady-state pharmacokinetics of rotigotine (4 mg/24 hours).
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Pharmacokinetics in Special Populations
                              
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Hepatic Impairment
                                    
                                    The effect of impaired hepatic function on the pharmacokinetics of rotigotine has been studied in subjects with moderate hepatic impairment (Child-Pugh classification – Grade B). There were no relevant changes in rotigotine plasma concentrations. No information is available on subjects with severe impairment of hepatic function.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Renal Impairment
                                    
                                    The effect of renal function on rotigotine pharmacokinetics has been studied in subjects with mild to severe impairment of renal function including subjects requiring dialysis compared to healthy subjects. There were no relevant changes in rotigotine plasma concentrations (up to end-stage renal disease requiring hemodialysis). In subjects with severe renal impairment not on dialysis (i.e., creatinine clearance 15 to less than 30 ml/min), exposure to conjugated rotigotine metabolites was doubled.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Gender
                                    
                                    Female and male subjects and patients had similar plasma concentrations (body weight normalized).
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Geriatric Patients
                                    
                                    Plasma concentrations of rotigotine in patients 65 to 80 years of age were similar to those in younger patients, approximately 40 to 64 years of age. Although not studied, exposures in older subjects (more than 80 years) may be higher due to skin changes with aging.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Pediatric Patients
                                    
                                    The pharmacokinetics of rotigotine in subjects below the age of 18 years has not been established.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Race
                                    
                                    The pharmacokinetic profile was similar in Caucasians, Blacks, and Japanese.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Adhesion
                              
                              Adhesion was examined in subjects with Parkinson's disease when patches were applied to rotating sites. Similar results were observed for the 4 mg/24 hours (20 cm2), 6 mg/24 hours (30 cm2), and 8 mg/24 hours (40 cm2) patches. An adherence of 90% or more of the patch surface was observed in 71% to 82% of cases. A partial detachment of more than 10% was observed in 15% to 24% of cases. A complete detachment of the patch was observed in 3% to 5% of cases.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         