
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  

                  Following oral administration, the bioavailability of ofloxacin in the tablet formulation is approximately 98%. Maximum serum concentrations are achieved one to two hours after an oral dose. Absorption of ofloxacin after single or multiple doses of 200 to 400 mg is predictable, and the amount of drug absorbed increases proportionately with the dose. Ofloxacin has biphasic elimination. Following multiple oral doses at steady-state administration, the half-lives are approximately 4 to 5 hours and 20 to 25 hours. However, the longer half-life represents less than 5% of the total AUC. Accumulation at steady-state can be estimated using a half-life of 9 hours. The total clearance and volume of distribution are approximately similar after single or multiple doses. Elimination is mainly by renal excretion. The following are mean peak serum concentrations in healthy 70 to 80 kg male volunteers after single oral doses of 200, 300, or 400 mg of ofloxacin or after multiple oral doses of 400 mg. 
                  

                  


                  


Steady-state concentrations were attained after four oral doses, and the area under the curve (AUC) was approximately 40% higher than the AUC after single doses. Therefore, after multiple-dose administration of 200 mg and 300 mg doses, peak serum levels of 2.2 mcg/mL and 3.6 mcg/mL, respectively, are predicted at steady-state.
                  
                     In vitro, approximately 32% of the drug in plasma is protein bound.
                  

                  The single dose and steady-state plasma profiles of ofloxacin injection were comparable in extent of exposure (AUC) to those of ofloxacin tablets when the injectable and tablet formulations of ofloxacin were administered in equal doses (mg/mg) to the same group of subjects. The mean steady-state AUC(0 to 12) attained after the intravenous administration of 400 mg over 60 min was 43.5 mcg•h/mL; the mean steady-state AUC(0 to 12) attained after the oral administration of 400 mg was 41.2 mcg•h/mL (two one-sided t-test, 90% confidence interval was 103 to 109). (see following chart).
                  

                  
                    
Between 0 and 6 h following the administration of a single 200 mg oral dose of ofloxacin to 12 healthy volunteers, the average urine ofloxacin concentration was approximately 220 mcg/mL. Between 12 and 24 hours after administration, the average urine ofloxacin level was approximately 34 mcg/mL.
Following oral administration of recommended therapeutic doses, ofloxacin has been detected in blister fluid, cervix, lung tissue, ovary, prostatic fluid, prostatic tissue, skin, and sputum. The mean concentration of ofloxacin in each of these various body fluids and tissues after one or more doses was 0.8 to 1.5 times the concurrent plasma level. Inadequate data are presently available on the distribution or levels of ofloxacin in the cerebrospinal fluid or brain tissue.
Ofloxacin has a pyridobenzoxazine ring that appears to decrease the extent of parent compound metabolism. Between 65% and 80% of an administered oral dose of ofloxacin is excreted unchanged via the kidneys within 48 hours of dosing. Studies indicate that less than 5% of an administered dose is recovered in the urine as the desmethyl or N-oxide metabolites. Four to eight percent of an ofloxacin dose is excreted in the feces. This indicates a small degree of biliary excretion of ofloxacin.
The administration of ofloxacin tablets with food does not affect the Cmax and AUC∞ of the drug, but Tmax is prolonged.
Clearance of ofloxacin is reduced in patients with impaired renal function (creatinine clearance rate < 50 mL/min), and dosage adjustment is necessary. (see 
                        PRECAUTIONS, General
                     and 
                        DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION
                     ).
Following oral administration to healthy elderly subjects (65 to 81 years of age), maximum plasma concentrations are usually achieved one to two hours after single and multiple twice-daily doses, indicating that the rate of oral absorption is unaffected by age or gender. Mean peak plasma concentrations in elderly subjects were 9 to 21% higher than those observed in younger subjects. Gender differences in the pharmacokinetic properties of elderly subjects have been observed. Peak plasma concentrations were 114% and 54% higher in elderly females compared to elderly males following single and multiple twice-daily doses. [This interpretation was based on study results collected from two separate studies.] Plasma concentrations increase dose-dependently with the increase in doses after single oral dose and at steady state. No differences were observed in the volume of distribution values between elderly and younger subjects. As in younger subjects, elimination is mainly by renal excretion as unchanged drug in elderly subjects, although less drug is recovered from renal excretion in elderly subjects. Consistent with younger subjects, less than 5% of an administered dose was recovered in the urine as the desmethyl and N-oxide metabolites in the elderly. A longer plasma half-life of approximately 6.4 to 7.4 hours was observed in elderly subjects, compared with 4 to 5 hours for young subjects. Slower elimination of ofloxacin is observed in elderly subjects as compared with younger subjects which may be attributable to the reduced renal function and renal clearance observed in the elderly subjects. Because ofloxacin is known to be substantially excreted by the kidney, and elderly patients are more likely to have decreased renal function, dosage adjustment is necessary for elderly patients with impaired renal function as recommended for all patients. (see 
                        PRECAUTIONS, General
                     and 
                        DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION
                     ).
               
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     MICROBIOLOGY
                     
                        Ofloxacin is a quinolone antimicrobial agent. The mechanism of action ofofloxacin and other fluoroquinolone antimicrobials involves inhibition ofbacterial topoisomerase IV and DNA gyrase (both of which are type IItopoisomerases), enzymes required for DNA replication, transcription, repairand recombination.
                        Ofloxacinhas in vitro activity against a wide range of gram-negative andgram-positive microorganisms. Ofloxacin is often bactericidal at concentrationsequal to or slightly greater than inhibitory concentrations.
                        Fluoroquinolones,including ofloxacin, differ in chemical structure and mode of action fromaminoglycosides, macrolides and β-lactam antibiotics, including penicillins.Fluoroquinolones may, therefore, be active against bacteria resistant to theseantimicrobials.
                        Resistanceto ofloxacin due to spontaneous mutation in vitro is a rare occurrence(range: 10-9to 10-11). Although cross-resistance has been observedbetween ofloxacin and some other fluoroquinolones, some microorganismsresistant to other fluoroquinolones may be susceptible to ofloxacin.
                        Ofloxacinhas been shown to be active against most strains of the followingmicroorganisms both in vitro and in clinical infections as described inthe INDICATIONS AND USAGE section:
                        
                           AerobicGram-Positive Microorganisms
                        
                        
                           Staphylococcusaureus
                           (methicillin-susceptible strains)
                        
                           Streptococcuspneumoniae (penicillin-susceptible strains)
                        
                           Streptococcus pyogenes
                        
                        
                           Aerobic Gram-Negative Microorganisms
                        
                        
                           Citrobacter (diversus)koseri
                        
                        
                           Enterobacter aerogenes
                        
                        
                           Escherichia coli
                        
                        
                           Haemophilus influenzae
                        
                        
                           Klebsiellapneumoniae
                        
                        
                           Neisseriagonorrhoeae
                        
                        
                           Proteusmirabilis
                        
                        
                           Pseudomonas aeruginosa
                        
                         As with other drugs in this class, some strains of Pseudomonas aeruginosa may develop resistance fairlyrapidly during treatment with ofloxacin.
                        
                           Other Microorganisms
                        
                        
                           Chlamydia trachomatis
                        
                         The following in vitro data areavailable, but their clinical significance is unknown.
                        Ofloxacin exhibitsin vitrominimum inhibitory concentrations (MIC values) of 2 mcg/mL or less against most(≥ 90%) strains of the following microorganisms; however, the safety andeffectiveness of ofloxacin in treating clinical infections due to thesemicroorganisms have not been established in adequate and well-controlledtrials.
                        
                           Aerobic Gram-Positive Microorganisms
                        
                        
                           Staphylococcus epidermidis(methicillin-susceptiblestrains)
                        
                           Staphylococcus saprophyticus
                        
                        
                           Streptococcus pneumoniae (penicillin-resistantstrains)
                        
                           AerobicGram-Negative Microorganisms
                        
                        
                           Acinetobactercalcoaceticus
                        
                        
                           Bordetellapertussis
                        
                        
                           Citrobacterfreundii
                        
                        
                           Enterobactercloacae
                        
                        
                           Haemophilusducreyi
                        
                        
                           Klebsiellaoxytoca
                        
                        
                           Moraxellacatarrhalis
                        
                        
                           Morganellamorganii
                        
                        
                           Proteusvulgaris
                        
                        
                           Providencia rettgeri
                        
                        
                           Providencia stuartii
                        
                        
                           Serratia marcescens
                        
                        
                           Anaerobic Microorganisms
                        
                        
                           Clostridium perfringes
                        
                        
                           Other Microorganisms
                        
                        
                           Chlamydia pneumoniae
                        
                        
                           Gardnerella vaginalis
                        
                        
                           Legionella pneumophila
                        
                        
                           Mycoplasma hominis
                        
                        
                           Mycoplasma pneumoniae
                        
                        
                           Ureaplasma urealyticum
                        
                        Ofloxacin is not active against Treponemapallidum (see WARNINGS).
                        
                           Susceptibility Tests
                        
                        
                           
                              Dilution Techniques

                              
                           
                        
                        Quantitative methods are used to determine antimicrobialminimum inhibitory concentrations (MIC values). These MIC values provideestimates of the susceptibility of bacteria to antimicrobial compounds. The MICvalues should be determined using a standardized procedure. Standardizedprocedures are based on a dilution method1,3(broth or agar) or equivalent with standardized inoculum concentrations andstandardized concentrations of ofloxacin powder. The MIC values should beinterpreted according to the following criteria:
                        For testing Enterobacteriaceae,methicillin-susceptible Staphylococcus aureus, and Pseudomonas aeruginosa:
                        

                        


                        




                        For testing Haemophilusinfluenzae:a
                           
                        
                        

                        

                        


                        




                        
                           a
                           Thisinterpretive standard is applicable only to broth microdilution susceptibilitytests with Haemophilus influenzae using HaemophilusTest Medium.1,3
                        
                        

                        The current absence of data on resistant strains precludesdefining any results other than “Susceptible.” Strains yielding MIC resultssuggestive of a “nonsusceptible” category should be submitted to a referencelaboratory for further testing.
For testing Neisseria gonorrhoeae:b
                        
                        

                        


                        




                        
                           b
                           These interpretive standards areapplicable only to agar dilution tests using GC agar base and 1% defined growthsupplement incubated in 5% CO2.
 For testing Streptococcus pneumoniae and Streptococcus pyogenes:c
                        
                        

                        


                        



                           c Theseinterpretive standards are applicable only to broth microdilutionsusceptibility tests using cation-adjusted Mueller-Hinton broth with 2 to 5%lysed horse blood.
                        Areport of “Susceptible” indicates that the pathogen is likely to be inhibitedif the antimicrobial compound in the blood reaches the concentration usuallyachievable. A report of “Intermediate” indicates that the result should beconsidered equivocal, and, if the microorganism is not fully susceptible toalternative, clinically feasible drugs, the test should be repeated. Thiscategory implies possible clinical applicability in body sites where the drugis physiologically concentrated or in situations where a high dosage of drug canbe used. This category also provides a buffer zone which prevents smalluncontrolled technical factors from causing major discrepancies ininterpretation. A report of “Resistant” indicates that the pathogen is notlikely to be inhibited if the antimicrobial compound in the blood reaches theconcentration usually achievable; other therapy should be selected.
                        Standardized susceptibility test procedures require the useof laboratory control microorganisms to control the technical aspects of thelaboratory procedures. Standard ofloxacin powder should provide the followingMIC values:
                        

                        


                        



                           d
                           Thisquality control range is applicable only to H. influenzae ATCC 49247 tested bya microdilution procedure using Haemophilus TestMedium (HTM).1,3
                        
                        
                           e Thisquality control range is applicable only to N. gonorrhoeae ATCC 49226 tested byan agar dilution procedure using GC agar base with 1% defined growth supplementincubated in 5% CO2.
                        
                           f Thisquality control range is applicable only to S. pneumoniae ATCC 49619 tested bya microdilution procedure using cation-adjusted Mueller-Hinton broth with 2 to5% lysed horse blood.
                        
                           
                              DIffusion Techniques
                           
                        
                        

                        Quantitative methods that require measurement of zone diameters also provide reproducible estimates of the susceptibility of bacteria to antimicrobial compounds. One such standardized procedure2 requires the use of standardized inoculum concentrations. This procedure uses paper disks impregnated with 5 mcg ofloxacin to test the susceptibility of microorganisms to ofloxacin.
                        Reports from the laboratory providing results of the standard single-disk susceptibility test with a 5 mcg ofloxacin disk should be interpreted according to the following criteria:
                        For testing Enterobacteriaceae, methicillin-susceptible Staphylococcus aureus, and Pseudomonas aeruginosa:
                        


                        


For testing Haemophilus influenzae:g
                              

                           
                        
                        


                        



                            
                           g This zone diameter standard is applicable only to disk diffusiontests with Haemophilus influenzae using Haemophilus Test Medium (HTM)2incubatedin 5% CO2.
                        The current absence of data on resistant strains precludesdefining any results other than “Susceptible.” Strains yielding zone diameterresults suggestive of a “nonsusceptible” category should be submitted to areference laboratory for further testing.
                        For testing Neisseria gonorrhoeae: h
                        
                        


                        



                           h These zone diameter standards areapplicable only to disk diffusion tests using GC agar base and 1% definedgrowth supplement incubated in 5% CO2.
                        For testing Streptococcus pneumoniaeandStreptococcus pyogenes: 
                           i
                        
                        


                        



                           i
                           These zone diameter standards areapplicable only to disk diffusion tests performed using Mueller-Hinton agarsupplemented with 5% defibrinated sheep blood and incubated in 5% CO2.
                        Interpretation should be as stated above for results usingdilution techniques. Interpretation involves correlation of the diameterobtained in the disk test with the MIC for ofloxacin. 
                        As with standardized dilution techniques, diffusion methodsrequire the use of laboratory control microorganisms that are used to controlthe technical aspects of the laboratory procedures. For the diffusion technique,the 5 mcg ofloxacin disk should provide the following zone diameters in theselaboratory quality control strains:
                        


                        



                           j
                           Thisquality control range is applicable only to H. influenzaeATCC 49247 tested by a disk diffusion procedure using HaemophilusTest Medium (HTM)2 incubated in 5% CO2.
                        
                           k Thisquality control range is applicable only to N. gonorrhoeaeATCC 49226 tested by a disk diffusion procedure using GC agar base with 1%defined growth supplement incubated in 5% CO2.
                        
                           l Thisquality control range is applicable only to S. pneumoniaeATCC 49619 tested by a disk diffusion procedure using Mueller-Hinton agarsupplemented with 5% defibrinated sheep blood and incubated in 5% CO2.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     ofloxacin-fig2-graph
                     
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         