


Drug InteractionsDrug Interactions
Angiotensin Converting Enzyme (ACE) Inhibitors: The hyponatremic and hypotensive effects of ACE inhibitors may be diminished by the concomitant administration of aspirin due to its indirect effect on the reninangiotensin conversion pathway. Angiotensin Converting Enzyme (ACE) Inhibitors: The hyponatremic and hypotensive effects of ACE inhibitors may be diminished by the concomitant administration of aspirin due to its indirect effect on the reninangiotensin conversion pathway. Acetazolamide: Concurrent use of aspirin and acetazolamide can lead to high serum concentrations of acetazolamide (and toxicity) due to competition at the renal tubule for secretion. Acetazolamide: Concurrent use of aspirin and acetazolamide can lead to high serum concentrations of acetazolamide (and toxicity) due to competition at the renal tubule for secretion. Alcohol, General Anesthetics, Narcotic Analgesics, Sedative Hypnotics, Tranquilizers such as Chlordiazepoxide, or Other CNS Depressants: The effects of these substances may be enhanced, causing increased CNS depression.Alcohol, General Anesthetics, Narcotic Analgesics, Sedative Hypnotics, Tranquilizers such as Chlordiazepoxide, or Other CNS Depressants: The effects of these substances may be enhanced, causing increased CNS depression.Anticoagulant Therapy (Heparin and Warfarin): Patients on anticoagulation therapy are at increased risk for bleeding because of drug-drug interactions and the effect on platelets. Aspirin can displace warfarin from protein binding sites, leading to prolongation of both the prothrombin time and the bleeding time. Aspirin can increase the anticoagulant activity of heparin, increasing bleeding risk.Anticoagulant Therapy (Heparin and Warfarin): Patients on anticoagulation therapy are at increased risk for bleeding because of drug-drug interactions and the effect on platelets. Aspirin can displace warfarin from protein binding sites, leading to prolongation of both the prothrombin time and the bleeding time. Aspirin can increase the anticoagulant activity of heparin, increasing bleeding risk.Anticonvulsants: Salicylates can displace protein-bound phenytoin and valproic acid, leading to a decrease in the total concentration of phenytoin and an increase in serum valproic acid levels. Anticonvulsants: Salicylates can displace protein-bound phenytoin and valproic acid, leading to a decrease in the total concentration of phenytoin and an increase in serum valproic acid levels. Beta Blockers: The hypotensive effects of beta blockers may be diminished by the concomitant administration of aspirin due to inhibition of renal prostaglandins, leading to decreased renal blood flow and salt and fluid retention.Beta Blockers: The hypotensive effects of beta blockers may be diminished by the concomitant administration of aspirin due to inhibition of renal prostaglandins, leading to decreased renal blood flow and salt and fluid retention.Corticosteroids: In patients receiving concomitant corticosteroids and chronic use of medications containing aspirin, withdrawal of corticosteroids may result in salicylism because corticosteroids enhance renal clearance of salicylates and their withdrawal is followed by return to normal rates of renal clearance. Corticosteroids: In patients receiving concomitant corticosteroids and chronic use of medications containing aspirin, withdrawal of corticosteroids may result in salicylism because corticosteroids enhance renal clearance of salicylates and their withdrawal is followed by return to normal rates of renal clearance. Diuretics: The effectiveness of diuretics in patients with underlying renal or cardiovascular disease may be diminished by the concomitant administration of aspirin due to inhibition of renal prostaglandins, leading to decreased renal blood flow and salt and fluid retention. Diuretics: The effectiveness of diuretics in patients with underlying renal or cardiovascular disease may be diminished by the concomitant administration of aspirin due to inhibition of renal prostaglandins, leading to decreased renal blood flow and salt and fluid retention. 6-Mercaptopurine and Methotrexate: Bone marrow toxicity and blood dyscrasia may result from displacing these drugs from secondary binding sites, and in the case of methotrexate, also reducing its excretion. 6-Mercaptopurine and Methotrexate: Bone marrow toxicity and blood dyscrasia may result from displacing these drugs from secondary binding sites, and in the case of methotrexate, also reducing its excretion. Nonsteroidal Anti-Inflammatory Drugs (NSAIDs): The concurrent use of aspirin with other NSAIDs should be avoided because this may increase bleeding or lead to decreased renal function.Nonsteroidal Anti-Inflammatory Drugs (NSAIDs): The concurrent use of aspirin with other NSAIDs should be avoided because this may increase bleeding or lead to decreased renal function.Oral Hypoglycemics: Moderate doses of aspirin may increase the effectiveness of oral hypoglycemic drugs, leading to hypoglycemia.Oral Hypoglycemics: Moderate doses of aspirin may increase the effectiveness of oral hypoglycemic drugs, leading to hypoglycemia.Uricosuric Agents (Probenicid and Sulfinpyrazone): Salicylates antagonize the uricosuric action, reducing their effectiveness in the treatment of gout. Aspirin competes with these agents for protein binding sites.Uricosuric Agents (Probenicid and Sulfinpyrazone): Salicylates antagonize the uricosuric action, reducing their effectiveness in the treatment of gout. Aspirin competes with these agents for protein binding sites.


