
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
                  
                     Effects of Modafinil Tablets on CYP3A4/5 Substrates
                     
The clearance of drugs that are substrates for CYP3A4/5 (e.g., steroidal contraceptives, cyclosporine, midazolam, and triazolam) may be increased by modafinil tablets via induction of metabolic enzymes, which results in lower systemic exposure. Dosage adjustment of these drugs should be considered when these drugs are used concomitantly with modafinil tablets [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].

                  
                  The effectiveness of steroidal contraceptives may be reduced when used with modafinil tablets and for one month after discontinuation of therapy. Alternative or concomitant methods of contraception are recommended for patients taking steroidal contraceptives (e.g., ethinyl estradiol) when treated concomitantly with modafinil tablets and for one month after discontinuation of modafinil tablets treatment.
                  Blood levels of cyclosporine may be reduced when used with modafinil tablets. Monitoring of circulating cyclosporine concentrations and appropriate dosage adjustment for cyclosporine should be considered when used concomitantly with modafinil tablets.
                  
                     Effects of Modafinil Tablets on CYP2C19 Substrates
                     
Elimination of drugs that are substrates for CYP2C19 (e.g., phenytoin, diazepam, propranolol, omeprazole, and clomipramine) may be prolonged by modafinil tablets via inhibition of metabolic enzymes, with resultant higher systemic exposure. In individuals deficient in the CYP2D6 enzyme, the levels of CYP2D6 substrates which have ancillary routes of elimination through CYP2C19, such as tricyclic antidepressants and selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors, may be increased by co-administration of modafinil tablets. Dose adjustments of these drugs and other drugs that are substrates for CYP2C19 may be necessary when used concomitantly with modafinil tablets [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                  
                     Warfarin
                     
More frequent monitoring of prothrombin times/INR should be considered whenever modafinil tablets are coadministered with warfarin [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                  
                     Monoamine Oxidase (MAO) Inhibitors
                     
Caution should be used when concomitantly administering MAO inhibitors and modafinil tablets.

                  
                  

               
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           Steroidal contraceptives (e.g., ethinyl estradiol): Use alternative or concomitant methods of contraception while taking modafinil tablets and for one month after discontinuation of modafinil tablets treatment. (7) 
                           Cyclosporine: Blood concentrations of cyclosporine may be reduced. (7)
                           CYP2C19 substrates, such as omeprazole, phenytoin, and diazepam: Exposure of these medications may be increased. (7)
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         