
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              •In patients who are elderly, volume-depleted (as on diuretic therapy), or with compromised renal function, use with NSAIDs, including selective COX-2 inhibitors, may result in deterioration of renal function, including renal failure. Monitor renal function periodically. (7.1)
                           
                              •Dual inhibition of the renin-angiotensin system: Increased risk of renal impairment, hypotension and hyperkalemia. (7.2)
                           
                              •Avoid potassium sparing agents in patients with heart failure. (7.3) 
                           
                              •Monitor serum lithium levels frequently. (7.4)
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 Non-Steroidal Anti-Inflammatory Agents (NSAIDs) Including Selective Cyclooxygenase-2 Inhibitors (COX-2 Inhibitors)
                     
                        In patients who are elderly, volume-depleted (including those on diuretic therapy), or with compromised renal function, co-administration of NSAIDs, including selective COX-2 inhibitors, with ACE inhibitors, including enalapril, may result in deterioration of renal function, including possible acute renal failure. These effects are usually reversible. Monitor renal function periodically in patients receiving enalapril and NSAID therapy.
                        In a clinical pharmacology study, indomethacin or sulindac was administered to hypertensive patients receiving enalapril maleate. In this study, there was no evidence of a blunting of the antihypertensive action of enalapril maleate. However, reports suggest that NSAIDs may diminish the antihypertensive effect of ACE inhibitors. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 Dual Blockade of the Renin-Angiotensin System (RAS)
                     
                        Dual blockade of the RAS with angiotensin receptor blockers, ACE inhibitors, or aliskiren is associated with increased risks of hypotension, hyperkalemia, and changes in renal function (including acute renal failure) compared to monotherapy. In most patients no benefit has been associated with using two RAS inhibitors concomitantly. In general, avoid combined use of RAS inhibitors. Closely monitor blood pressure, renal function and electrolytes in patients on EPANED and other agents that affect the RAS.
                        Do not co-administer aliskiren with EPANED in patients with diabetes. Avoid use of aliskiren with EPANED in patients with renal impairment (GFR <60 mL/min).
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3 Agents Increasing Serum Potassium
                     
                        EPANED attenuates potassium loss caused by thiazide-type diuretics. Potassium-sparing diuretics (e.g., spironolactone, triamterene, or amiloride), potassium supplements, or potassium-containing salt substitutes may lead to significant increases in serum potassium. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4 Lithium
                     
                        Lithium toxicity has been reported in patients receiving enalapril and lithium concomitantly which was generally reversible. It is recommended that serum lithium levels be monitored frequently if enalapril is administered concomitantly with lithium.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.5 Gold
                     
                        Nitritoid reactions (symptoms include facial flushing, nausea, vomiting, and hypotension) have been reported rarely in patients on therapy with injectable gold (sodium aurothiomalate) and concomitant ACE inhibitor therapy including enalapril.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         