
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  The actions of epinephrine resemble the effects of stimulation of adrenergic nerves. To a variable degree, it acts on both alpha and beta receptor sites of sympathetic effector cells. Its most prominent actions are on the beta receptors of the heart, vascular and other smooth muscle. When given by rapid I.V. injection it produces a rapid rise in blood pressure, mainly systolic, direct stimulation of cardiac muscle which increases the strength of ventricular contraction, increases the heart rate, and constricts the arterioles in the skin, mucosa and splanchnic areas of circulation.
                  Epinephrine relaxes the smooth muscle of the bronchi and iris and is a physiologic antagonist of histamine.
                  The drug also produces an increase in blood sugar and glycogenolysis in the liver.
               
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Blood pressure
                     
                        When given by slow I.V. injection, epinephrine usually produces a moderate rise in systolic and a fall in diastolic pressure. Although some increase in pulse pressure occurs, there is usually no great elevation in mean blood pressure. Accordingly, the compensatory reflex mechanisms that cause a pronounced increase in blood pressure do not antagonize the direct cardiac actions of epinephrine as much as with catecholamines that have a predominant action on alpha receptors.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Total peripheral resistance
                     
                        By action of epinephrine on beta receptors of the skeletal muscle vasculature, total peripheral resistance decreases, and blood flow is thereby enhanced. Usually, this vasodilator effect predominates so that the modest rise in systolic pressure which follows slow injection or absorption is the result of direct cardiac stimulation and increase in cardiac output. In some instances, peripheral resistance is not altered or may even rise, owing to a greater ratio of alpha to beta activity in different vascular areas.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        Intravenous injection produces an immediate and intensified response. Following I.V. injection, epinephrine disappears rapidly from the blood stream. Subcutaneously or I.M. administered epinephrine has a rapid onset and short duration of action. Subcutaneous administration during asthmatic attacks may produce bronchodilation within 5 to 10 minutes, and maximal effects may occur within 20 minutes.
                        The drug becomes fixed in the tissues and is rapidly inactivated chiefly by enzymic transformation to metanephrine or normetanephrine, either of which is subsequently conjugated and excreted in the urine in the form of sulfates and glucuronides. Either sequence results in the formation of 3-methoxy-4-hydroxy-mandelic acid (vanillylmandelic acid, VMA) which is also detectable in the urine.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         