
                     
                     
                     Drug Interactions
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Anticoagulants:
                           
                              Anabolic steroids may increase sensitivity to oral anticoagulants. Dosage of the anticoagulant may have to be decreased in order to maintain desired prothrombin time. Patients receiving oral anticoagulant therapy require close monitoring, especially when anabolic steroids are started or stopped.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Warfarin: 
                           
                              A multidose study of oxandrolone, given as 5 or 10 mg BID in 15 healthy subjects concurrently treated with warfarin, resulted in a mean increase in S-warfarin half-life from 26 to 48 hours and AUC from 4.55 to 12.08 ng•hr/mL; similar increases in R-warfarin half-life and AUC were also detected. Microscopic hematuria (9/15) and gingival bleeding (1/15) were also observed. A 5.5-fold decrease in the mean warfarin dose from 6.13 mg/day to 1.13 mg/day (approximately 80-85% reduction of warfarin dose), was necessary to maintain a target INR of 1.5. When oxandrolone therapy is initiated in a patient already receiving treatment with warfarin, the INR or prothrombin time (PT) should be monitored closely and the dose of warfarin adjusted as necessary until a stable target INR or PT has been achieved. 
                              Furthermore, in patients receiving both drugs, careful monitoring of the INR or PT, and adjustment of the warfarin dosage if indicated are recommended when the oxandrolone dose is changed or discontinued. Patients should be closely monitored for signs and symptoms of occult bleeding.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Oral Hypoglycemic Agents: 
                           
                              Oxandrolone may inhibit the metabolism of oral hypoglycemic agents.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Adrenal Steroids or ACTH: 
                           
                              In patients with edema, concomitant administration with adrenal cortical steroids or ACTH may increase the edema.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               