
               
               
               
                  CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  Cefaclor is well absorbed after oral administration to fasting subjects. Total absorption is the same whether the drug is given with or without food; however, when it is taken with food, the peak concentration achieved is 50% to 75% of that observed when the drug is administered to fasting subjects and generally appears from three fourths to 1 hour later. Following administration of 250-mg, 500-mg, and 1-g doses to fasting subjects, average peak serum levels of approximately 7, 13, and 23 mcg/mL respectively were obtained within 30 to 60 minutes. Approximately 60% to 85% of the drug is excreted unchanged in the urine within 8 hours, the greater portion being excreted within the first 2 hours. During this 8-hour period, peak urine concentrations following the 250-mg, 500-mg, and 1-g doses were approximately 600, 900, and 1,900 mcg/mL, respectively. The serum half-life in normal subjects is 0.6 to 0.9 hour. In patients with reduced renal function, the serum half-life of cefaclor is slightly prolonged. In those with complete absence of renal function, the plasma half-life of the intact molecule is 2.3 to 2.8 hours. Excretion pathways in patients with markedly impaired renal function have not been determined. Hemodialysis shortens the half-life by 25% to 30%. 
               
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        Microbiology
                     
                     
                        
                           Mechanism of Action

                           As with other cephalosporins, the bactericidal action of cefaclor results from inhibition of cell-wall synthesis.
                        
                           Mechanism of Resistance

                           Resistance to cefaclor is primarily through hydrolysis of beta-lactamases, alteration of penicillin binding proteins (PBPs) and decreased permeability. Pseudomonas spp., Acinetobacter calcoaceticus and most strains of Enterococi (Enterococcus faecalis, group D streptococci), Enterobacter spp., indole-positive Proteus, Morganella morganii (formerly Proteus morganii), Providencia rettgeri (formerly Proteus rettgeri) and Serratia spp. are resistant to cefaclor. Cefaclor is inactive against methicillin-resistant staphylococci, β lactamase-negative, ampicillin-resistant strains of H. influenzae should be considered resistant to cefaclor despite apparent in vitro susceptibility to this agent.
                        
                           Antibacterial Activity

                           Cefaclor has been shown to be active against most strains of the following microorganisms, both in vitro and in clinical infections as described in the INDICATIONS AND USAGE section. 
                        
                           Gram-positive Bacteria
     
                           Staphylococcus aureus (methicillin-susceptible only)
     Coagulasenegative staphylococci (methicillin-susceptible only)
     Streptococcus pneumonia
     
                           Streptococcus pyogenes (group A β-hemolytic streptococci) 
                        
                           Gram-negative Bacteria
     
                           Escherichia coli 
     
                           Haemophilus influenzae excluding β-lactamase-negative ampicillin-resistant strains 
     Klebsiella spp. 
     
                           Proteus mirabilis 
                        
                        The following in vitro data are available, 
                              but their clinical significance is unknown
                           . 
                        At least 90 percent of the following bacteria exhibit an in vitro minimum inhibitory concentrations (MICs) less than or equal to the susceptible breakpoint of cefaclor. However, the safety and effectiveness of cefaclor in treating clinical infections due to these bacteria has not been established in adequate and well-controlled trials
                        
                           Gram-negative Bacteria
     
                           Citrobacter diversus 
     
                           Moraxella catarrhalis       
     
                           Neisseria gonorrhoeae 
                        
                        
                           Anaerobic Bacteria
     
                           Bacteroides spp.
     
                           Peptococcus spp.
     
                           Peptostreptococcus 
     
                           Propionibacterium acnes 
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        

Susceptibility Test Methods


                     
                     
                        When available, the clinical microbiology laboratory should provide the result of in vitro susceptibility test results for antimicrobial drugs used in resident hospitals to the physician as periodic reports that describe the susceptibility profile of nosocomial and community-acquired pathogens. These reports should aid the physician in selecting an antibacterial drug for treatment.
                        
                           Dilution Techniques
                        
                        Quantitative methods are used to determine antimicrobial minimum inhibitory concentrations (MICs). These MICs provide estimates of the susceptibility of bacteria to antimicrobial compounds. The MICs should be determined using a standardized method (broth, agar, or microdilution)1,3. The MIC values should be interpreted according to criteria provided in Table 1.
                        
                           Diffusion Techniques
                        
                        Quantitative methods that require measurement of zone diameters also provide reproducible estimates of the susceptibility of bacteria to antimicrobial compounds. The zone size provides an estimate of the susceptibility of bacteria to antimicrobial compounds. The zone size should be determined using standardized test method2,3. This procedure uses paper disks impregnated with 30-mcg cefaclor to test the susceptibility of microorganisms to cefaclor. The disc diffusion interpretive criteria are provided in Table 1.
                        
                           Table 1: Susceptibility Test Interpretive Criteria for Cefaclor
                        
                        


                        



                           1 Susceptibility of staphylococci to cefaclor may be deduced from testing only penicillin and either cefoxitin or oxacillin

                           2 Susceptibility of Streptococcus pyogenes to cefaclor may also be deduced from testing penicillin
                        A report of susceptibility indicates that antimicrobial is likely to inhibit growth of the pathogen if the antimicrobial compound reaches the concentrations at the site of infection necessary to inhibit growth of the pathogen. A report of Intermediate indicates that the result should be considered equivocal, and, if the microorganism is not fully susceptible to alternative, clinically feasible drugs, the test should be repeated. This category implies possible clinical applicability in body sites where the drug is physiologically concentrated or in situations where a high dosage of drug can be used. This category also provides a buffer zone that prevents small uncontrolled technical factors from causing major discrepancies in interpretation. A report of Resistant indicates that the antimicrobial is not likely to inhibit growth of the pathogen if the antimicrobial compound reaches the concentrations usually achievable at the infection site; other therapy should be selected.
                        
                           Quality Control
                        
                        Standardized susceptibility test procedures require the use of laboratory controls to monitor and ensure the accuracy and precision of supplies and reagents used in the assay, and the techniques of the individuals performing the test, 1,2,3,4 Standard cefaclor powder should provide the following range of MIC values noted in Table 2. For the diffusion technique using the 30 mcg disk the criteria in Table 2 should be achieved.
                        
                           Table 2: Acceptable Quality control Ranges for Cefaclor
                        
                        


