
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  
                  
                  The mechanism by which COLCRYS exerts its beneficial effect in patients with FMF has not been fully elucidated; however, evidence suggests that colchicine may interfere with the intracellular assembly of the inflammasome complex present in neutrophils and monocytes that mediates activation of interleukin-1β. Additionally, colchicine disrupts cytoskeletal functions through inhibition of β-tubulin polymerization into microtubules, and consequently prevents the activation, degranulation, and migration of neutrophils thought to mediate some gout symptoms.
                  
 

                  
                  
                  
                     Absorption
                  
                  In healthy adults, COLCRYS is absorbed when given orally, reaching a mean Cmax of 2.5 ng/mL (range 1.1 to 4.4 ng/mL) in 1 to 2 hours (range 0.5 to 3 hours) after a single dose administered under fasting conditions. 
                  Following oral administration of COLCRYS given as 1.8 mg colchicine over 1 hour to healthy, young adults under fasting conditions, colchicine appears to be readily absorbed, reaching mean maximum plasma concentrations of 6.2 ng/mL at a median 1.81 hours (range: 1.0 to 2.5 hours). Following administration of the non-recommended high-dose regimen (4.8 mg over 6 hours), mean maximal plasma concentrations were 6.8 ng/mL, at a median 4.47 hours (range: 3.1 to 7.5 hours).
                  After 10 days on a regimen of 0.6 mg twice daily, peak concentrations are 3.1 to 3.6 ng/mL (range 1.6 to 6.0 ng/mL), occurring 1.3 to 1.4 hours post-dose (range 0.5 to 3.0 hours).  Mean pharmacokinetic parameter values in healthy adults are shown in Table 5 below.
                  


                  


T
                  In some subjects, secondary colchicine peaks are seen, occurring between 3 and 36 hours post-dose and ranging from 39% to 155% of the height of the initial peak. These observations are attributed to intestinal secretion and reabsorption and/or biliary recirculation. 
                  Absolute bioavailability is reported to be approximately 45%.
                  Administration of COLCRYS with food has no effect on the rate of colchicine absorption, but did decrease the extent of colchicine by approximately 15%. This is without clinical significance.
                  
 

                  
                  
                  
                     Distribution
                  
                  The mean apparent volume of distribution in healthy young volunteers was approximately 5 to 8 L/kg. 
                  Colchicine binding to serum protein is low, 39 ± 5%, primarily to albumin regardless of concentration. 
                  Colchicine crosses the placenta (plasma levels in the fetus are reported to be approximately 15% of the maternal concentration). Colchicine also distributes into breast milk at concentrations similar to those found in the maternal serum [see Pregnancy (8.1) and Nursing Mothers (8.3)
                     ].
                  
 

                  
                  
                  
                     Metabolism
                  
                  Colchicine is demethylated to two primary metabolites, 2-O-demethylcolchicine and 3-O-demethylcolchicine (2- and 3-DMC, respectively), and one minor metabolite, 10-O-demethylcolchicine (also known as colchiceine).  In vitro studies using human liver microsomes have shown that CYP3A4 is involved in the metabolism of colchicine to 2- and 3-DMC.  Plasma levels of these metabolites are minimal (less than 5% of parent drug). 
                  
 

                  
                  
                  
                     Elimination/Excretion
                  
                  In healthy volunteers (n=12) 40 – 65% of 1 mg orally administered colchicine was recovered unchanged in urine. Enterohepatic recirculation and biliary excretion are also postulated to play a role in colchicine elimination.  Following multiple oral doses (0.6 mg twice daily), the mean elimination half-lives in young healthy volunteers (mean age 25 to 28 years of age) is 26.6 to 31.2 hours. Colchicine is a substrate of P-gp.
                  
 

                  
                  
                  
                     Extracorporeal Elimination: Colchicine is not removed by hemodialysis.
                  
 

                  
                  
                  
                     Special Populations
                  
                  There is no difference between men and women in the pharmacokinetic disposition of colchicine.
                  
 

                  
                  
                  
                     Pediatric Patients: Pharmacokinetics of colchicine was not evaluated in pediatric patients.
                  
 

                  
                  
                  
                     Elderly: Pharmacokinetics of colchicine has not been determined in elderly patients. A published report described the pharmacokinetics of 1 mg oral colchicine tablet in four elderly women compared to six young healthy males. The mean age of the four elderly women was 83 years (range 75 – 93), mean weight was 47 kg (38 – 61 kg) and mean creatinine clearance was 46 mL/min (range 25 – 75 mL/min). Mean peak plasma levels and AUC of colchicine were two times higher in elderly subjects compared to young healthy males. However, it is possible that the higher exposure in the elderly subjects was due to decreased renal function. 
                  
 

                  
                  
                  
                     Renal impairment: Pharmacokinetics of colchicine in patients with mild and moderate renal impairment is not known. A published report described the disposition of colchicine (1 mg) in young adult men and women with FMF who had normal renal function or end-stage renal disease requiring dialysis. Patients with end-stage renal disease had 75% lower colchicine clearance (0.17 vs 0.73 L/hr/kg) and prolonged plasma elimination half-life (18.8 hrs vs 4.4 hrs) as compared to subjects with FMF and normal renal function [see Dose Modification in Renal Impairment (2.5) and Renal Impairment (8.6)
                     ].
                  
 

                  
                  
                  
                     Hepatic impairment: Published reports on the pharmacokinetics of IV colchicine in patients with severe chronic liver disease, as well as those with alcoholic or primary biliary cirrhosis, and normal renal function suggest wide inter-patient variability. In some subjects with mild to moderate cirrhosis, the clearance of colchicine is significantly reduced and plasma half-life prolonged compared to healthy subjects. In subjects with primary biliary cirrhosis, no consistent trends were noted [see Dose Modification in Hepatic Impairment (2.6) and Hepatic Impairment (8.7)
                     ]. No pharmacokinetic data are available for patients with severe hepatic impairment (Child-Pugh C).
                  
 

                  
                  
                  
                     Drug interactions:
                  
                  
 

                  
                  
                  
                     
                        In vitro
                     
                      drug interactions: 
                  
                  
                     In vitro studies in human liver microsomes have shown that colchicine is not an inhibitor or inducer of CYP1A2, CYP2A6, CYP2B6, CYP2C8, CYP2C9, CYP2C19, CYP2D6, CYP2E1, or CYP3A4 activity. 
                  
 

                  
                  
                  
                     
                        In vivo
                     
                      drug interactions: 
                  
                  The effects of co-administration of other drugs with COLCRYS on Cmax, AUC, and Cmin are summarized in Table 6 (effect of other drugs on colchicine) and Table 7 (effect of colchicine on other drugs).  For information regarding clinical recommendations, see Table 1 in Dose Modification for Co-administration of Interacting Drugs [see Dose Modification for Co-administration of Interacting Drugs (2.4)
                     ].
                  


                  


Estrogen-containing oral contraceptives: In healthy female volunteers given ethinyl estradiol and norethindrone (Ortho-Novum® 1/35) co-administered with COLCRYS (0.6 mg b.i.d. × 14 days), hormone concentrations are not affected.
                  In healthy volunteers given theophylline co-administered with COLCRYS (0.6 mg b.i.d. × 14 days), theophylline concentrations were not affected.
                  


                  


Conducted in healthy adult females
                  AUCτ
                  
 

               
               
            
         