
               
               
               7  DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           Strong P-glycoprotein inhibitors (e.g., cyclosporine): Co-administration may increase plasma silodosin concentration. Concomitant use is not recommended. (7.2)
                           
                           Alpha-blockers: Interactions involving concomitant use have not been determined. However, interactions are expected and concomitant use is not recommended. (7.3)
                           
                           Concomitant use of PDE5 inhibitors with alpha-blockers including Rapaflo can potentially cause symptomatic hypotension. (5.5)  (7.5) 
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1  Moderate and Strong CYP3A4 Inhibitors
                     
                        In a clinical metabolic inhibition study, a 3.8-fold increase in silodosin maximum plasma concentrations and 3.2-fold increase in silodosin exposure were observed with concurrent administration of a strong CYP3A4 inhibitor, 400 mg ketoconazole. Use of strong CYP3A4 inhibitors such as itraconazole or ritonavir may cause plasma concentrations of silodosin to increase. Concomitant administration of strong CYP3A4 inhibitors and RAPAFLO is contraindicated [see 
                           
                              Contraindications (4)
                           
                           , 
                           
                              Warnings and Precautions (5.4)
                           
                            and 
                           
                              Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)
                           ].
                        The effect of moderate CYP3A4 inhibitors on the pharmacokinetics of silodosin has not been evaluated. Concomitant administration with moderate CYP3A4 inhibitors (e.g., diltiazem, erythromycin, verapamil) may increase concentration of RAPAFLO. Exercise caution and monitor patients for adverse events when co-administering RAPAFLO with moderate CYP3A4 inhibitors.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2  Strong P-glycoprotein (P-gp) Inhibitors
                     
                        
                           In vitro studies indicated that silodosin is a P-gp substrate. Ketoconazole, a CYP3A4 inhibitor that also inhibits P-gp, caused significant increase in exposure to silodosin. Inhibition of P-gp may lead to increased silodosin concentration. RAPAFLO is therefore not recommended in patients taking strong P-gp inhibitors such as cyclosporine [see 
                           
                              Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)
                           ].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3  Alpha-Blockers
                     
                        The pharmacodynamic interactions between silodosin and other alpha-blockers have not been determined. However, interactions may be expected, and RAPAFLO should not be used in combination with other alpha-blockers [see 
                           
                              Warnings and Precautions (5.5)
                           ].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4  Digoxin
                     
                        The effect of co-administration of RAPAFLO and digoxin 0.25 mg/day for 7 days was evaluated in a clinical trial in 16 healthy males, aged 18 to 45 years. Concomitant administration of RAPAFLO and digoxin did not significantly alter the steady state pharmacokinetics of digoxin. No dose adjustment is required.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.5  PDE5 Inhibitors
                     
                        Co-administration of RAPAFLO with a single dose of 100 mg sildenafil or 20 mg tadalafil was evaluated in a placebo-controlled clinical study that included 24 healthy male subjects, 45 to 78 years of age. Orthostatic vital signs were monitored in the 12-hour period following concomitant dosing. During this period, the total number of positive orthostatic test results was greater in the group receiving RAPAFLO plus a PDE5 inhibitor compared with RAPAFLO alone. No events of symptomatic orthostasis or dizziness were reported in subjects receiving RAPAFLO with a PDE5 inhibitor.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.6  Other Concomitant Drug Therapy
                     
                        
                           
                              Antihypertensives
                           
                        
                        The pharmacodynamic interactions between silodosin and antihypertensives have not been rigorously investigated in a clinical study. However, approximately one-third of the patients in clinical studies used concomitant antihypertensive medications with RAPAFLO. The incidence of dizziness and orthostatic hypotension in these patients was higher than in the general silodosin population (4.6% versus 3.8% and 3.4% versus 3.2%, respectively). Exercise caution during concomitant use with antihypertensives and monitor patients for possible adverse events [see 
                           
                              Warnings and Precautions (5.5)
                           ].
                        
                           
                              Metabolic Interactions
                           
                        
                        
                           In vitro data indicate that silodosin does not have the potential to inhibit or induce cytochrome P450 enzyme systems.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.7  Food Interactions
                     
                        The effect of a moderate fat, moderate calorie meal on silodosin pharmacokinetics was variable and decreased silodosin maximum plasma concentration (Cmax) by approximately 18 − 43% and exposure (AUC) by 4 − 49% across three different studies. Safety and efficacy clinical trials for RAPAFLO were always conducted in the presence of food intake. Patients should be instructed to take silodosin with a meal to reduce risk of adverse events [see 
                           
                              Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)
                           ].
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         