
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        
                           BREO ELLIPTA
                        
                        Since BREO ELLIPTA contains both fluticasone furoate and vilanterol, the mechanisms of action described below for the individual components apply to BREO ELLIPTA. These drugs represent 2 different classes of medications (a synthetic corticosteroid and a LABA) that have different effects on clinical and physiological indices.
                        
                           Fluticasone Furoate
                        
                        Fluticasone furoate is a synthetic trifluorinated corticosteroid with anti-inflammatory activity. Fluticasone furoate has been shown in vitro to exhibit a binding affinity for the human glucocorticoid receptor that is approximately 29.9 times that of dexamethasone and 1.7 times that of fluticasone propionate. The clinical relevance of these findings is unknown.
                        The precise mechanism through which fluticasone furoate affects COPD and asthma symptoms is not known. Inflammation is an important component in the pathogenesis of COPD and asthma. Corticosteroids have been shown to have a wide range of actions on multiple cell types (e.g., mast cells, eosinophils, neutrophils, macrophages, lymphocytes) and mediators (e.g., histamine, eicosanoids, leukotrienes, cytokines) involved in inflammation. Specific effects of fluticasone furoate demonstrated in in vitro and in vivo models included activation of the glucocorticoid response element, inhibition of pro-inflammatory transcription factors such as NFkB, and inhibition of antigen-induced lung eosinophilia in sensitized rats. These anti-inflammatory actions of corticosteroids may contribute to their efficacy.
                        
                           Vilanterol
                        
                        Vilanterol is a LABA. In vitro tests have shown the functional selectivity of vilanterol was similar to salmeterol. The clinical relevance of this in vitro finding is unknown.
                        Although beta2-receptors are the predominant adrenergic receptors in bronchial smooth muscle and beta1-receptors are the predominant receptors in the heart, there are also beta2-receptors in the human heart comprising 10% to 50% of the total beta-adrenergic receptors. The precise function of these receptors has not been established, but they raise the possibility that even highly selective beta2-agonists may have cardiac effects.
                        The pharmacologic effects of beta2-adrenoceptor agonist drugs, including vilanterol, are at least in part attributable to stimulation of intracellular adenyl cyclase, the enzyme that catalyzes the conversion of adenosine triphosphate (ATP) to cyclic-3’,5’-adenosine monophosphate (cyclic AMP). Increased cyclic AMP levels cause relaxation of bronchial smooth muscle and inhibition of release of mediators of immediate hypersensitivity from cells, especially from mast cells.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        
                           Cardiovascular Effects
                        
                        
                           Healthy Subjects: QTc interval prolongation was studied in a double-blind, multiple-dose, placebo- and positive-controlled crossover study in 85 healthy volunteers. The maximum mean (95% upper confidence bound) difference in QTcF from placebo after baseline-correction was 4.9 (7.5) milliseconds and 9.6 (12.2) milliseconds seen 30 minutes after dosing for fluticasone furoate /vilanterol 200 mcg/25 mcg and fluticasone furoate/vilanterol 800 mcg/100 mcg, respectively.
                        A dose-dependent increase in heart rate was also observed. The maximum mean (95% upper confidence bound) difference in heart rate from placebo after baseline-correction was 7.8 (9.4) beats/min and 17.1 (18.7) beats/min seen 10 minutes after dosing for fluticasone furoate/vilanterol 200 mcg/25 mcg and fluticasone furoate/vilanterol 800 mcg/100 mcg, respectively.
                        
                           HPA Axis Effects
                        
                        
                           Healthy Subjects: Inhaled fluticasone furoate at repeat doses up to 400 mcg was not associated with statistically significant decreases in serum or urinary cortisol in healthy subjects. Decreases in serum and urine cortisol levels were observed at fluticasone furoate exposures several-fold higher than exposures observed at the therapeutic dose.
                        
                           Subjects with Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease: In a trial with subjects with COPD, treatment with fluticasone furoate (50, 100, or 200 mcg)/vilanterol 25 mcg, vilanterol 25 mcg, and fluticasone furoate (100 or 200 mcg) for 6 months did not affect 24-hour urinary cortisol excretion. A separate trial with subjects with COPD demonstrated no effects on serum cortisol after 28 days of treatment with fluticasone furoate (50, 100, or 200 mcg)/vilanterol 25 mcg.
                        
                           Subjects with Asthma: A randomized, double-blind, parallel-group trial in 185 subjects with asthma showed no difference between once-daily treatment with fluticasone furoate/vilanterol 100 mcg/25 mcg or fluticasone furoate/vilanterol 200 mcg/25 mcg compared with placebo on serum cortisol weighted mean (0 to 24 hours), serum cortisol AUC(0-24), and 24-hour urinary cortisol after 6 weeks of treatment, whereas prednisolone 10 mg given once daily for 7 days resulted in significant cortisol suppression.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        Linear pharmacokinetics was observed for fluticasone furoate (200 to 800 mcg) and vilanterol (25 to 100 mcg). On repeated once-daily inhalation administration, steady state of fluticasone furoate and vilanterol plasma concentrations was achieved after 6 days, and the accumulation was up to 2.6-fold for fluticasone furoate and 2.4-fold for vilanterol as compared with single dose.
                        
                           Absorption
                        
                        
                           Fluticasone Furoate: Fluticasone furoate plasma levels may not predict therapeutic effect. Peak plasma concentrations are reached within 0.5 to 1 hour. Absolute bioavailability of fluticasone furoate when administrated by inhalation was 15.2%, primarily due to absorption of the inhaled portion of the dose delivered to the lung. Oral bioavailability from the swallowed portion of the dose is low (approximately 1.3%) due to extensive first-pass metabolism. Systemic exposure (AUC) in subjects with COPD or asthma was 46% or 7% lower, respectively, than observed in healthy subjects.
                        
                           Vilanterol: Vilanterol plasma levels may not predict therapeutic effect. Peak plasma concentrations are reached within 10 minutes following inhalation. Absolute bioavailability of vilanterol when administrated by inhalation was 27.3%, primarily due to absorption of the inhaled portion of the dose delivered to the lung. Oral bioavailability from the swallowed portion of the dose of vilanterol is low (less than 2%) due to extensive first-pass metabolism. Systemic exposure (AUC) in subjects with COPD was 24% higher than observed in healthy subjects. Systemic exposure (AUC) in subjects with asthma was 21% lower than observed in healthy subjects.
                        
                           Distribution
                        
                        
                           Fluticasone Furoate: Following intravenous administration to healthy subjects, the mean volume of distribution at steady state was 661 L. Binding of fluticasone furoate to human plasma proteins was high (99.6%).
                        
                           Vilanterol: Following intravenous administration to healthy subjects, the mean volume of distribution at steady state was 165 L. Binding of vilanterol to human plasma proteins was 93.9%.
                        
                           Metabolism
                        
                        
                           Fluticasone Furoate: Fluticasone furoate is cleared from systemic circulation principally by hepatic metabolism via CYP3A4 to metabolites with significantly reduced corticosteroid activity. There was no in vivo evidence for cleavage of the furoate moiety resulting in the formation of fluticasone.
                        
                           Vilanterol: Vilanterol is mainly metabolized, principally via CYP3A4, to a range of metabolites with significantly reduced β1- and β2-agonist activity.
                        
                           Elimination
                        
                        
                           Fluticasone Furoate: Fluticasone furoate and its metabolites are eliminated primarily in the feces, accounting for approximately 101% and 90% of the orally and intravenously administered doses, respectively. Urinary excretion accounted for approximately 1% and 2% of the orally and intravenously administered doses, respectively. Following repeat-dose inhaled administration, the plasma elimination phase half-life averaged 24 hours.
                        
                           Vilanterol: Following oral administration, vilanterol was eliminated mainly by metabolism followed by excretion of metabolites in urine and feces (approximately 70% and 30% of the recovered radioactive dose, respectively). The plasma elimination half-life of vilanterol, as determined from inhalation administration of multiple doses of vilanterol 25 mcg, is 21.3 hours in subjects with COPD and 16.0 hours in subjects with asthma.
                        
                           Special Populations
                        
                        The effect of renal and hepatic impairment and other intrinsic factors on the pharmacokinetics of fluticasone furoate and vilanterol is shown in Figure 1.
                        
                           Figure 1. Impact of Intrinsic Factors on the Pharmacokinetics (PK) of Fluticasone Furoate (FF) and Vilanterol (VI) Following Administration as Fluticasone Furoate/Vilanterol Combination
                        
                        
                        
                           a	Severe renal impairment (CrCl less than 30 mL/min) compared with healthy subjects; mild (Child-Pugh A), moderate (Child-Pugh B), and severe (Child-Pugh C) hepatic impairment compared with healthy subjects.
                        
                           b	For COPD and asthma, the following comparisons were made: age compared with less than or equal to 65 years, gender compared with female, and ethnicity compared with white.
                        
                           Race: Systemic exposure [AUC(0-24)] to inhaled fluticasone furoate 200 mcg was 27% to 49% higher in healthy subjects of Japanese, Korean, and Chinese heritage compared with white subjects. Similar differences were observed for subjects with COPD or asthma (Figure 1). However, there is no evidence that this higher exposure to fluticasone furoate results in clinically relevant effects on urinary cortisol excretion or on efficacy in these racial groups.
                        There was no effect of race on the pharmacokinetics of vilanterol in subjects with COPD. In subjects with asthma, vilanterol Cmax is estimated to be higher (3-fold) and AUC(0-24) comparable for those subjects from an Asian heritage compared with subjects from a non-Asian heritage. However, the higher Cmax values are similar to those seen in healthy subjects. 
                        
                           Hepatic Impairment: Fluticasone Furoate: Following repeat dosing of fluticasone furoate/vilanterol 200 mcg/25 mcg (100 mcg/12.5 mcg in the severe impairment group) for 7 days, there was an increase of 34%, 83%, and 75% in fluticasone furoate systemic exposure (AUC) in subjects with mild, moderate, and severe hepatic impairment, respectively, compared with healthy subjects (Figure 1).
                        In subjects with moderate hepatic impairment receiving fluticasone furoate/vilanterol 200 mcg/25 mcg, mean serum cortisol (0 to 24 hours) was reduced by 34% (90% CI: 11%, 51%) compared with healthy subjects. In subjects with severe hepatic impairment receiving fluticasone furoate/vilanterol 100 mcg/12.5 mcg, mean serum cortisol (0 to 24 hours) was increased by 14% (90% CI: -16%, 55%) compared with healthy subjects. Patients with moderate to severe hepatic disease should be closely monitored. 
                        
                           Vilanterol: Hepatic impairment had no effect on vilanterol systemic exposure [Cmax and AUC(0-24) on Day 7] following repeat-dose administration of fluticasone furoate/vilanterol 200 mcg/25 mcg (100 mcg/12.5 mcg in the severe impairment group) for 7 days (Figure 1).
                        There were no additional clinically relevant effects of the fluticasone furoate/vilanterol combinations on heart rate or serum potassium in subjects with mild or moderate hepatic impairment (vilanterol 25 mcg combination) or with severe hepatic impairment (vilanterol 12.5 mcg combination) compared with healthy subjects.
                        
                           Renal Impairment: Fluticasone furoate systemic exposure was not increased and vilanterol systemic exposure [AUC(0-24)] was 56% higher in subjects with severe renal impairment compared with healthy subjects (Figure 1). There was no evidence of greater corticosteroid or beta-agonist class-related systemic effects (assessed by serum cortisol, heart rate, and serum potassium) in subjects with severe renal impairment compared with healthy subjects.
                        
                           Drug Interactions
                        
                        There were no clinically relevant differences in the pharmacokinetics or pharmacodynamics of either fluticasone furoate or vilanterol when administered in combination compared with administration alone. The potential for fluticasone furoate and vilanterol to inhibit or induce metabolic enzymes and transporter systems is negligible at low inhalation doses.
                        
                           Inhibitors of Cytochrome P450 3A4: The exposure (AUC) of fluticasone furoate and vilanterol were 36% and 65% higher, respectively, when coadministered with ketoconazole 400 mg compared with placebo (Figure 2). The increase in fluticasone furoate exposure was associated with a 27% reduction in weighted mean serum cortisol (0 to 24 hours). The increase in vilanterol exposure was not associated with an increase in beta-agonist–related systemic effects on heart rate or blood potassium.
                        
                           Figure 2. Impact of Coadministered Drugsa on the Pharmacokinetics (PK) of Fluticasone Furoate (FF) and Vilanterol (VI) Following Administration as Fluticasone Furoate/Vilanterol Combination or Vilanterol Coadministered with a Long-Acting Muscarinic Antagonist
                        
                        
                        
                           a	Compared with placebo group.
                        
                           Inhibitors of P-glycoprotein: Fluticasone furoate and vilanterol are both substrates of P-glycoprotein (P-gp). Coadministration of repeat-dose (240 mg once daily) verapamil (a potent P-gp inhibitor and moderate CYP3A4 inhibitor) did not affect the vilanterol Cmax or AUC in healthy subjects (Figure 2). Drug interaction trials with a specific P-gp inhibitor and fluticasone furoate have not been conducted.
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           Figure 1. Impact of Intrinsic Factors on the Pharmacokinetics (PK) of Fluticasone Furoate (FF) and Vilanterol (VI) Following Administration as Fluticasone Furoate/Vilanterol Combination
                           
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           Figure 2. Impact of Coadministered Drugsa on the Pharmacokinetics (PK) of Fluticasone Furoate (FF) and Vilanterol (VI) Following Administration as Fluticasone Furoate/Vilanterol Combination or Vilanterol Coadministered with a Long-Acting Muscarinic Antagonist
                           
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         