
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  Mechanism of Action

                  Glipizide appears to lower blood glucose acutely by stimulating the release of insulin from the pancreas, an effect dependent upon functioning beta cells in the pancreatic islets. Extrapancreatic effects also may play a part in the mechanism of action of oral sulfonylurea hypoglycemic drugs. Two extrapancreatic effects shown to be important in the action of glipizide are an increase in insulin sensitivity and a decrease in hepatic glucose production. However, the mechanism by which glipizide lowers blood glucose during long-term administration has not been clearly established. Stimulation of insulin secretion by glipizide in response to a meal is of major importance. The insulinotropic response to a meal is enhanced with glipizide administration in diabetic patients. The postprandial insulin and C-peptide responses continue to be enhanced after at least 6 months of treatment. In 2 randomized, double-blind, dose-response studies comprising a total of 347 patients, there was no significant increase in fasting insulin in all glipizide-treated patients combined compared to placebo, although minor elevations were observed at some doses. There was no increase in fasting insulin over the long term.
Some patients fail to respond initially, or gradually lose their responsiveness to sulfonylurea drugs, including glipizide. Alternatively, glipizide may be effective in some patients who have not responded or have ceased to respond to other sulfonylureas.

                  

                  Effects on Blood Glucose

                  The effectiveness of glipizide extended-release tablets in type 2 diabetes at doses from 5-60 mg once daily has been evaluated in 4 therapeutic clinical trials each with long-term open extensions involving a total of 598 patients. Once daily administration of 5, 10 and 20 mg produced statistically significant reductions from placebo in hemoglobin A1C, fasting plasma glucose and postprandial glucose in patients with mild to severe type 2 diabetes. In a pooled analysis of the patients treated with 5 mg and 20 mg, the relationship between dose and glipizide extended-release tablet's effect of reducing hemoglobin A1C was not established. However, in the case of fasting plasma glucose patients treated with 20 mg had a statistically significant reduction of fasting plasma glucose compared to the 5 mg-treated group.
The reductions in hemoglobin A1C and fasting plasma glucose were similar in younger and older patients. Efficacy of glipizide extended-release tablets was not affected by gender, race or weight (as assessed by body mass index). In long term extension trials, efficacy of glipizide extended-release tablets was maintained in 81% of patients for up to 12 months.
In an open, two-way crossover study 132 patients were randomly assigned to either glipizide extended-release tablets or glipizide tablets for 8 weeks and then crossed over to the other drug for an additional 8 weeks. Glipizide extended-release tablets administration resulted in significantly lower fasting plasma glucose levels and equivalent hemoglobin A1C levels, as compared to glipizide tablets.

                  

                  Other Effects

                  It has been shown that glipizide extended-release tablet therapy is effective in controlling blood glucose without deleterious changes in the plasma lipoprotein profiles of patients treated for type 2 diabetes.
In a placebo-controlled, crossover study in normal volunteers, glipizide had no antidiuretic activity, and, in fact, led to a slight increase in free water clearance.

                  

               
               
            
         