
                     
                     
                     Drug Interactions 
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 ACE-inhibitors
                              
                              
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              Reports suggest that NSAIDs may diminish the antihypertensive effect of ACE-inhibitors. This interaction should be given consideration in patients taking NSAIDs concomitantly with ACE-inhibitors. 
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Aspirin
                              
                              
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              When meclofenamate sodium in administered with aspirin, its protein binding is reduced, although the clearance of free meclofenamate sodium is not altered. The clinical significance of this interaction is not known; however, as with other NSAIDs, concomitant administration of meclofenamate sodium capsules and aspirin is not generally recommended because of the potential of increased adverse effects. 
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Furosemide
                              
                              
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              Clinical studies, as well as post-marketing observations, have shown that meclofenamate sodium can reduce the natriuretic effect-of furosemide and thiazides in some patients. This response has been attributed to inhibition of renal prostaglandin synthesis. During concomitant therapy with NSAIDs, the patient should be observed closely for signs of renal failure (see PRECAUTIONS: Renal Effects), as well as to assure diuretic efficacy. 
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Lithium
                              
                              
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              NSAIDs have produced an elevation of plasma lithium levels and a reduction in renal lithium clearance. The mean minimum lithium concentration increased 15% and the renal clearance was decreased by approximately 20%. These effects have been attributed to inhibition of renal prostaglandin synthesis by the NSAID. Thus, when NSAIDs and lithium are administered concurrently, subjects should be observed carefully for signs of lithium toxicity. 
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Methotrexate
                              
                              
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              NSAIDs have been reported to competitively inhibit methotrexate accumulation in rabbit kidney slices. This may indicate that they could enhance the toxicity of methotrexate. Caution should be used when NSAIDs are administered concomitantly with methotrexate. 
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Warfarin
                              
                              
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              The effects of warfarin and NSAIDs on GI bleeding are synergistic, such that users of both drugs together have a risk of serious GI bleeding higher than users of either drug alone. 
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               