
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
                   Sevelamer carbonate has been studied in human drug-drug interaction studies with warfarin and digoxin. Sevelamer hydrochloride, which contains the same active moiety as sevelamer carbonate, has been studied in human drug-drug interaction studies with ciprofloxacin, digoxin, warfarin, enalapril, metoprolol and iron.
               
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                            Sevelamer decreases the bioavailability of ciprofloxacin by approximately 50%. (7.1)
                            Sevelamer did not alter the pharmacokinetics of single doses of digoxin, warfarin, enalapril, metoprolol, or iron. (7)
                            When administering an oral medication where a reduction in the bioavailability of that medication would have a clinically significant effect on its safety or efficacy, administer the drug at least one hour before or three hours after Renvela, and monitor blood levels of the drug. (7.7)
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 Ciprofloxacin
                     
                        In a study of 15 healthy subjects, a co-administered single dose of 2.8 grams of sevelamer hydrochloride decreased the bioavailability of ciprofloxacin by approximately 50%.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 Digoxin
                     
                        In 19 healthy subjects receiving 2.4 grams of sevelamer hydrochloride three times a day with meals for 2 days, sevelamer did not alter the pharmacokinetics of a single dose of digoxin.
                         In 18 healthy subjects receiving 9.6 grams of sevelamer carbonate once daily with a meal, sevelamer did not alter the pharmacokinetics of a single dose of digoxin. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3 Warfarin
                     
                         In 14 healthy subjects receiving 2.4 g of sevelamer hydrochloride three times a day with meals for two days sevelamer did not alter the pharmacokinetics of a single dose of warfarin. 
                         In 14 healthy subjects receiving 9.6 grams of sevelamer carbonate once daily with a meal, sevelamer did not alter the pharmacokinetics of a single dose of warfarin. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4 Enalapril
                     
                        In 28 healthy subjects a single 2.4 gram dose of sevelamer hydrochloride did not alter the pharmacokinetics of a single dose of enalapril.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.5 Metoprolol
                     
                        In 31 healthy subjects a single 2.4 gram dose of sevelamer hydrochloride did not alter the pharmacokinetics of a single dose of metoprolol.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.6 Iron
                     
                        In 23 healthy subjects, a single 2.8 gram dose of sevelamer hydrochloride did not alter the absorption of a single oral dose of iron as 200 mg exsiccated ferrous sulfate tablet.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.7 Other Concomitant Drug Therapy
                     
                         There are no empirical data on avoiding drug interactions between Renvela and most concomitant drugs. During postmarketing experience, very rare cases of increased thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH) levels have been reported in patients co-administered sevelamer hydrochloride and levothyroxine. Monitor TSH levels and signs of hypothyroidism in patients receiving both medications.
                         When administering an oral medication where a reduction in the bioavailability of that medication would have a clinically significant effect on its safety or efficacy, there is no information that suggests a dosing regimen that would be universally appropriate for all drugs. One may, however, administer the drug one hour before or three hours after Renvela, and monitor blood levels of the drug. Patients taking anti-arrhythmic medications for the control of arrhythmias and anti-seizure medications for the control of seizure disorders were excluded from the clinical trials. 
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         