
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           Drug Interactions: In a Phase 1 trial using escalating doses of paclitaxel (110 to 200 mg/m2) and cisplatin (50 or 75 mg/m2) given as sequential infusions, myelosuppression was more profound when paclitaxel was given after cisplatin than with the alternate sequence (ie, paclitaxel before cisplatin). Pharmacokinetic data from these patients demonstrated a decrease in paclitaxel clearance of approximately 33% when paclitaxel was administered following cisplatin.

                        The metabolism of paclitaxel is catalyzed by cytochrome P450 isoenzymes CYP2C8 and CYP3A4. Caution should be exercised when paclitaxel is concomitantly administered with known substrates (eg, midazolam, buspirone, felodipine, lovastatin, eletriptan, sildenafil, simvastatin, and triazolam), inhibitors (eg, atazanavir, clarithromycin, indinavir, itraconazole, ketoconazole, nefazodone, nelfinavir, ritonavir, saquinavir, and telithromycin), and inducers (eg, rifampin and carbamazepine) of CYP3A4. (See 
                              CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY.)

                        Caution should also be exercised when paclitaxel is concomitantly administered with known substrates (eg, repaglinide and rosiglitazone), inhibitors (eg, gemfibrozil), and inducers (eg, rifampin) of CYP2C8. (See 
                              CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY.)

                        Potential interactions between paclitaxel, a substrate of CYP3A4, and protease inhibitors (ritonavir, saquinavir, indinavir, and nelfinavir), which are substrates and/or inhibitors of CYP3A4, have not been evaluated in clinical trials.

                        Reports in the literature suggest that plasma levels of doxorubicin (and its active metabolite doxorubicinol) may be increased when paclitaxel and doxorubicin are used in combination.

                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Hematology: Paclitaxel therapy should not be administered to patients with baseline neutrophil counts of less than 1500 cells/mm3. In order to monitor the occurrence of myelotoxicity, it is recommended that frequent peripheral blood cell counts be performed on all patients receiving paclitaxel. Patients should not be re-treated with subsequent cycles of paclitaxel until neutrophils recover to a level >1500 cells/mm3 and platelets recover to a level >100,000 cells/mm3. In the case of severe neutropenia (<500 cells/mm3 for 7 days or more) during a course of paclitaxel therapy, a 20% reduction in dose for subsequent courses of therapy is recommended.

                              For patients with advanced HIV disease and poor-risk AIDS-related Kaposi's sarcoma, paclitaxel, at the recommended dose for this disease, can be initiated and repeated if the neutrophil count is at least 1000 cells/mm3.

                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Hypersensitivity Reactions: Patients with a history of severe hypersensitivity reactions to products containing Cremophor® EL (eg, cyclosporin for injection concentrate and teniposide for injection concentrate) should not be treated with Paclitaxel Injection, USP. In order to avoid the occurrence of severe hypersensitivity reactions, all patients treated with paclitaxel should be premedicated with corticosteroids (such as dexamethasone), diphenhydramine and H2 antagonists (such as cimetidine or ranitidine). Minor symptoms such as flushing, skin reactions, dyspnea, hypotension, or tachycardia do not require interruption of therapy. However, severe reactions, such as hypotension requiring treatment, dyspnea requiring bronchodilators, angioedema, or generalized urticaria require immediate discontinuation of paclitaxel and aggressive symptomatic therapy. Patients who have developed severe hypersensitivity reactions should not be rechallenged with paclitaxel.

                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Cardiovascular: Hypotension, bradycardia, and hypertension have been observed during administration of paclitaxel, but generally do not require treatment. Occasionally paclitaxel infusions must be interrupted or discontinued because of initial or recurrent hypertension. Frequent vital sign monitoring, particularly during the first hour of paclitaxel infusion, is recommended. Continuous cardiac monitoring is not required except for patients with serious conduction abnormalities. (See 
                                    WARNINGS
                                 .)  When paclitaxel is used in combination with doxorubicin for treatment of metastatic breast cancer, monitoring of cardiac function is recommended. (See 
                                    ADVERSE REACTIONS
                                 .)

                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Nervous System: Although the occurrence of peripheral neuropathy is frequent, the development of severe symptomatology is unusual and requires a dose reduction of 20% for all subsequent courses of Paclitaxel Injection, USP.

                              Paclitaxel Injection, USP contains dehydrated alcohol USP, 385 mg/mL; consideration should be given to possible CNS and other effects of alcohol. (See 
                                    PRECAUTIONS: Pediatric Use
                                 .)

                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Hepatic: There is limited evidence that the myelotoxicity of paclitaxel may be exacerbated in patients with serum total bilirubin >2 times ULN (see 
                                    CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
                                 ). Extreme caution should be exercised when administering paclitaxel to such patients, with dose reduction as recommended in 
                                    DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION, TABLE 17.
                              
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Injection Site Reaction: Injection site reactions, including reactions secondary to extravasation, were usually mild and consisted of erythema, tenderness, skin discoloration, or swelling at the injection site. These reactions have been observed more frequently with the 24-hour infusion than with the 3-hour infusion. Recurrence of skin reactions at a site of previous extravasation following administration of paclitaxel at a different site, ie, “recall”, has been reported.

                              More severe events such as phlebitis, cellulitis, induration, skin exfoliation, necrosis, and fibrosis have been reported. In some cases the onset of the injection site reaction either occurred during a prolonged infusion or was delayed by a week to 10 days.

                              A specific treatment for extravasation reactions is unknown at this time. Given the possibility of extravasation, it is advisable to closely monitor the infusion site for possible infiltration during drug administration.

                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               