
               
               
               DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
                  7.1 CYP2D6 Inhibitors and Poor Metabolizers

                  
                  
Interactions of carvedilol with potent inhibitors of CYP2D6 isoenzyme (such as quinidine, fluoxetine, paroxetine, and propafenone) have not been studied, but these drugs would be expected to increase blood levels of the R(+) enantiomer of carvedilol [seeClinical Pharmacology (12.3)]. Retrospective analysis of side effects in clinical trials showed that poor 2D6 metabolizers had a higher rate of dizziness during up-titration, presumably resulting from vasodilating effects of the higher concentrations of theR(+) enantiomer.

                  

                  7.2 Hypotensive Agents

                  
                  
Patients taking both agents withproperties and a drug that can deplete catecholamines (e.g., reserpine and monoamine oxidase inhibitors) should be observed closely for signs of hypotension and/or severe bradycardia.

                  
Concomitant administration of clonidine with agents withproperties may potentiate blood-pressure- and heart-rate-lowering effects. When concomitant treatment with agents withproperties and clonidine is to be terminated, theagent should be discontinued first. Clonidine therapy can then be discontinued several days later by gradually decreasing the dosage.

                  

                  7.3 Cyclosporine

                  
                  
Modest increases in mean trough cyclosporine concentrations were observed following initiation of carvedilol treatment in 21 renal transplant patients suffering from chronic vascular rejection. In about 30% of patients, the dose of cyclosporine had to be reduced in order to maintain cyclosporine concentrations within the therapeutic range, while in the remainder no adjustment was needed. On the average for the group, the dose of cyclosporine was reduced about 20% in these patients. Due to wide interindividual variability in the dose adjustment required, it is recommended that cyclosporine concentrations be monitored closely after initiation of carvedilol therapy and that the dose of cyclosporine be adjusted as appropriate.

                  

                  7.4 Digitalis Glycosides

                  
                  
Both digitalis glycosides andslow atrioventricular conduction and decrease heart rate. Concomitant use can increase the risk of bradycardia. Digoxin concentrations are increased by about 15% when digoxin and carvedilol are administered concomitantly. Therefore, increased monitoring of digoxin is recommended when initiating, adjusting, or discontinuing carvedilol [seeClinical Pharmacology (12.5)].

                  

                  7.5 Inducers/Inhibitors of Hepatic Metabolism

                  
                  
Rifampin reduced plasma concentrations of carvedilol by about 70% [seeClinical Pharmacology (12.5)]. Cimetidine increased AUC by about 30% but caused no change in Cmax [seeClinical Pharmacology (12.5)].

                  

                  7.6 Amiodarone

                  
                  
Amiodarone, and its metabolite desethyl amiodarone, inhibitors of CYP2C9 and P-glycoprotein, increased concentrations of the S(-)-enantiomer of carvedilol by at least 2-fold [seeClinical Pharmacology (12.5)]. The concomitant administration of amiodarone or other CYP2C9 inhibitors such as fluconazole with carvedilol may enhance theproperties of carvedilol resulting in further slowing of the heart rate or cardiac conduction. Patients should be observed for signs of bradycardia or heart block, particularly when one agent is added to pre-existing treatment with the other.

                  

                  7.7 Calcium Channel Blockers

                  
                  
Conduction disturbance (rarely with hemodynamic compromise) has been observed when carvedilol is coadministered with diltiazem. As with other agents withproperties, if carvedilol is to be administered with calcium channel blockers of the verapamil or diltiazem type, it is recommended that ECG and blood pressure be monitored.

                  

                  7.8 Insulin or Oral Hypoglycemics

                  
                  
Agents withproperties may enhance the blood-sugar-reducing effect of insulin and oral hypoglycemics. Therefore, in patients taking insulin or oral hypoglycemics, regular monitoring of blood glucose is recommended [seeWarnings and Precautions (5.6)].

                  

                  7.9 Anesthesia

                  
                  
If treatment with carvedilol is to be continued perioperatively, particular care should be taken when anesthetic agents which depress myocardial function, such as ether, cyclopropane, and trichloroethylene, are used [seeOverdosage (10)].

                  

               
               
            
         