
                     
                     
                     Drug Interactions
                     
                        
                           Concomitant diuretic therapy
                        
                        As with other ACE inhibitors, patients on diuretics, especially those on recently instituted diuretic therapy, may occasionally experience an excessive reduction of blood pressure after initiation of therapy with quinapril. The possibility of hypotensive effects with quinapril may be minimized by either discontinuing the diuretic or cautiously increasing salt intake prior to initiation of treatment with quinapril. If it is not possible to discontinue the diuretic, the starting dose of quinapril should be reduced (see DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION).
                        
                           Agents increasing serum potassium
                        
                        Quinapril can attenuate potassium loss caused by thiazide diuretics and increase serum potassium when used alone. If concomitant therapy of quinapril with potassium-sparing diuretics (e.g., spironolactone, triamterene, or amiloride), potassium supplements, or potassium-containing salt substitutes is indicated, they should be used with caution along with appropriate monitoring of serum potassium (see PRECAUTIONS).
                        
                           Tetracycline and other drugs that interact with magnesium
                        
                        Simultaneous administration of tetracycline with quinapril reduced the absorption of tetracycline by approximately 28% to 37%, possibly due to the high magnesium content in quinapril hydrochloride tablets. This interaction should be considered if coprescribing quinapril and tetracycline or other drugs that interact with magnesium.
                        
                           Lithium
                        
                        Increased serum lithium levels and symptoms of lithium toxicity have been reported in patients receiving concomitant lithium and ACE inhibitor therapy. These drugs should be coadministered with caution and frequent monitoring of serum lithium levels is recommended. If a diuretic is also used, it may increase the risk of lithium toxicity.
                        
                           Gold
                        
                        Nitritoid reactions (symptoms include facial flushing, nausea, vomiting, and hypotension) have been reported rarely in patients on therapy with injectable gold (sodium aurothiomalate) and concomitant ACE inhibitor therapy.
                        
                           Other agents
                        
                        Drug interaction studies of quinapril with other agents showed:
                        
                           Multiple dose therapy with propranolol or cimetidine has no effect on the pharmacokinetics of single doses of quinapril.
                           The anticoagulant effect of a single dose of warfarin (measured by prothrombin time) was not significantly changed by quinapril coadministration twice-daily.
                           Quinapril treatment did not affect the pharmacokinetics of digoxin.
                           No pharmacokinetic interaction was observed when single doses of quinapril and hydrochlorothiazide were administered concomitantly.
                           Coadministration of multiple 10 mg doses of atorvastatin with 80 mg of quinapril hydrochloride resulted in no significant change in the steady-state pharmacokinetic parameters of atorvastatin.
                        
                     
                  
               