
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Microbiology
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Mechanism of Action
                     
                        The mechanism of action of ciclopirox has been investigated using various in vitro and in vivo infection models. One in vitro study suggested that ciclopirox acts by chelation of polyvalent cations (Fe+3 or Al+3) resulting in the inhibition of the metal-dependent enzymes that are responsible for the degradation of peroxides within the fungal cell.  The clinical significance of this observation is not known. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Activity in vitro and ex vivo
                     
                        
                           In vitro methodologies employing various broth or solid media with and without additional nutrients have been utilized to determine ciclopirox minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) values for the dermatophytic molds.(1–2) As a consequence, a broad range of MIC values, 1–20 ug/mL, were obtained for Trichophyton rubrum and Trichophyton mentagrophytes species. Correlation between in vitro MIC results and clinical outcome has yet to be established for ciclopirox.
                        One ex vivo study was conducted evaluating 8% ciclopirox against new and established Trichophyton rubrum and Trichophyton mentagrophytes infections in ovine hoof material.(3) After 10 days of treatment the growth of T. rubrum and T. mentagrophytes in the established infection model was very minimally affected. Elimination of the molds from hoof material was not achieved in either the new or established infection models.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Susceptibility testing for Trichophyton rubrum species
                     
                        
                           In vitro susceptibility testing methods for determining ciclopirox MIC values against the dermatophytic molds, including Trichophyton rubrum species, have not been standardized or validated.  Ciclopirox MIC values will vary depending on the susceptibility testing method employed, composition and pH of media and the utilization of nutritional supplements. Breakpoints to determine whether clinical isolates of Trichophyton rubrum are susceptible or resistant to ciclopirox have not been established. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Resistance 
                     
                        Studies have not been conducted to evaluate drug resistance development in T. rubrum species exposed to 8% ciclopirox topical solution. Studies assessing cross-resistance to ciclopirox and other known antifungal agents have not been performed.  
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Antifungal Drug Interactions
                     
                        No studies have been conducted to determine whether ciclopirox might reduce the effectiveness of systemic antifungal agents for onychomycosis.  Therefore, the concomitant use of 8% ciclopirox topical solution and systemic antifungal agents for onychomycosis is not recommended.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        As demonstrated in pharmacokinetic studies in animals and man, ciclopirox olamine is rapidly absorbed after oral administration and completely eliminated in all species via feces and urine.  Most of the compound is excreted either unchanged or as glucuronide.  After oral administration of 10 mg of radiolabeled drug (14C-ciclopirox) to healthy volunteers, approximately 96% of the radioactivity was excreted renally within 12 hours of administration.  Ninety-four percent of the renally excreted radioactivity was in the form of glucuronides.  Thus, glucuronidation is the main metabolic pathway of this compound.
                        Systemic absorption of ciclopirox was determined in 5 patients with dermatophytic onychomycoses, after application of PENLAC® NAIL LACQUER (ciclopirox) Topical Solution, 8%, to all 20 digits and adjacent 5 mm of skin once daily for six months.  Random serum concentrations and 24 hour urinary excretion of ciclopirox were determined at two weeks and at 1, 2, 4 and 6 months after initiation of treatment and 4 weeks post-treatment.  In this study, ciclopirox serum levels ranged from 12–80 ng/mL.  Based on urinary data, mean absorption of ciclopirox from the dosage form was <5% of the applied dose.  One month after cessation of treatment, serum and urine levels of ciclopirox were below the limit of detection. 
                        In two vehicle-controlled trials, patients applied PENLAC® NAIL LACQUER (ciclopirox) Topical Solution, 8%, to all toenails and affected fingernails.  Out of a total of 66 randomly selected patients on active treatment, 24 had detectable serum ciclopirox concentrations at some point during the dosing interval (range 10.0–24.6 ng/mL).  It should be noted that eleven of these 24 patients took concomitant medication containing ciclopirox as ciclopirox olamine (Loprox® Cream, 0.77%).
                        The penetration of the PENLAC® NAIL LACQUER (ciclopirox) Topical Solution, 8%, was evaluated in an in vitro investigation.  Radiolabeled ciclopirox applied once to onychomycotic toenails that were avulsed demonstrated penetration up to a depth of approximately 0.4 mm.  As expected, nail plate concentrations decreased as a function of nail depth.  The clinical significance of these findings in nail plates is unknown.  Nail bed concentrations were not determined.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         