
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              •Drug Interactions: Coadministration of DAKLINZA can alter the concentration of other drugs and other drugs may alter the concentration of daclatasvir. Consult the full prescribing information before use for contraindicated drugs and other potential drug-drug interactions. (2.2, 4, 5.1, 7, 12.3)
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 Potential for Other Drugs to Affect DAKLINZA
                     
                        Daclatasvir is a substrate of CYP3A. Therefore, moderate or strong inducers of CYP3A may decrease the plasma levels and therapeutic effect of daclatasvir [see Dosage and Administration (2.2), Contraindications (4), and Table 3]. Strong inhibitors of CYP3A (eg, clarithromycin, itraconazole, ketoconazole, ritonavir) may increase the plasma levels of daclatasvir [see Dosage and Administration (2.2) and Table 3].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 Potential for DAKLINZA to Affect Other Drugs
                     
                        Daclatasvir is an inhibitor of P-glycoprotein transporter (P-gp), organic anion transporting polypeptide (OATP) 1B1 and 1B3, and breast cancer resistance protein (BCRP). Administration of DAKLINZA may increase systemic exposure to medicinal products that are substrates of P-gp, OATP 1B1 or 1B3, or BCRP, which could increase or prolong their therapeutic effect or adverse reactions (see Table 3).
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3 Established and Potentially Significant Drug Interactions
                     
                        Refer to the prescribing information for sofosbuvir for drug interaction information. The most conservative recommendation should be followed.
                        Table 3 provides clinical recommendations for established or potentially significant drug interactions between DAKLINZA and other drugs [see Contraindications (4)
                           ]. Clinically relevant increase in concentration is indicated as “↑” and clinically relevant decrease as “↓” [for drug interaction data, see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)
                           ].
                        


                     



                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4 Drugs without Clinically Significant Interactions with DAKLINZA
                     
                        Based on the results of drug interaction trials [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)
                           ], no clinically relevant changes in exposure were observed for cyclosporine, escitalopram, ethinyl estradiol/norgestimate, methadone, midazolam, tacrolimus, or tenofovir with concomitant use of daclatasvir. No clinically relevant changes in daclatasvir exposure were observed with cyclosporine, escitalopram, famotidine, omeprazole, sofosbuvir, tacrolimus, or tenofovir. No clinically relevant interaction is anticipated for daclatasvir or the following concomitant medications: peginterferon alfa, ribavirin, or antacids.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         