
               
               
               DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        Drugs undergoing CYP450 metabolism 
                     
                     
                        Sotalol is primarily eliminated by renal excretion; therefore, drugs that are metabolized by CYP450 are not expected to alter the pharmacokinetics of sotalol. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        Digoxin 
                     
                     
                        Proarrhythmic events were more common in sotalol treated patients also receiving digoxin; it is not clear whether this represents an interaction or is related to the presence of CHF, a known risk factor for proarrhythmia, in the patients receiving digoxin. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        Calcium blocking drugs 
                     
                     
                         Sotalol hydrochloride tablets (AF) should be administered with caution in conjunction with calcium blocking drugs because of possible additive effects on atrioventricular conduction or ventricular function. Additionally, concomitant use of these drugs may have additive effects on blood pressure, possibly leading to hypotension. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        Catecholamine-depleting agents 
                     
                     
                         Concomitant use of catecholamine-depleting drugs, such as reserpine and guanethidine, with a beta-blocker may produce an excessive reduction of resting sympathetic nervous tone. Patients treated with sotalol hydrochloride tablets (AF) plus a catecholamine depletor should therefore be closely monitored for evidence of hypotension and/or marked bradycardia which may produce syncope. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        Insulin and oral antidiabetics 
                     
                     
                        Hyperglycemia may occur, and the dosage of insulin or antidiabetic drugs may require adjustment. Symptoms of hypoglycemia may be masked. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        Beta-2-receptor stimulants 
                     
                     
                        Beta-agonists such as salbutamol, terbutaline and isoprenaline may have to be administered in increased dosages when used concomitantly with sotalol hydrochloride tablets (AF).
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        Clonidine 
                     
                     
                         Beta-blocking drugs may potentiate the rebound hypertension sometimes observed after discontinuation of clonidine; therefore, caution is advised when discontinuing clonidine in patients receiving sotalol hydrochloride tablets (AF).
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        Other 
                     
                     
                        No pharmacokinetic interactions were observed with hydrochlorothiazide or warfarin. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        Antacids 
                     
                     
                        Administration of sotalol hydrochloride tablets (AF) within 2 hours of antacids containing aluminum oxide and magnesium hydroxide should be avoided because it may result in a reduction in Cmax and AUC of 26% and 20%, respectively and consequently in a 25% reduction in the bradycardic effect at rest. Administration of the antacid two hours after sotalol hydrochloride tablets (AF) has no effect on the pharmacokinetics or pharmacodynamics of sotalol.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        Drug/Laboratory Test Interactions 
                     
                     
                        The presence of sotalol in the urine may result in falsely elevated levels of urinary metanephrine when measured by fluorimetric or photometric methods. In screening patients suspected of having a pheochromocytoma and being treated with sotalol, a specific method, such as a high performance liquid chromatographic assay with solid phase extraction (e.g., J. Chromatogr. 385: 241, 1987) should be employed in determining levels of catecholamines.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Carcinogenesis, Mutagenesis, Impairment of Fertility
                     
                        No evidence of carcinogenic potential was observed in rats during a 24-month study at 137-275 mg/kg/ day (approximately 30 times the maximum recommended human oral dose (MRHD) as mg/kg or 5 times the MRHD as mg/m2) or in mice, during a 24-month study at 4141-7122 mg/kg/day (approximately 450 to 750 times the MRHD as mg/kg or 36 to 63 times the MRHD as mg/m2). 
                        Sotalol has not been evaluated in any specific assay of mutagenicity or clastogenicity. 
                        No significant reduction in fertility occurred in rats at oral doses of 1000 mg/kg/ day (approximately 100 times the MRHD as mg/kg or 9 times the MRHD as mg/m2) prior to mating, except for a small reduction in the number of offspring per litter.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Pregnancy Category B
                     
                        Reproduction studies in rats and rabbits during organogenesis at 100 and 22 times the MRHD as mg/kg (9 and 7 times the MRHD as mg/m2), respectively, did not reveal any teratogenic potential associated with sotalol HCl. In rabbits, a high dose of sotalol HCl (160 mg/kg/day) at 16 times the MRHD as mg/kg (6 times the MRHD as mg/m2) produced a slight increase in fetal death likely due to maternal toxicity. Eight times the maximum dose (80 mg/kg/day or 3 times the MRHD as mg/m2) did not result in an increased incidence of fetal deaths. In rats, 1000 mg/kg/day sotalol HCl, 100 times the MRHD (18 times the MRHD as mg/m2), increased the number of early resorptions, while at 14 times the maximum dose (2.5 times the MRHD as mg/m2), no increase in early resorptions was noted. However, animal reproduction studies are not always predictive of human response. 
                        Although there are no adequate and well-controlled studies in pregnant women, sotalol HCl has been shown to cross the placenta, and is found in amniotic fluid. There has been a report of subnormal birth weight with sotalol. Therefore, sotalol hydrochloride tablets (AF) should be used during pregnancy only if the potential benefit outweighs the potential risk.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Nursing Mothers
                     
                        Sotalol is excreted in the milk of laboratory animals and has been reported to be present in human milk. Because of the potential for adverse reactions in nursing infants from sotalol (AF), a decision should be made whether to discontinue nursing or to discontinue the drug, taking into account the importance of the drug to the mother.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Pediatric Use
                     
                        The safety and effectiveness of sotalol (AF) in children has not been established. However, the Class III electrophysiologic and beta-blocking effects, the pharmacokinetics, and the relationship between the effects (QTc interval and resting heart rate) and drug concentrations have been evaluated in children aged between 3 days and 12 years old. (See CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY.)
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         