
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        
                           JENTADUETO
                        
                        JENTADUETO combines 2 antihyperglycemic agents with complementary
mechanisms of action to improve glycemic control in patients with
type 2 diabetes mellitus: linagliptin, a dipeptidyl peptidase-4 (DPP-4)
inhibitor, and metformin, a member of the biguanide class.
                        
                           Linagliptin
                        
                        Linagliptin is an inhibitor of DPP-4, an
enzyme that degrades the incretin hormones glucagon-like peptide-1
(GLP-1) and glucose-dependent insulinotropic polypeptide (GIP). Thus,
linagliptin increases the concentrations of active incretin hormones,
stimulating the release of insulin in a glucose-dependent manner and
decreasing the levels of glucagon in the circulation. Both incretin
hormones are involved in the physiological regulation of glucose homeostasis.
Incretin hormones are secreted at a low basal level throughout the
day and levels rise immediately after meal intake. GLP-1 and GIP increase
insulin biosynthesis and secretion from pancreatic beta cells in the
presence of normal and elevated blood glucose levels.  Furthermore,
GLP-1 also reduces glucagon secretion from pancreatic alpha cells,
resulting in a reduction in hepatic glucose output.
                        
                           Metformin
                        
                        Metformin is an antihyperglycemic agent which improves
glucose tolerance in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus, lowering
both basal and postprandial plasma glucose. Its pharmacologic mechanisms
of action are different from other classes of oral antihyperglycemic
agents. Metformin decreases hepatic glucose production, decreases
intestinal absorption of glucose, and improves insulin sensitivity
by increasing peripheral glucose uptake and utilization. Unlike SUs,
metformin does not produce hypoglycemia in either patients with type
2 diabetes mellitus or normal subjects (except in special circumstances) [see Warnings and Precautions (5.10)] and does not cause hyperinsulinemia. With metformin therapy,
insulin secretion remains unchanged while fasting insulin levels and
day-long plasma insulin response may actually decrease.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        
                           Linagliptin
                        
                        Linagliptin binds to DPP-4 in a reversible manner and increases the
concentrations of incretin hormones. Linagliptin glucose-dependently
increases insulin secretion and lowers glucagon secretion, thus resulting
in a better regulation of the glucose homeostasis. Linagliptin binds
selectively to DPP-4 and selectively inhibits DPP-4, but not DPP-8
or DPP-9 activity in vitro at concentrations approximating
therapeutic exposures.
                        
                           Cardiac Electrophysiology
                        
                        In a randomized, placebo-controlled, active-comparator, 4-way crossover
study, 36 healthy subjects were administered a single oral dose of
linagliptin 5 mg, linagliptin 100 mg (20 times the recommended dose),
moxifloxacin, and placebo. No increase in QTc was observed with either
the recommended dose of 5 mg or the 100-mg dose. At the 100-mg dose,
peak linagliptin plasma concentrations were approximately 38-fold
higher than the peak concentrations following a 5-mg dose.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        
                           JENTADUETO
                        
                        The results
of a bioequivalence study in healthy subjects demonstrated that JENTADUETO
(linagliptin/metformin hydrochloride) 2.5 mg/500 mg, 2.5 mg/850 mg,
and 2.5 mg/1000 mg combination tablets are bioequivalent to coadministration
of corresponding doses of linagliptin and metformin as individual
tablets. Administration of linagliptin 2.5 mg/metformin hydrochloride
1000 mg fixed-dose combination with food resulted in no change in
overall exposure of linagliptin. There was no change in metformin
AUC; however, mean peak serum concentration of metformin was decreased
by 18% when administered with food. A delayed time-to-peak serum concentrations
by 2 hours was observed for metformin under fed conditions. These
changes are not likely to be clinically significant.
                        
                           Absorption
                        
                        
                           Linagliptin
                        
                        The absolute bioavailability of linagliptin is approximately
30%. Following oral administration, plasma concentrations of linagliptin
decline in at least a biphasic manner with a long terminal half-life
(>100 hours), related to the saturable binding of linagliptin to DPP-4.
 However, the prolonged elimination does not contribute to the accumulation
of the drug. The effective half-life for accumulation of linagliptin,
as determined from oral administration of multiple doses of linagliptin
5 mg, is approximately 12 hours. After once-daily dosing, steady state
plasma concentrations of linagliptin 5 mg are reached by the third
dose, and Cmax and AUC increased by a factor
of 1.3 at steady-state compared with the first dose. Plasma AUC of
linagliptin increased in a less than dose-proportional manner in the
dose range of 1 to 10 mg. The pharmacokinetics of linagliptin is similar
in healthy subjects and in patients with type 2 diabetes.
                        
                           Metformin
                        
                        The absolute bioavailability of a metformin
hydrochloride 500-mg tablet given under fasting conditions is approximately
50% to 60%. Studies using single oral doses of metformin tablets 500
mg to 1500 mg, and 850 mg to 2550 mg, indicate that there is a lack
of dose proportionality with increasing doses, which is due to decreased
absorption rather than an alteration in elimination.
                        
                           Distribution
                        
                        
                           Linagliptin
                        
                        The mean apparent volume of distribution at steady
state following a single intravenous dose of linagliptin 5 mg to healthy
subjects is approximately 1110 L, indicating that linagliptin extensively
distributes to the tissues.  Plasma protein binding of linagliptin
is concentration-dependent decreasing from about 99% at 1 nmol/L to
75% to 89% at ≥30 nmol/L, reflecting saturation of binding to DPP-4
with increasing concentration of linagliptin. At high concentrations,
where DPP-4 is fully saturated, 70% to 80% of linagliptin remains
bound to plasma proteins and 20% to 30% is unbound in plasma.  Plasma
binding is not altered in patients with renal or hepatic impairment.
                        
                           Metformin
                        
                        The apparent volume of distribution (V/F)
of metformin following single oral doses of immediate-release metformin
hydrochloride tablets 850 mg averaged 654±358 L. Metformin is negligibly
bound to plasma proteins, in contrast to SUs, which are more than
90% protein bound. Metformin partitions into erythrocytes, most likely
as a function of time. At usual clinical doses and dosing schedules
of metformin tablets, steady-state plasma concentrations of metformin
are reached within 24 to 48 hours and are generally <1 mcg/mL.
During controlled clinical trials of metformin, maximum metformin
plasma levels did not exceed 5 mcg/mL, even at maximum doses.
                        
                           Metabolism
                        
                        
                           Linagliptin
                        
                        Following oral administration, the majority
(about 90%) of linagliptin is excreted unchanged, indicating that
metabolism represents a minor elimination pathway.  A small fraction
of absorbed linagliptin is metabolized to a pharmacologically inactive
metabolite, which shows a steady-state exposure of 13.3% relative
to linagliptin.
                        
                           Metformin
                        
                        Intravenous single-dose studies
in normal subjects demonstrate that metformin is excreted unchanged
in the urine and does not undergo hepatic metabolism (no metabolites
have been identified in humans) nor biliary excretion.
                        
                           Excretion
                        
                        
                           Linagliptin
                        
                        Following administration of an oral [14C]linagliptin dose to healthy subjects, approximately 85% of the
administered radioactivity was eliminated via the enterohepatic system
(80%) or urine (5%) within 4 days of dosing.  Renal clearance at steady
state was approximately 70 mL/min.
                        
                           Metformin
                        
                        Renal clearance is approximately 3.5 times greater than creatinine
clearance, which indicates that tubular secretion is the major route
of metformin elimination. Following oral administration, approximately
90% of the absorbed drug is eliminated via the renal route within
the first 24 hours, with a plasma elimination half-life of approximately
6.2 hours. In blood, the elimination half-life is approximately 17.6
hours, suggesting that the erythrocyte mass may be a compartment of
distribution.
                        
                           Specific
Populations
                        
                        
                           Renal Impairment
                        
                        
                           JENTADUETO: Studies characterizing the pharmacokinetics
of linagliptin and metformin after administration of JENTADUETO in
renally impaired patients have not been performed. Since metformin
is contraindicated in patients with renal impairment, use of JENTADUETO
is also contraindicated in patients with renal impairment (e.g., serum
creatinine ≥1.5 mg/dL [males] or ≥1.4 mg/dL [females], or abnormal
creatinine clearance) [see Contraindications (4) and Warnings and Precautions (5.3)].
                        
                        
                           Linagliptin: Under steady-state conditions,
linagliptin exposure in patients with mild renal impairment was comparable
to healthy subjects.  In patients with moderate renal impairment under
steady-state conditions, mean exposure of linagliptin increased (AUCτ,ss by 71% and Cmax by 46%) compared
with healthy subjects.  This increase was not associated with a prolonged
accumulation half-life, terminal half-life, or an increased accumulation
factor.  Renal excretion of linagliptin was below 5% of the administered
dose and was not affected by decreased renal function.
                        Patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus
and severe renal impairment showed steady-state exposure approximately
40% higher than that of patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus and
normal renal function (increase in AUC by 42% and Cmax by 35%).  For both type 2 diabetes mellitus groups, renal excretion
was below 7% of the administered dose.
                        
                           Metformin: In patients with decreased
renal function (based on measured creatinine clearance), the plasma
and blood half-life of metformin is prolonged and the renal clearance
is decreased in proportion to the decrease in creatinine clearance [see Contraindications (4) and Warnings
and Precautions (5.3)].
                        
                           Hepatic Impairment
                        
                        
                           JENTADUETO: Studies characterizing the pharmacokinetics of linagliptin and metformin
after administration of JENTADUETO in hepatically impaired patients
have not been performed. However, use of metformin alone in patients
with hepatic impairment has been associated with some cases of lactic
acidosis. Therefore, use of JENTADUETO is not recommended in patients
with hepatic impairment [see Warnings and Precautions (5.4)].
                        
                           Linagliptin: In patients with mild
hepatic impairment (Child-Pugh class A) steady-state exposure (AUCτ,ss) of linagliptin was approximately 25% lower and
Cmax,ss was approximately 36% lower than in
healthy subjects.  In patients with moderate hepatic impairment (Child-Pugh
class B), AUCss of linagliptin was about 14%
lower and Cmax,ss was approximately 8% lower
than in healthy subjects.  Patients with severe hepatic impairment
(Child-Pugh class C) had comparable exposure of linagliptin in terms
of AUC0-24 and approximately 23% lower Cmax compared with healthy subjects.  Reductions in the
pharmacokinetic parameters seen in patients with hepatic impairment
did not result in reductions in DPP-4 inhibition.
                        
                           Metformin hydrochloride: No pharmacokinetic
studies of metformin have been conducted in patients with hepatic
impairment.
                        
                           Body Mass
Index (BMI)/Weight
                        
                        
                           Linagliptin: BMI/Weight had no clinically meaningful
effect on the pharmacokinetics of linagliptin based on a population
pharmacokinetic analysis.
                        
                           Gender
                        
                        
                           Linagliptin: Gender had no clinically meaningful effect on the pharmacokinetics
of linagliptin based on a population pharmacokinetic analysis.
                        
                           Metformin hydrochloride: Metformin pharmacokinetic parameters did not differ significantly
between normal subjects and patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus
when analyzed according to gender. Similarly, in controlled clinical
studies in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus, the antihyperglycemic
effect of metformin was comparable in males and females.
                        
                           Geriatric
                        
                        
                           JENTADUETO: Studies characterizing
the pharmacokinetics of linagliptin and metformin after administration
of JENTADUETO in geriatric patients have not been performed. Based
on the metformin component, JENTADUETO treatment should not be initiated
in patients ≥80 years of age unless measurement of creatinine clearance
demonstrates that renal function is not reduced [see Warnings
and Precautions (5.1, 5.3) and Use in Specific Populations (8.5)].
                        
                        
                           Linagliptin: Age did not have a clinically
meaningful impact on the pharmacokinetics of linagliptin based on
a population pharmacokinetic analysis.
                        
                           Metformin hydrochloride: Limited data
from controlled pharmacokinetic studies of metformin in healthy elderly
subjects suggest that total plasma clearance of metformin is decreased,
the half-life is prolonged, and Cmax is increased,
compared with healthy young subjects. From these data, it appears
that the change in metformin pharmacokinetics with aging is primarily
accounted for by a change in renal function.
                        
                           Pediatric
                        
                        Studies characterizing the pharmacokinetics of linagliptin
and metformin after administration of JENTADUETO in pediatric patients
have not yet been performed.
                        
                           Race
                        
                        
                           Linagliptin:  Race had no clinically meaningful
effect on the pharmacokinetics of linagliptin based on available pharmacokinetic
data, including subjects of White, Hispanic, Black, and Asian racial
groups.
                        
                           Metformin hydrochloride: No studies of metformin pharmacokinetic parameters according to race
have been performed. In controlled clinical studies of metformin in
patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus, the antihyperglycemic effect
was comparable in Caucasians (n=249), Blacks (n=51), and Hispanics
(n=24).
                        
                           Drug Interactions
                        
                        Pharmacokinetic drug interaction
studies with JENTADUETO have not been performed; however, such studies
have been conducted with the individual components of JENTADUETO (linagliptin
and metformin hydrochloride).
                        
                           Linagliptin
                        
                        
                           In vitro Assessment of Drug Interactions
                        
                        Linagliptin is a weak to moderate inhibitor
of CYP isozyme CYP3A4, but does not inhibit other CYP isozymes and
is not an inducer of CYP isozymes, including CYP1A2, 2A6, 2B6, 2C8,
2C9, 2C19, 2D6, 2E1, and 4A11.
                        Linagliptin is a P-glycoprotein (P-gp) substrate, and inhibits P-gp
mediated transport of digoxin at high concentrations. Based on these
results and in vivo drug interaction studies, linagliptin
is considered unlikely to cause interactions with other P-gp substrates
at therapeutic concentrations.
                        
                           In vivo Assessment of Drug Interactions
                        
                        Strong inducers of CYP3A4 or P-gp (e.g.,
rifampin) decrease exposure to linagliptin to subtherapeutic and likely
ineffective concentrations. For patients requiring use of such drugs,
an alternative to linagliptin is strongly recommended.  In
vivo studies indicated evidence of a low propensity for causing
drug interactions with substrates of CYP3A4, CYP2C9, CYP2C8, P-gp,
and OCT. No dose adjustment of linagliptin is recommended based on
results of the described pharmacokinetic studies.
                        



                        



                           Metformin hydrochloride
                        
                        



