
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           Cationic drugs eliminated by renal tubular secretion: May
reduce metformin elimination. Use with caution. (7.1)
                           
                           Strong P-glycoprotein/CYP3A4 inducer:  The efficacy of JENTADUETO
may be reduced when administered in combination (e.g., rifampin).
 Use of alternative treatments is strongly recommended. (7.2)
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1  Drug Interactions
with Metformin
                     
                        
                           Cationic Drugs
                        
                        Cationic
drugs (e.g., amiloride, digoxin, morphine, procainamide, quinidine,
quinine, ranitidine, triamterene, trimethoprim, or vancomycin) that
are eliminated by renal tubular secretion theoretically have the potential
for interaction with metformin by competing for common renal tubular
transport systems.  Although such interactions remain theoretical
(except for cimetidine), careful patient monitoring and dose adjustment
of JENTADUETO and/or the interfering drug is recommended in patients
who are taking cationic medications that are excreted via the proximal
renal tubular secretory system [see Warnings and Precautions (5.3) and Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                        
                        
                           Carbonic Anhydrase Inhibitors
                        
                        Topiramate or other carbonic anhydrase
inhibitors (e.g., zonisamide, acetazolamide or dichlorphenamide) frequently
decrease serum bicarbonate and induce non-anion gap, hyperchloremic
metabolic acidosis. Concomitant use of these drugs may induce metabolic
acidosis. Use these drugs with caution in patients treated with JENTADUETO,
as the risk of lactic acidosis may increase [see Warnings
and Precautions (5.1) and Clinical
Pharmacology (12.3)].
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2  Drug Interactions
with Linagliptin
                     
                        
                           Inducers of P-glycoprotein and CYP3A4 Enzymes
                        
                        Rifampin decreased linagliptin exposure,
suggesting that the efficacy of linagliptin may be reduced when administered
in combination with a strong P-gp inducer or CYP 3A4 inducer. As JENTADUETO
is a fixed-dose combination of linagliptin and metformin, use of alternative
treatments (not containing linagliptin) is strongly recommended when
concomitant treatment with a strong P-gp or CYP 3A4 inducer is necessary [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3  Drugs Affecting
Glycemic Control
                     
                        Certain
drugs tend to produce hyperglycemia and may lead to loss of glycemic
control. These drugs include the thiazides and other diuretics, corticosteroids,
phenothiazines, thyroid products, estrogens, oral contraceptives,
phenytoin, nicotinic acid, sympathomimetics, calcium channel blocking
drugs, and isoniazid. When such drugs are administered to a patient
receiving JENTADUETO, the patient should be closely observed to maintain
adequate glycemic control [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)]. When such drugs are withdrawn
from a patient receiving JENTADUETO, the patient should be observed
closely for hypoglycemia.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         