
               
               
               12  CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1  Mechanism of Action
                     
                        
                           COMBIVENT RESPIMAT: COMBIVENT
RESPIMAT is a combination of the anticholinergic ipratropium bromide
and the beta2-adrenergic agonist albuterol
sulfate. The mechanisms of action described below for the individual
components apply to COMBIVENT RESPIMAT. The two classes of medications
(an anticholinergic and a beta2-adrenergic
agonist) are both bronchodilators. Simultaneous administration of
both an anticholinergic (ipratropium bromide) and a beta2-sympathomimetic (albuterol sulfate) is designed to
produce a greater bronchodilator effect than when either drug is utilized
alone at its recommended dosage. The efficacy of COMBIVENT RESPIMAT
is likely to be due to a local effect on the muscarinic and beta2-adrenergic receptors in the lung.
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Ipratropium bromide
                           
                           
                              Ipratropium bromide is an anticholinergic (parasympatholytic)
agent which, based on animal studies, appears to inhibit vagally mediated
reflexes by antagonizing the action of acetylcholine, the transmitter
agent released at the neuromuscular junctions in the lung. Anticholinergics
prevent the increases in intracellular concentration of Ca++ which
is caused by interaction of acetylcholine with the muscarinic receptors
on bronchial smooth muscle.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Albuterol sulfate
                           
                           
                              
                                 In vitro studies and in
vivo pharmacology studies have demonstrated that albuterol
has a preferential effect on beta2-adrenergic
receptors compared with isoproterenol. While it is recognized that
beta2-adrenergic receptors are the predominant
receptors on bronchial smooth muscle, recent data indicate that there
is a population of beta2-receptors in the human
heart which comprise between 10% and 50% of cardiac beta-adrenergic
receptors. The precise function of these receptors, however, is not
yet established [
                                    see Warnings and Precautions (5.2)
                                    
                                 ].
                              Activation of beta2-adrenergic receptors on airway smooth muscle leads to the activation
of adenylyl cyclase and to an increase in the intracellular concentration
of cyclic-3',5'-adenosine monophosphate (cyclic AMP). This increase
of cyclic AMP leads to the activation of protein kinase, which inhibits
the phosphorylation of myosin and lowers intracellular ionic calcium
concentrations, resulting in relaxation. Albuterol relaxes the smooth
muscles of all airways, from the trachea to the terminal bronchioles.
Albuterol acts as a functional antagonist to relax the airway irrespective
of the spasmogen involved, thus protecting against all bronchoconstrictor
challenges. Increased cyclic AMP concentrations are also associated
with the inhibition of release of mediators from mast cells in the
airway.
                              Albuterol has been
shown in most clinical trials to have more bronchial smooth muscle
relaxation effect than isoproterenol at comparable doses while producing
fewer cardiovascular effects. However, all beta-adrenergic drugs,
including albuterol sulfate, can produce a significant cardiovascular
effect in some patients [
                                    see Warnings and Precautions (5.2)
                                    
                                 ].
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2  Pharmacodynamics
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Ipratropium bromide
                           
                           
                              
                                 Cardiovascular effects
                                 
At recommended doses, ipratropium bromide does not produce clinically
significant changes in pulse rate or blood pressure.
                              
                                 Ocular effects
                                 
In studies without a positive control, ipratropium bromide did not
alter pupil size, accommodation or visual acuity.
                              
                                 Mucociliary clearance and respiratory
secretions
                                 
Controlled clinical studies
have demonstrated that ipratropium bromide does not alter either mucociliary
clearance or the volume or viscosity of respiratory secretions.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Albuterol sulfate
                           
                           
                              
                                 Cardiovascular effects
                                 
Controlled clinical trials and other clinical experience have shown
that inhaled albuterol, like other beta-adrenergic agonist drugs,
can produce a significant cardiovascular effect in some patients,
as measured by pulse rate, blood pressure, symptoms, and/or electrocardiographic
changes.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3  Pharmacokinetics
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Ipratropium bromide
                           
                           
                              Ipratropium bromide is a quaternary amine and hence,
it is not readily absorbed into the systemic circulation either from
the surface of the lung or from the gastrointestinal tract as confirmed
by blood level and renal excretion studies.
                              The half-life of elimination is about 2 hours after
inhalation or intravenous administration. Ipratropium bromide is minimally
bound (0% to 9% in vitro) to plasma albumin and α1-acid glycoprotein. It is partially metabolized to inactive
ester hydrolysis products. Following intravenous administration, approximately
one-half of the dose is excreted unchanged in the urine.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Albuterol sulfate
                           
                           
                              Albuterol is longer acting than isoproterenol in most
patients because it is not a substrate for the cellular uptake processes
for catecholamines, nor for metabolism by catechol-O-methyl transferase.
Instead, the drug is conjugatively metabolized to albuterol 4'-O-sulfate.
                              Intravenous pharmacokinetics of albuterol
was studied in a comparable group of 16 healthy male volunteers; the
mean terminal half-life following a 30-minute infusion of 1.5 mg was
3.9 hours with a mean clearance of 439 mL/min/1.73 m2.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              COMBIVENT RESPIMAT Inhalation Spray
                           
                           
                              In a 12-week randomized, multicenter,
double-blind, double-dummy parallel group trial, 108 US patients with
COPD receiving either COMBIVENT RESPIMAT (20/100 mcg) or CFC-propelled
COMBIVENT Inhalation Aerosol (36/206 mcg) four times daily participated
in pharmacokinetic evaluations. Plasma ipratropium concentrations
were low with an average peak plasma concentration of 33.5 pg/mL from
COMBIVENT RESPIMAT. The majority of the study participants exhibited
levels below the lower limit of quantitation (<10 pg/mL) by 4 to
6 hours following dosing. The steady state systemic exposure obtained
for ipratropium bromide following COMBIVENT RESPIMAT was comparable
to that of CFC-propelled COMBIVENT Inhalation Aerosol. Ipratropium
plasma AUC and total amount of drug excreted unchanged in urine (Ae)
ratios for COMBIVENT RESPIMAT/CFC-propelled COMBIVENT Inhalation Aerosol
were 1.04 and 1.18, respectively. For albuterol the steady-state systemic
exposure was less from COMBIVENT RESPIMAT compared to that of CFC-propelled
COMBIVENT Inhalation Aerosol. Albuterol plasma AUC and urine Ae ratios
for COMBIVENT RESPIMAT/CFC-propelled COMBIVENT Inhalation Aerosol
were 0.74 and 0.86, respectively.
                              Pharmacokinetic drug-drug interaction between ipratropium bromide
and albuterol sulfate was evaluated in a crossover study in 12 healthy
male volunteers who received CFC-propelled COMBIVENT Inhalation Aerosol
and the two active components separately as individual treatments.
Results from this study indicated that the coadministration of these
two components from a single canister did not significantly alter
the systemic absorption of either component, indicating lack of any
pharmacokinetic interaction between these two drugs.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Specific Populations
                           
                           
                              
                                 Age
                                 
Consistent with CFC-propelled COMBIVENT Inhalation Aerosol (36/206
mcg), patients receiving COMBIVENT RESPIMAT (20/100 mcg) aged 65 years
and over had higher steady state systemic exposures than patients
aged under 65 years for both ipratropium (AUC = 166 vs. 105 pg•hr/mL,
Cmax = 38.5 vs. 30.1 pg/mL) and albuterol (AUC
= 5.44 vs. 3.27 ng•hr/mL, Cmax = 1.19 vs. 0.74
ng/mL).
                              
                                 Gender
                                 
The AUC- and Cmax-values for
ipratropium were 131 pg.hr/mL and 35.4 pg/mL in males and 123 pg.hr/mL
and 31.7 pg/mL in females, respectively. The AUC- and Cmax-values for albuterol were 4.0 ng•hr/mL and 0.89 ng/mL
in males and 4.2 ng•hr/mL and 0.93 ng/mL in females, respectively.
                              
                                 Hepatic and Renal Impairment
                                 
The pharmacokinetics of COMBIVENT RESPIMAT or ipratropium
bromide has not been studied in patients with hepatic or renal insufficiency.
                              
                                 Drug-Drug Interactions
                                 
No specific pharmacokinetic studies were conducted
to evaluate potential drug-drug interactions with other medications.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         