
               
               
               7  DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
                  COMBIVENT RESPIMAT has been used concomitantly
with other drugs, including beta-adrenergic bronchodilators, methylxanthines,
and oral and inhaled steroids, commonly used in the treatment of chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease. There are no formal studies fully evaluating
the interaction effects of COMBIVENT RESPIMAT and these drugs with
respect to safety and effectiveness.
               
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           Anticholinergics: May interact additively with concomitantly
used anticholinergic medications. Avoid administration of COMBIVENT
RESPIMAT with other anticholinergic-containing drugs (7.1)
                           
                           Beta-adrenergic agents: May increase the risk of adverse
cardiovascular effects. Avoid coadministration of COMBIVENT RESPIMAT
and other sympathomimetic agents (7.2)
                           
                           Beta-blockers: Inhibit the effect of albuterol. Consider
alternative therapy in patients with hyperreactive airways (7.3)
                           
                           Diuretics: Electrocardiographic changes and/or hypokalemia
associated with diuretics may worsen with concomitant use of beta-agonists.
Consider monitoring potassium levels. (7.4)
                           
                           Monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOs) or tricyclic antidepressants:
May potentiate effect of albuterol on the vascular system. Consider
alternative therapy in patients taking MAOs or tricyclic antidepressants. (7.5)
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1  Anticholinergic
Agents
                     
                        There is the
potential for an additive interaction with concomitantly used anticholinergic
medications. Therefore, avoid coadministration of COMBIVENT RESPIMAT
with other anticholinergic-containing drugs as this may lead to an
increase in anticholinergic adverse effects [
                              see Warnings and Precautions (5.3, 5.4)
                              
                           ].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2  Beta-adrenergic
Agents
                     
                        Caution is
advised in the coadministration of COMBIVENT RESPIMAT and other sympathomimetic
agents due to the increased risk of adverse cardiovascular effects
[
                              see Warnings and Precautions (5.2, 5.5)
                              
                           ].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3  Beta-receptor
Blocking Agents
                     
                        Beta-receptor
blocking agents and albuterol inhibit the effect of each other. Beta-receptor
blocking agents should be used with caution in patients with hyperreactive
airways.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4  Diuretics
                     
                        The ECG changes and/or hypokalemia which
may result from the administration of non-potassium sparing diuretics
(such as loop or thiazide diuretics) can be acutely worsened by beta-agonists,
especially when the recommended dose of the beta-agonist is exceeded.
Although the clinical significance of these effects is not known,
caution is advised in the coadministration of beta-agonist-containing
drugs, such as COMBIVENT RESPIMAT, with non-potassium sparing diuretics.
Consider monitoring potassium levels.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.5  Monoamine Oxidase
Inhibitors or Tricyclic Antidepressants
                     
                        COMBIVENT RESPIMAT should be administered with extreme
caution to patients being treated with monoamine oxidase inhibitors
or tricyclic antidepressants or within 2 weeks of discontinuation
of such agents because the action of albuterol on the cardiovascular
system may be potentiated. Consider alternative therapy in patients
taking MAOs or tricyclic antidepressants [
                              see
Warnings and Precautions (5.2)
                              
                           ].
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         