
                     
                     
                     Drug Interactions
                     
                        Nifedipine is mainly eliminated by metabolism and is a substrate of CYP3A. Inhibitors and inducers of CYP3A can impact the exposure to nifedipine and consequently its desirable and undesirable effects. In vitro and in vivo data indicate that nifedipine can inhibit the metabolism of drugs that are substrates of CYP3A, thereby increasing the exposure to other drugs. Nifedipine is a vasodilator, and coadministration of other drugs affecting blood pressure may result in pharmacodynamic interactions.
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           CYP3A Inhibitors
                           
                              CYP3A inhibitors such as ketoconazole, fluconazole, itraconazole, clarithromycin, erythromycin (azithromycin, although structurally related to to the class of macrolide antibiotic, is void of clinically relevant CYP3A inhibition), grapefruit, nefazodone, fluoxetine, saquinavir, indinavir, nelfinavir, and ritonavir may result in increased exposure to nifedipine when coadministered. Careful monitoring and dose adjustment may be necessary; consider initiating nifedipine at the lowest dose available if given concomitantly with these medications.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Strong CYP3A Inducers
                           
                              Strong CYP3A inducers, such as rifampin, rifabutin, phenobarbital, phenytoin, carbamazepine, and St. John's Wort reduce the bioavailability and efficacy of nifedipine; therefore nifedipine should not be used in combination with strong CYP3A inducers such as rifampin (See 
                                    CONTRAINDICATIONS
                                 ).
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Cardiovascular Drugs
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Antiarrhythmics
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                       
                                       
                                          
                                             Quinidine: Quinidine is a substrate of CYP3A and has been shown to inhibit CYP3A in vitro. Coadministraion of multiple doses of quinidine sulfate, 200 mg t.i.d., and nifedipine, 20 mg t.i.d., increased Cmax and AUC of nifedipine in healthy volunteers by factors of 2.30 and 1.37, respectively. The heart rate in the initial interval after drug administration was increased by up to 17.9 beats/minute. The exposure to quinidine was not importantly changed in the presence of nifedipine. Monitoring of heart rate and adjustment of the nifedipine dose, if necessary, are recommended when quinidine is added to a treatment with nifedipine.
                                       
                                       
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                       
                                       
                                          
                                             Flecainide: There has been too little experience with the coadministration of flecainide with nifedipine to recommend concomitant use.
                                       
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Calcium Channel Blockers
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                       
                                       
                                          
                                             Diltiazem: Pretreatment of healthy volunteers with 30 mg or 90 mg t.i.d. diltiazem p.o. increased the AUC of nifedipine after a single dose of 20 mg nifedipine by factors of 2.2 and 3.1, respectively. The corresponding Cmax values of nifedipine increased by factors of 2.0 and 1.7, respectively. Caution should be exercised when coadministering diltiazem and nifedipine and a reduction of the dose of nifedipine should be considered.
                                       
                                       
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                       
                                       
                                          
                                             Verapamil: Verapamil, a CYP3A inhibitor, can inhibit the metabolism of nifedipine and increase the exposure to nifedipine during concomitant therapy. Blood pressure should be monitored and reduction of the dose of nifedipine considered.
                                       
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       ACE Inhibitors
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                       
                                       
                                          
                                             Benazepril: In healthy volunteers receiving single dose of 20 mg nifedipine ER and benazepril 10 mg, the plasma concentrations of benazeprilat and nifedipine in the presence and absence of each other were not statistically significantly different. A hypotensive effect was only seen after coadministration of the two drugs. The tachycardic effect of nifedipine was attenuated in the presence of benazepril.
                                       
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Angiotensin-II Blockers
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                       
                                       
                                          
                                             Irbesartan:
                                              In vitro studies show significant inhibition of the formation of oxidized irbesartan metabolites by nifedipine. However, in clinical studies, concomitant nifedipine had no effect on irbesartan pharmacokinetics.
                                       
                                       
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                       
                                       
                                          
                                             Candesartan: No significant drug interaction has been reported in studies with candesartan cilexitil given together with nifedipine. Because candesartan is not significantly metabolized by the cytochrome P450 system and at therapeutic concentrations has no effect on cytochrome P450 enzymes, interactions with drugs that inhibit or are metabolized by those enzymes would not be expected.
                                       
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Beta-Blockers
                                    
                                    Nifedipine extended-release tablet was well tolerated when administered in combination with beta-blockers in 187 hypertensive patients in a placebo-controlled clinical trial. However, there have been occasional literature reports suggesting that the combination of nifedipine and beta-adrenergic blocking drugs may increase the likelihood of congestive heart failure, severe hypotension, or exacerbation of angina in patients with cardiovascular disease. Clinical monitoring is recommended, and a dose adjustment of nifedipine should be considered.
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                       
                                       
                                          
                                             Timolol: Hypotension is more likely to occur if dihydropryridine calcium antagonists such as nifedipine are coadministered with timolol.
                                       
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Central Alpha1-Blockers
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                       
                                       
                                          
                                             Doxazosin: Healthy volunteers participating in a multiple dose doxazosin-nifedipine interaction study received 2 mg doxazosin q.d. alone or combined with 20 mg nifedipine ER b.i.d. Coadministration of nifedipine resulted in a decrease in AUC and Cmax of doxazosin to 83% and 86% of the values in the absence of nifedipine, respectively. In the presence of doxazosin, AUC and Cmax of nifedipine were increased by factors of 1.13 and 1.23, respectively. Compared to nifedipine monotherapy, blood pressure was lower in the presence of doxazosin. Blood pressure should be monitored when doxazosin is coadministered with nifedipine and dose reduction of nifedipine considered.
                                       
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Digitalis
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                       
                                       
                                          
                                             Digoxin: The simultaneous administration of nifedipine and digoxin may lead to reduced clearance resulting in an increase in plasma concentration of digoxin. Since there have been isolated reports of patients with elevated digoxin levels, and there is a possible interaction between digoxin and nifedipine extended-release tablet, it is recommended that digoxin levels be monitored when initiating, adjusting, and discontinuing nifedipine extended-release tablet to avoid possible over- or under-digitalization. 
                                       
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Antithrombotics
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                       
                                       
                                          
                                             Coumarins: There have been rare reports of increased prothrombin time in patients taking coumarin anticoagulants to whom nifedipine was administered. However, the relationship to nifedipine therapy is uncertain.
                                       
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Platelet Aggregation Inhibitors
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                       
                                       
                                          
                                             Clopidogrel: No clinically significant pharmacodynamic interactions were observed when clopidogrel was coadministered with nifedipine.
                                       
                                       
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                       
                                       
                                          
                                             Tirofiban: Coadministration of nifedipine did not alter the exposure to tirofiban importantly.
                                       
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Other
                                    
                                    
                                       Diuretics, PDE5 inhibitors, alpha-methyldopa: Nifedipine may increase the blood pressure lowering effect of these concomitantly administered agents.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               