
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Fabry disease is an X-linked genetic disorder of
                           glycosphingolipid metabolism. Deficiency of the lysosomal enzyme
                           α-galactosidase A leads to progressive accumulation of
                           glycosphingolipids, predominantly GL-3, in many body tissues, starting
                           early in life and continuing over decades. Clinical manifestations of
                           Fabry disease include renal failure, cardiomyopathy, and cerebrovascular
                           accidents. Accumulation of GL-3 in renal endothelial cells may play a
                           role in renal failure.
                        Fabrazyme is intended to provide an exogenous source of
                           α‑galactosidase A in Fabry disease patients. Nonclinical and clinical
                           studies evaluating a limited number of cell types indicate that Fabrazyme
                           will catalyze the hydrolysis of glycosphingolipids, including
                           GL-3.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                     
                         In a placebo-controlled study conducted in patients with Fabry
                           disease after intravenous administration of 1 mg/kg of Fabrazyme every
                           two weeks for 20 weeks, a reduction of GL-3 was observed in the capillary
                           endothelium (vasculature) of kidney, heart and skin as determined by
                           histological assessment, and in plasma as determined by ELISA 
                              
                                 
                                     [see 
                                 
                                  Clinical
                                    Studies (14)
                                 
                                    ]. 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                         Plasma pharmacokinetic profiles of Fabrazyme were characterized
                           at 0.3, 1, and 3 mg/kg in adult patients with Fabry disease. The area
                           under the plasma concentration-time curve (AUC∞) and the
                           clearance (CL) did not increase proportionately with increasing doses,
                           demonstrating that the enzyme follows non-linear pharmacokinetics
                              (
                              
                                 Table
                                    3
                              
                           ).  Plasma pharmacokinetic profiles were also characterized in
                           adult patients with Fabry disease given 1 mg/kg Fabrazyme every 14 days
                           for a total of 11 infusions.  Refer to 
                              
                                 Table
                                    3
                              
                            below for more details. 
                         In 15 pediatric Fabry patients (ranging in age from 8 to 16
                           years old and weighing between 27.1 to 64.9 kg) who were dosed with 1
                           mg/kg every 14 days, Fabrazyme pharmacokinetics were not weight-dependent
                              (
                              
                                 Table
                                    3
                              
                           ).  Fabrazyme concentrations were about five times higher after
                           IgG seroconversion, without any detectable impact on GL-3 clearance. 
                         IgG seroconversion in pediatric patients was associated with
                           prolonged half-life and plasma concentrations of Fabrazyme, a phenomenon
                           rarely observed in adult patients. A possible cause for this prolongation
                           likely pertains to the ability of antibodies to potentially act as
                           “carriers” for their antigens 
                              
                                 
                                    [see 
                                 
                                 Adverse
                                    Reactions (6.2)
                                 
                                     and 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 Use in
                                    Specific Populations (8.4)
                                 
                                    ]. 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                        


