
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  Budesonide has a high topical glucocorticosteroid (GCS) activity and a substantial first pass elimination. The formulation contains granules which are coated to protect dissolution in gastric juice, but which dissolve at pH >5.5, ie, normally when the granules reach the duodenum.  Thereafter, a matrix of ethylcellulose with budesonide controls the release of the drug into the intestinal lumen in a time-dependent manner.
               
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     PHARMACOKINETICS
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Absorption
                           
                           
                              The absorption of ENTOCORT EC seems to be complete, although Cmax and Tmax are variable. Time to peak concentration varies in individual patients between 30 and 600 minutes. Following oral administration of 9 mg of budesonide in healthy subjects, a peak plasma concentration of approximately 5 nmol/L is observed and the area under the plasma concentration time curve is approximately 30 nmol•hr/L. The systemic availability after a single dose is higher in patients with Crohn's disease compared to healthy volunteers, (21% vs 9%) but approaches that in healthy volunteers after repeated dosing.  
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Distribution
                           
                           
                              The mean volume of distribution (Vss) of budesonide varies between 2.2 and 3.9 L/kg in healthy subjects and in patients.  Plasma protein binding is estimated to be 85 to 90% in the concentration range 1 to 230 nmol/L, independent of gender. The erythrocyte/plasma partition ratio at clinically relevant concentrations is about 0.8. 
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Metabolism
                           
                           
                              Following absorption, budesonide is subject to high first pass metabolism (80-90%). In vitro experiments in human liver microsomes demonstrate that budesonide is rapidly and extensively biotransformed, mainly by CYP3A4, to its 2 major metabolites, 6β-hydroxy budesonide and 16α-hydroxy prednisolone. The glucocorticoid activity of these metabolites is negligible (<1/100) in relation to that of the parent compound.
                              
                                 In vivo investigations with intravenous doses in healthy subjects are in agreement with the in vitro findings and demonstrate that budesonide has a high plasma clearance, 0.9-1.8 L/min.  Similarly, high plasma clearance values have been shown in patients with Crohn’s disease.  These high plasma clearance values approach the estimated liver blood flow, and, accordingly, suggest that budesonide is a high hepatic clearance drug.
                              The plasma elimination half-life, t1/2, after administration of intravenous doses ranges between 2.0 and 3.6 hours, and does not differ between healthy adults and patients with Crohn’s disease.    
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Excretion
                           
                           
                              Budesonide is excreted in urine and feces in the form of metabolites.  After oral as well as intravenous administration of micronized [3H]-budesonide, approximately 60% of the recovered radioactivity is found in urine. The major metabolites, including 6β-hydroxy budesonide and 16α-hydroxy prednisolone, are mainly renally excreted, intact or in conjugated forms.  No unchanged budesonide is detected in urine.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Special Populations
                           
                           
                              No significant pharmacokinetic differences have been identified due to sex. 
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Hepatic Insufficiency
                           
                           
                              In patients with liver cirrhosis, systemic availability of orally administered budesonide correlates with disease severity and is, on average, 2.5-fold higher compared with healthy controls.  Patients with mild liver disease are minimally affected.  Patients with severe liver dysfunction were not studied.  Absorption parameters are not altered, and for the intravenous dose, no significant differences in CL or Vss are observed.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Renal Insufficiency
                           
                           
                              The pharmacokinetics of budesonide in patients with renal impairment has not been studied.  Intact budesonide is not renally excreted, but metabolites are to a large extent, and might therefore reach higher levels in patients with impaired renal function.  However, these metabolites have negligible corticosteroid activity as compared with budesonide (<1/100).  Thus, patients with impaired renal function taking budesonide are not expected to have an increased risk of adverse effects.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           DRUG-DRUG INTERACTIONS
                           
                              Budesonide is metabolized via CYP3A4. Potent inhibitors of CYP3A4 can increase the plasma levels of budesonide severalfold. Co-administration of ketoconazole results in an eight-fold increase in AUC of budesonide, compared to budesonide alone. Grapefruit juice, an inhibitor of gut mucosal CYP3A, approximately doubles the systemic exposure of oral budesonide. Conversely, induction of CYP3A4 can result in the lowering of budesonide plasma levels. Oral contraceptives containing ethinyl estradiol, which are also metabolized by CYP3A4, do not affect the pharmacokinetics of budesonide. Budesonide does not affect the plasma levels of oral contraceptives (ie, ethinyl estradiol).
                              Since the dissolution of the coating of ENTOCORT EC is pH dependent (dissolves at pH >5.5), the release properties and uptake of the compound may be altered after treatment with drugs that change the gastrointestinal pH. However, the gastric acid inhibitory drug omeprazole, 20 mg qd, does not affect the absorption or pharmacokinetics of ENTOCORT EC. When an uncoated oral formulation of budesonide is co-administered with a daily dose of cimetidine 1 g, a slight increase in the budesonide peak plasma concentration and rate of absorption occurs, resulting in significant cortisol suppression.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Food Effects
                           
                           
                              A mean delay in time to peak concentration of 2.5 hours is observed with the intake of a high-fat meal, with no significant differences in AUC.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         