
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY

               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action

                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Perindopril
                              
                              Perindopril, a pro-drug, is hydrolyzed to perindoprilat, which inhibits ACE in humans and in animals. ACE is a peptidyl dipeptidase that catalyzes the conversion of the inactive decapeptide, angiotensin I, to the vasoconstrictor substance angiotensin II. Angiotensin II is a potent peripheral vasoconstrictor, which stimulates aldosterone secretion by the adrenal cortex, and provides negative feedback on renin secretion.  Inhibition of ACE results in decreased plasma angiotensin II, leading to decreased vasoconstriction, increased plasma renin activity and decreased aldosterone secretion.  The latter results in diuresis and natriuresis and may be associated with an increase in serum potassium [see Warnings and Precautions (5.6)].

                              ACE is identical to kininase II, an enzyme that degrades bradykinin.  Whether increased levels of bradykinin, a potent vasodepressor peptide, play a role in the therapeutic effects of perindopril remains to be elucidated.

                              While the principal mechanism of perindopril in blood pressure reduction is believed to be through the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system, ACE inhibitors have some effect even in apparent low-renin hypertension.  Perindopril has been studied in relatively few black patients, usually a low-renin population, and the average response of diastolic blood pressure to perindopril was about half the response seen in nonblack patients, a finding consistent with previous experience of other ACE inhibitors.

                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Amlodipine
                              
                              Amlodipine is a dihydropyridine calcium antagonist (calcium ion antagonist or slow channel blocker) that inhibits the transmembrane influx of calcium ions into vascular smooth muscle and cardiac muscle. Experimental data suggest that amlodipine binds to both dihydropyridine and nondihydropyridine binding sites. The contractile processes of cardiac muscle and vascular smooth muscle are dependent upon the movement of extracellular calcium ions into these cells through specific ion channels. Amlodipine inhibits calcium ion influx across cell membranes selectively, with a greater effect on vascular smooth muscle cells than on cardiac muscle cells. Negative inotropic effects can be detected in vitro but such effects have not been seen in intact animals at therapeutic doses.

                              Serum calcium concentration is not affected by amlodipine. Within the physiologic pH range, amlodipine is an ionized compound (pKa=8.6), and its kinetic interaction with the calcium channel receptor is characterized by a gradual rate of association and dissociation with the receptor binding site, resulting in a gradual onset of effect.

                              Amlodipine is a peripheral arterial vasodilator that acts directly on vascular smooth muscle to cause a reduction in peripheral vascular resistance and reduction in blood pressure.

                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics

                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Perindopril
                              
                              After administration of perindopril, ACE is inhibited in a dose and blood concentration-related fashion. The degree of ACE inhibition achieved by a given dose appears to diminish over time (the ID50 increases). The pressor response to an angiotensin I infusion is reduced by perindopril, but this is not as persistent as the effect on ACE.

                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Amlodipine
                              
                              Following administration of therapeutic doses to patients with hypertension, amlodipine produces vasodilation resulting in a reduction of supine and standing blood pressures. These decreases in blood pressure are not accompanied by a significant change in heart rate or plasma catecholamine levels with chronic dosing. Although the acute intravenous administration of amlodipine decreases arterial blood pressure and increases heart rate in hemodynamic studies of patients with chronic stable angina, chronic oral administration of amlodipine in clinical trials did not lead to clinically significant changes in heart rate or blood pressures in normotensive patients with angina.

                              With chronic once daily oral administration, antihypertensive effectiveness is maintained for at least 24 hours.  Plasma concentrations correlate with effect in both young and elderly patients.  The magnitude of reduction in blood pressure with amlodipine is also correlated with the height of pretreatment elevation; thus, individuals with moderate hypertension (diastolic pressure 105-114 mmHg) had about a 50% greater response than did patients with mild hypertension (diastolic pressure 90-104 mmHg).  Normotensive subjects experienced no clinically significant change in blood pressures (+1/-2 mmHg).

                              In hypertensive patients with normal renal function, therapeutic doses of amlodipine resulted in a decrease in renal vascular resistance and an increase in glomerular filtration rate and effective renal plasma flow without change in filtration fraction or proteinuria.

                              As with other calcium channel blockers, hemodynamic measurements of cardiac function at rest and during exercise (or pacing) in patients with normal ventricular function treated with amlodipine have generally demonstrated a small increase in cardiac index without significant influence on dP/dt or on left ventricular end diastolic pressure or volume. In hemodynamic studies, amlodipine has not been associated with a negative inotropic effect when administered in the therapeutic dose range to intact animals and humans, even when co-administered with β-blockers to humans. Similar findings, however, have been observed in normal or well-compensated patients with heart failure with agents possessing significant negative inotropic effects.

                              Electrophysiologic Effects: Amlodipine does not change sinoatrial (SA) nodal function or atrioventricular (AV) conduction in intact animals or humans. In clinical studies in which amlodipine was administered in combination with β-blockers to patients with either hypertension or angina, no adverse effects on electrocardiographic parameters were observed.

                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics

                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Prestalia
                              
                              Following administration of PRESTALIA, peak plasma concentration of perindopril, perindoprilat and amlodipine occur at approximately 1 hour, 4 hours and 6-12 hours, respectively. The mean half-life of perindopril is approximately 1.3 hours. The decline in the plasma concentration of perindoprilat is multiphasic and shows a terminal elimination half-life of approximately 100 hours, resulting from slow dissociation of perindoprilat from plasma/tissue ACE binding sites. Amlodipine elimination from plasma is biphasic with a terminal elimination half-life of approximately 30 to 50 hours.

                              When PRESTALIA is administered with food, the exposure to perindopril, perindoprilat and amlodipine is not impacted.

                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Perindopril
                              
                              Perindopril is extensively metabolized following oral administration. Six metabolites resulting from hydrolysis, glucuronidation, and cyclization via dehydration have been identified. These include the active ACE inhibitor perindoprilat (hydrolyzed perindopril), perindopril, and perindoprilat glucuronides, dehydrated perindopril, and the diastereoisomers of dehydrated perindoprilat. In humans, hepatic esterase appears to be responsible for the hydrolysis of perindopril.

                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Drug-Drug Interactions
                                    
                                    Co-administered perindopril does not impact the exposure to amlodipine or digoxin.

                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Amlodipine
                              
                              Absolute bioavailability of amlodipine has been estimated as between 64% and 90%. Ex vivo studies indicate that approximately 93% of circulating amlodipine is bound to plasma proteins in hypertensive patients.

                              Amlodipine is extensively (approximately 90%) metabolized in the liver to inactive metabolites. Steady-state plasma levels are reached after once-daily dosing for 7 to 8 days. 10% of unchanged drug and 60% of amlodipine metabolites are excreted in urine.

                              Elderly patients and patients with hepatic insufficiency have decreased clearance of amlodipine with a resulting increase in AUC of approximately 40% to 60%. A similar increase in AUC was observed in patients with moderate to severe heart failure.

                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Drug-Drug Interactions
                                    
                                    Other drugs impacting amlodipine: Co-administered cimetidine, magnesium- and aluminum hydroxide antacids, sildenalfil, and grapefruit juice have no impact on the exposure to amlodipine.

                                    Amlodipine impacting other drugs: Co-administered amlodipine does not affect the exposure to perindopril, perindoprilat, atorvastatin, ethanol and the warfarin prothrombin response time.

                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         