
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS

               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           Potassium supplements and potassium-sparing diuretics: risk of hyperkalemia (7).

                           Lithium: increased serum lithium levels; toxicity symptoms (7).

                           Injectable gold: flushing, nausea, vomiting, or hypotension (7).

                           Dual inhibition of the renin-angiotensin system: increased risk of renal impairment, hypotension, and hyperkalemia (7).

                           Do not exceed doses greater than 20 mg daily of simvastatin (7).

                           NSAIDs: risk of renal impairment and loss of antihypertensive effect (7).

                           Diuretics: increased risk of hypotension, consider dose reduction (7).

                           CYP3A inhibitors: risk of hypotension and edema (7).

                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           Prestalia
                        
                        The pharmacokinetics of perindopril and amlodipine are not altered when the drugs are co-administered.

                        No drug interaction studies have been conducted with PRESTALIA, although studies have been conducted with perindopril and amlodipine.

                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           mTOR Inhibitors: Patients taking concomitant mTOR inhibitor (e.g. temsirolimus) therapy may be at increased risk for angioedema. [see Warnings and Precautions (5.2)]
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           Perindopril
                        
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Diuretics: Patients on diuretics, especially those in whom diuretic therapy was recently instituted, may occasionally experience an excessive reduction of blood pressure after initiation of therapy with PRESTALIA. Provide close medical supervision with the first dose of PRESTALIA, for at least two hours and until blood pressure has stabilized for another hour. Perindopril can attenuate potassium loss caused by thiazide diuretics.

                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Potassium Supplements and Potassium-Sparing Diuretics: Potassium-sparing diuretics (spironolactone, amiloride, triamterene, and others) or potassium supplements, or other drugs capable of increasing serum potassium (indomethacin, heparin, cyclosporine and others) can increase the risk of hyperkalemia. If concomitant use of such agents is indicated, the patient's serum potassium should be monitored frequently.

                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Lithium: Increased serum lithium levels and symptoms of lithium toxicity have been reported in patients receiving ACE inhibitors during therapy with lithium. When co-administering PRESTALIA and lithium, frequent monitoring of serum lithium levels is recommended. Use of a diuretic may further increase the risk of lithium toxicity.

                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Gold: Nitritoid reactions (symptoms include facial flushing, nausea, vomiting, and hypotension) have been reported rarely in patients on therapy with injectable gold (sodium aurothiomalate) and concomitant ACE inhibitor therapy.

                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Non-Steroidal Anti-Inflammatory Agents (NSAIDS) Including Selective Cyclooxygenase-2 Inhibitors (COX-2 Inhibitors): In patients who are elderly, volume-depleted (including those on diuretic therapy), or with compromised renal function, co-administration of NSAIDS, including selective COX-2 inhibitors, with ACE inhibitors, including perindopril, may result in deterioration of renal function, including possible acute renal failure. These effects are usually reversible. Monitor renal function periodically in patients receiving perindopril and NSAID therapy.

                              The antihypertensive effects of ACE inhibitors, including perindopril, may be attenuated by NSAIDS, including selective COX-2 inhibitors.

                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Dual Blockade of the Renin-Angiotensin System (RAS): Dual blockade of the RAS with angiotensin receptor blockers, ACE inhibitors, or aliskiren is associated with increased risks of hypotension, hyperkalemia, and changes in renal function (including acute renal failure) compared to monotherapy. In most patients no benefit has been associated with using two RAS inhibitors concomitantly. In general, avoid combined use of RAS inhibitors. Closely monitor blood pressure, renal function, and electrolytes in patients on PRESTALIA and other agents that affect the RAS.

                              Do not co-administer aliskiren with PRESTALIA in patients with diabetes. Avoid use of aliskiren with PRESTALIA in patients with renal impairment (GFR <60 mL/min).

                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           Amlodipine
                        
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Simvastatin: Co-administration of multiple doses of 10 mg of amlodipine with 80 mg simvastatin resulted in a 77% increase in exposure to simvastatin compared to simvastatin administered alone. Limit the dose of simvastatin in patients on amlodipine to 20 mg daily.

                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Cyclosporine: A prospective study in renal transplant patients showed an average 40% increase in trough cyclosporin levels during concomitant treatment with amlodipine. Frequent monitoring of trough blood levels of cyclosporine is recommended.

                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 CYP3A Inhibitors: Co-administration of the moderate CYP3A inhibitor diltiazem increases the exposure to amlodipine by 60%. Co-administered erythromycin, also a moderate CYP3A inhibitor, does not impact the exposure to amlodipine. Strong CYP3A inhibitors (e.g., itraconazole) may increase the plasma concentrations of the CYP3A substrate amlodipine to a greater extent. Monitor for symptoms of hypotension and edema when amlodipine is co-administered with moderate or strong CYP3A inhibitors to determine the need for dose adjustment.

                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 CYP3A Inducers: No information is available on the quantitative effects of CYP3A inducers on amlodipine. Blood pressure should be monitored when amlodipine is co-administered with CYP3A inducers.

                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         