
                     
                     
                     Drug Interactions
                     
                        Although TIMOPTIC used alone has little or no effect on pupil size, mydriasis resulting from concomitant therapy with TIMOPTIC and epinephrine has been reported occasionally.
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Beta-adrenergic blocking agents
                           
                              Patients who are receiving a beta-adrenergic blocking agent orally and TIMOPTIC should be observed for potential additive effects of beta-blockade, both systemic and on intraocular pressure. The concomitant use of two topical beta-adrenergic blocking agents is not recommended.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Calcium antagonists
                           
                              Caution should be used in the coadministration of beta-adrenergic blocking agents, such as TIMOPTIC, and oral or intravenous calcium antagonists because of possible atrioventricular conduction disturbances, left ventricular failure, and hypotension. In patients with impaired cardiac function, coadministration should be avoided.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Catecholamine-depleting drugs
                           
                              Close observation of the patient is recommended when a beta blocker is administered to patients receiving catecholamine-depleting drugs such as reserpine, because of possible additive effects and the production of hypotension and/or marked bradycardia, which may result in vertigo, syncope, or postural hypotension.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Digitalis and calcium antagonists
                           
                              The concomitant use of beta-adrenergic blocking agents with digitalis and calcium antagonists may have additive effects in prolonging atrioventricular conduction time.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           CYP2D6 inhibitors
                           
                              Potentiated systemic beta-blockade (e.g., decreased heart rate, depression) has been reported during combined treatment with CYP2D6 inhibitors (e.g. quinidine, SSRIs) and timolol.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Clonidine
                           
                              Oral beta-adrenergic blocking agents may exacerbate the rebound hypertension which can follow the withdrawal of clonidine. There have been no reports of exacerbation of rebound hypertension with ophthalmic timolol maleate.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Injectable epinephrine
                           
                              (See 
                                    PRECAUTIONS, General, Anaphylaxis
                                 )
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               