
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              •Coumarin Anticoagulants: (7.1).
                           
                              •Bile Acid Binding Resins: (7.2).
                           
                              •Immunosuppressants: (7.3).
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 Coumarin Anticoagulants
                     
                        Potentiation of coumarin-type anticoagulant effect has been observed with prolongation of the PT/INR.
                        Caution should be exercised when oral coumarin anticoagulants are given in conjunction with fenofibric acid delayed-release capsules. The dosage of the anticoagulant should be reduced to maintain the PT/INR at the desired level to prevent bleeding complications. Frequent PT/INR determinations are advisable until it has been definitely determined that the PT/INR has stabilized [see 
                           Warnings and Precautions (5.6)
                           ].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 Bile Acid Binding Resins
                     
                        Since bile acid binding resins may bind other drugs given concurrently, patients should take fenofibric acid delayed-release capsules at least 1 hour before or 4 to 6 hours after a bile acid resin to avoid impeding its absorption.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3 Immunosuppressants
                     
                        Immunosuppressants such as cyclosporine and tacrolimus can produce nephrotoxicity with decreases in creatinine clearance and rises in serum creatinine, and because renal excretion is the primary elimination route of drugs of the fibrate class including fenofibric acid delayed-release capsules, there is a risk that an interaction will lead to deterioration of renal function. The benefits and risks of using fenofibric acid delayed-release capsules with immunosuppressants and other potentially nephrotoxic agents should be carefully considered, and the lowest effective dose employed.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4 Colchicine
                     
                        Cases of myopathy, including rhabdomyolysis, have been reported with fenofibrates coadministered with colchicine, and caution should be exercised when prescribing fenofibrate with colchicine.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         