
                     
                     
                     Drug Interactions
                     
                        
                           
                              Ethanol
                           
                        
                        Clinical evidence has shown that etretinate can be formed with concurrent ingestion of acitretin and ethanol (see boxed CONTRAINDICATIONS AND WARNINGS and CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY, 
                              Pharmacokinetics
                           ).
                        
                           
                              Glyburide
                           
                        
                        In a trial of 7 healthy male volunteers, acitretin treatment potentiated the blood glucose-lowering effect of glyburide (a sulfonylurea similar to chlorpropamide) in 3 of the 7 subjects. Repeating the trial with 6 healthy male volunteers in the absence of glyburide did not detect an effect of acitretin on glucose tolerance. Careful supervision of diabetic patients under treatment with acitretin is recommended (see CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY, Pharmacokinetics
                            and 
                              DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION
                           ).
                        
                           
                              Hormonal Contraceptives
                           
                        
                        It has not been established if there is a pharmacokinetic interaction between acitretin and combined oral contraceptives. However, it has been established that acitretin interferes with the contraceptive effect of microdosed progestin “minipill” preparations. Microdosed “minipill” progestin preparations are not recommended for use with acitretin (see CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY, 
                              Pharmacokinetic Drug Interactions
                           ). It is not known whether other progestin-only contraceptives, such as implants and injectables, are adequate methods of contraception during acitretin therapy.
                        
                        
                           
                              Methotrexate
                           
                        
                        An increased risk of hepatitis has been reported to result from combined use of methotrexate and etretinate. Consequently, the combination of methotrexate with acitretin is also contraindicated (see 
                              CONTRAINDICATIONS
                           ).
                        
                           
                              Phenytoin
                           
                        
                        If acitretin is given concurrently with phenytoin, the protein binding of phenytoin may be reduced.
                        
                           
                              Tetracyclines
                           
                        
                        Since both acitretin and tetracyclines can cause increased intracranial pressure, their combined use is contraindicated (see 
                              CONTRAINDICATIONS
                            and 
                              WARNINGS
                           , 
                              Pseudotumor Cerebri
                           ).
                        
                           
                              Vitamin A and Oral Retinoids
                           
                        
                        Concomitant administration of vitamin A and/or other oral retinoids with acitretin must be avoided because of the risk of hypervitaminosis A.
                        
                           
                              Other
                           
                        
                        There appears to be no pharmacokinetic interaction between acitretin and cimetidine, digoxin, or glyburide. Investigations into the effect of acitretin on the protein binding of anticoagulants of the coumarin type (warfarin) revealed no interaction.
                     
                     
                  
               