
                     
                     
                     Drug Interactions:
                     
                        When given concurrently the following drugs may interact with thiazide diuretics:
                          potentiation of orthostatic hypotension may occur.
                                    Alcohol, barbiturates, or narcotics
                           -
                        
                          (oral agents and insulin) dosage adjustment of the antidiabetic drug may be required.
                                    Antidiabetic drugs
                           -
                        
                        additive effect or potentiation.
                                    Other antihypertensive drugs -
                        
                        Cholestyramine and colestipol resins bind the hydrochlorothiazide and reduce its absorption from the gastrointestinal tract by up to 85 and 43 percent, respectively.
                                    Cholestyramine and colestipol resins -
                        
                        intensified electrolyte depletion, particularly hypokalemia.
                                    Corticosteroid, ACTH -
                        
                        possible decreased response to pressor amines but not sufficient to preclude their use.
                                    Pressor amines (e.g., norepinephrine) -
                        
                        possible increased responsiveness to the muscle relaxant.
                                    Skeletal muscle relaxants, nondepolarizing (e.g., tubocurarine) -
                        
                        generally should not be given with diuretics. Diuretic agents reduce the renal clearance of lithium and greatly increase the risk of lithium toxicity. Refer to the package insert for lithium preparations before use of such preparations with Hydrochlorothiazide Capsules.
                                    Lithium -
                        
                        In some patients, the administration of a non-steroidal anti-inflammatory agent can reduce the diuretic, natriuretic, and antihypertensive effects of loop, potassium sparing and thiazide diuretics. When Hydrochlorothiazide Capsules and non-steroidal anti-inflammatory agents are used concomitantly, the patients should be observed closely to determine if the desired effect of the diuretic is obtained.
                                    Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs -
                        
                        
                           Drug/Laboratory Test Interactions
                        
                        Thiazides should be discontinued before carrying out tests for parathyroid function (see ).
                                    PRECAUTIONS
                           ,
                           General
                        
                     
                     
                  
               