
                     
                     
                     Drug Interactions
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Diuretics
                           
                              Patients on diuretics, especially those in whom diuretic therapy was recently instituted, may occasionally experience an excessive reduction of blood pressure after initiation of therapy with benazepril hydrochloride. The possibility of hypotensive effects with benazepril hydrochloride can be minimized by either discontinuing the diuretic or increasing the salt intake prior to initiation of treatment with benazepril hydrochloride. If this is not possible, the starting dose should be reduced (see ).
                                            DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION
                              
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Potassium Supplements and Potassium-Sparing Diuretics
                           
                              Benazepril hydrochloride can attenuate potassium loss caused by thiazide diuretics. Potassium-sparing diuretics (spironolactone, amiloride, triamterene, and others) or potassium supplements can increase the risk of hyperkalemia. Therefore, if concomitant use of such agents is indicated, they should be given with caution, and the patient’s serum potassium should be monitored frequently.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Oral Anticoagulants
                           
                              Interaction studies with warfarin and acenocoumarol failed to identify any clinically important effects on the serum concentrations or clinical effects of these anticoagulants.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Lithium
                           
                              Increased serum lithium levels and symptoms of lithium toxicity have been reported in patients receiving ACE inhibitors (including benazepril) during therapy with lithium. These drugs should be coadministered with caution, and frequent monitoring of serum lithium levels is recommended. If a diuretic is also used, the risk of lithium toxicity may be increased.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Gold
                           
                              Nitritoid reactions (symptoms include facial flushing, nausea, vomiting and hypotension) have been reported rarely in patients on therapy with injectable gold (sodium aurothiomalate) and concomitant ACE inhibitor therapy.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Anti-Diabetics
                           
                              In rare cases, diabetic patients receiving an ACE inhibitor (including benazepril) concomitantly with insulin or oral anti-diabetics may develop hypoglycemia. Such patients should therefore be advised about the possibility of hypoglycemic reactions and should be monitored accordingly.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Other
                           
                              No clinically important pharmacokinetic interactions occurred when benazepril hydrochloride was administered concomitantly with hydrochlorothiazide, chlorthalidone, furosemide, digoxin, propranolol, atenolol, naproxen, or cimetidine.
                              Benazepril hydrochloride has been used concomitantly with beta-adrenergic-blocking agents, calcium-channel-blocking agents, diuretics, digoxin, and hydralazine, without evidence of clinically important adverse interactions. Benazepril, like other ACE inhibitors, has had less than additive effects with beta-adrenergic blockers, presumably because both drugs lower blood pressure by inhibiting parts of the renin-angiotensin system.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               