
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        COCs lower the risk of becoming pregnant primarily by suppressing ovulation.  Other possible mechanisms may include cervical mucus changes that inhibit sperm penetration and endometrial changes that reduce the likelihood of implantation.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        No pharmacodynamic studies were conducted with Quartette.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                         Absorption
                        
                        Ethinyl estradiol and levonorgestrel are absorbed with maximum plasma concentrations occurring within 2 hours after Quartette administration. Levonorgestrel is completely absorbed after oral administration (bioavailability nearly 100%) and is not subject to first-pass metabolism. Ethinyl estradiol is absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract but, due to first-pass metabolism in gut mucosa and liver, the bioavailability of ethinyl estradiol is approximately 40%.  The effect of food on the rate and the extent of levonorgestrel and ethinyl estradiol absorption following oral administration of Quartette has not been evaluated. 
                        The mean plasma pharmacokinetic parameters of levonorgestrel following administration of another levonorgestrel/ethinyl estradiol combination tablet with an equal dose of levonorgestrel for 84 days, in healthy women are reported in Table 2.
                        
                           Table 2: Mean Pharmacokinetic Parameters for 150 mcg Levonorgestrel Following Administration of a Levonorgestrel/ethinyl estradiol Combination Tablet Once Daily for 84 Days
                        
                        


                        


Following repeated daily dosing of levonorgestrel/ethinyl estradiol oral contraceptives, levonorgestrel plasma concentrations accumulate more than predicted based on single-dose pharmacokinetics, due in part, to increased SHBG levels that are induced by ethinyl estradiol, and a possible reduction in hepatic metabolic capacity.  
                        Systemic exposure to ethinyl estradiol following administration of a LNG/EE combination tablet increases linearly in an approximate dose-proportional manner over the range of doses of 20 mcg to 30 mcg within this product. Systemic exposure to EE (as assessed by AUC) at steady state following administration of levonorgestrel/ethinyl estradiol oral contraceptives is approximately 20% higher than expected based on single-dose data for the dose range of 20-30 mcg.
                        
                           Distribution
                        
                        The apparent volume of distribution of levonorgestrel is reported to be approximately 1.8 L/kg. Levonorgestrel is about 97.5 - 99% protein-bound, principally to sex hormone binding globulin (SHBG) and, to a lesser extent, serum albumin.  
                        The apparent volume of distribution of ethinyl estradiol is reported to be approximately 4.3 L/kg.  Ethinyl estradiol is about 95-97% bound to serum albumin.  Ethinyl estradiol does not bind to SHBG, but induces SHBG synthesis, which leads to decreased levonorgestrel clearance.  
                        
                           Metabolism
                        
                        Following absorption, levonorgestrel is conjugated at the 17β-OH position to form sulfate and to a lesser extent, glucuronide conjugates in plasma. Significant amounts of conjugated and unconjugated 3α,5β-tetrahydrolevonorgestrel are also present in plasma, along with much smaller amounts of 3α,5α-tetrahydrolevonorgestrel and 16β-hydroxylevonorgestrel. Levonorgestrel and its phase I metabolites are excreted primarily as glucuronide conjugates.  Metabolic clearance rates may differ among individuals by several-fold, and this may account in part for the wide variation observed in levonorgestrel concentrations among users.
                        First-pass metabolism of ethinyl estradiol involves formation of ethinyl estradiol-3-sulfate in the gut wall, followed by 2-hydroxylation of a portion of the remaining untransformed ethinyl estradiol by hepatic cytochrome P-450 3A4 (CYP3A4). Levels of CYP3A4 vary widely among individuals and can explain the variation in rates of ethinyl estradiol hydroxylation.  Hydroxylation at the 4-, 6-, and 16- positions may also occur, although to a much lesser extent than 2-hydroxylation.  The various hydroxylated metabolites are subject to further methylation and/or conjugation.
                        
                           Excretion
                        
                        About 45% of levonorgestrel and its metabolites are excreted in the urine and about 32% are excreted in feces, mostly as glucuronide conjugates. The mean terminal elimination half-life for levonorgestrel after a single dose of Quartette ranged from 36-41 hours.
                        Ethinyl estradiol is excreted in the urine and feces as glucuronide and sulfate conjugates, and it undergoes enterohepatic recirculation.  The terminal elimination half-life of ethinyl estradiol following single doses of Quartette is approximately 16.5 hours.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         