
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  
                     Diagnosis 

                     
                  
                  Diluted solutions of stinging insect venom injected intradermally will produce wheal and erythema reactions in patients who have significant IgE-mediated, Type I immediate hypersensitivity to stings of these insects.

                  
                  
                     Treatment

                     
                  
                  Repeated injections of increasing doses of insect venom extracts have been shown to ameliorate the intensity of allergic symptoms upon subsequent insect stings. (3,4)
                  
                  The mechanism by which hyposensitization is achieved is not known completely. IgG antibodies (blocking antibodies) appear in the serum of patients treated with injected venom. No direct relationship has been identified between the level of blocking antibody (or the ratio of blocking antibody to IgE antibody directed to the same venom antigens) and the degree of hyposensitization. However, patients who show protection from symptoms after stings have been found to have significant levels of specific blocking antibody.(3, 4) .
Initially, after a period of immunotherapy with specific venom antigens, levels of IgE antibody may increase.(4) However, from studies carried out with other venom preparations, these levels are reported to decline after a time.(5) After maintenance level has been reached and maintained, symptoms after stings have been shown to decrease considerably.(3, 4)
                  
                  It is not known if skin-sensitizing antibody can be eradicated or if the patient can be entirely cured, nor is it known how long immunotherapy must be continued. 

                  
                  In a clinical study with Jubilant HollisterStier venom products, injections (using the Suggested Dose Schedule under DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION) were given once per week at one study center, and twice or more per week at another center.(4) (For further discussion, see below). It must be considered important to achieve the 100 µg per venom maintenance dose (the maintenance dose for Mixed Vespid venom protein is 300 µg), since there are no data on effectiveness of maintenance levels below 100 µg per venom.
                  In the clinical trial, 97% of patients at the maintenance dosage (100 µg per venom) showed no systemic reaction following an insect sting challenge.(4)The remaining 3% had a milder reaction than noted prior to treatment. The patients in this study reached maintenance (100 µg per venom) usually within 2 1/2-3 1/2 months after beginning therapy.(4) Whether efficacy of therapy is influenced by the time required to reach maintenance has not yet been determined.

                  
                  Large local reactions occurred in approximately 60% of the patients given immunotherapy. Some form of systemic response occurred, often repeatedly, in one-third of the patients treated in the clinical trial.(4) Only one systemic response occurred on the first dose given. The rest occurred at various times in the course of immunotherapy. Some systemic manifestations may have occurred because of the patient's apprehension, and did not require treatment. Approximately one-fourth of the patients experiencing systemic responses were given some form of specific therapy (epinephrine, theophylline, or metaproteranol), some on several occasions.(4)
                  
                  In deciding the criteria for proceeding from dose to dose of the Suggested Dose Schedule (see DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION), the results of the clinical study(4) should be considered. A study center "A" reporting the least number of systemic reactions during pre-maintenance treatment held the dose constant in most of the cases where significant local reactions occurred. With the systemic reactions reported, this center held the dose the same in approximately 80% of the incidences. The treatment injections were given at this center usually once per week, and if a patient missed an appointment, the next dose was often the same as the preceding dose (depending on the previous reactivity of the patient). Patients treated at this center reached maintenance in an average of 17-19 visits.

                  
                  Another study center "B", reporting a higher incidence of systemic reactions, was more regimented in following the Suggested Dose Schedule. This center reduced or held the dose the same in less than 10% of the cases reporting significant local reactions. With the systemic reactions reported, this center held the dose the same or reduced the dosage in approximately 20% of the cases. At this center, more than one injection per week was given at the outset as circumstances and sensitivity allowed. Patients treated at this center reached maintenance in an average of 14 visits.

                  
                  Following the achievement of maintenance level (100 µg per venom), approximately 80% or more patients were given a second maintenance injection at a 1-week interval. The third maintenance injection was usually (in approximately 60% of the patients) at a 2-week interval. The next injection was usually within 3 weeks, and thereafter, the patients were injected for ongoing maintenance at approximately monthly intervals.(4)
                  
               
               
            
         