
               
               
               
12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY

               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
12.1 Mechanism of Action

                     
                        Granisetron is a selective 5-hydroxytryptamine3 (5-HT3) receptor antagonist with little or no affinity for other serotonin receptors, including 5-HT1, 5-HT1A, 5-HT1B/C, 5-HT2; for alpha1-, alpha2-, or beta-adrenoreceptors; for dopamine-D2; or for histamine-H1; benzodiazepine; picrotoxin or opioid receptors.
                        Serotonin receptors of the 5-HT3 type are located peripherally on vagal nerve terminals and centrally in the chemoreceptor trigger zone of the area postrema. During chemotherapy that induces vomiting, mucosal enterochromaffin cells release serotonin, which stimulates 5-HT3 receptors. This evokes vagal afferent discharge, inducing vomiting. Animal studies demonstrate that, in binding to 5-HT3 receptors, granisetron blocks serotonin stimulation and subsequent vomiting after emetogenic stimuli such as cisplatin. In the ferret animal model, a single granisetron injection prevented vomiting due to high-dose cisplatin or arrested vomiting within 5 to 30 seconds.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
12.2 Pharmacodynamics

                     
                        The effect of granisetron on QTc prolongation was evaluated in a randomized, single-blind, positive (moxifloxacin 400 mg) - and placebo controlled parallel study in healthy subjects. A total of 240 subjects were administered Sancuso patch, intravenous granisetron (10 mcg/kg over 30 seconds). In a study with demonstrated ability to detect small effects, the upper bound of the 90% confidence interval for the largest placebo adjusted, baseline corrected QTc based on Fridericia correction method (QTcF) for Sancuso was below 10 ms, the threshold for regulatory concern.
                        No evidence of an effect on plasma prolactin or aldosterone concentrations has been found in studies using granisetron.
                        The effect on oro-cecal transit time following application of Sancuso has not been studied. Granisetron hydrochloride injection exhibited no effect on oro-cecal transit time in healthy subjects given a single intravenous infusion of 50 mcg/kg or 200 mcg/kg. Single and multiple oral doses of granisetron hydrochloride slowed colonic transit in healthy subjects.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
12.3 Pharmacokinetics

                     
                        
                           Absorption
                        
                        Granisetron crosses intact skin into the systemic circulation by a passive diffusion process.
                        Following a 7-day application of Sancuso in 24 healthy subjects, high inter-subject variability in systemic exposure was observed. Maximal concentration was reached at approximately 48 hours (range: 24-168 hours) following patch application. Mean Cmax was 5.0 ng/mL (CV: 170%) and mean AUC0-168hr was 527 ng-hr/mL (CV:173%).
                        
                           Mean Plasma Concentration of Granisetron (mean ± SD)
                        
                        
                        Based on the measure of residual content of the patch after removal, approximately 66% (SD: ± 10.9) of granisetron is delivered following patch application for 7 days.
                        
                           Distribution
                        
                        Plasma protein binding is approximately 65%. Granisetron distributes freely between plasma and red blood cells.
                        
                           Metabolism
                        
                        Granisetron metabolism involves N-demethylation and aromatic ring oxidation followed by conjugation. In vitro liver microsomal studies show that granisetron's major route of metabolism is inhibited by ketoconazole, suggestive of metabolism mediated by the cytochrome P-450 3A subfamily. Animal studies suggest that some of the metabolites may also have 5-HT3 receptor antagonist activity.
                        
                           Elimination
                        
                        Clearance is predominantly by hepatic metabolism. Based on a study with intravenous injection, approximately 12% of the dose is excreted unchanged in the urine of healthy subjects in 48 hours. The remainder of the dose is excreted as metabolites, 49% in the urine, and 34% in the feces.
                        
                           Subpopulations
                        
                        
                           Gender
                        
                        There is evidence to suggest that female subjects had higher granisetron concentrations than males following patch application. However, no statistically significant difference in clinical efficacy outcome was observed between genders.
                        
                           Pediatrics
                        
                        No studies have been performed to investigate the pharmacokinetics of Sancuso in pediatrics.
                        
                           Elderly, and Renal or Hepatic Impairment
                        
                        Although no studies have been performed to investigate the pharmacokinetics of Sancuso in elderly subjects, and in patients with renal or hepatic impairment, the following pharmacokinetic information is available for intravenous granisetron.
                        In the elderly, and in patients with renal failure or hepatic impairment, the pharmacokinetics of granisetron were determined following a single 40 mcg/kg intravenous dose of granisetron hydrochloride.
                        
                           Elderly
                        
                        In elderly volunteers (mean age 71 years) pharmacokinetic parameters following a single 40 mcg/kg intravenous dose of granisetron hydrochloride, lower clearance and longer half-life were observed compared to younger healthy volunteers.
                        
                           Renal Failure Patients
                        
                        Total clearance of granisetron was not affected in patients with severe renal failure who received a single 40 mcg/kg intravenous dose of granisetron hydrochloride.
                        
                           Hepatically-Impaired Patients
                        
                        In patients with hepatic impairment due to neoplastic liver involvement, total plasma clearance following a single 40 mcg/kg intravenous dose of granisetron hydrochloride was approximately halved compared to patients without hepatic impairment. Given the wide variability in pharmacokinetic parameters of granisetron and the good tolerance of doses well above the recommended dose, dose adjustment in patients with hepatic functional impairment is not necessary.

                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
sancuso-02

                           
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         