
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  6% and 10% PREMASOL - sulfite-free (Amino Acid) Injections provide a mixture of essential and nonessential amino acids as well as taurine and a soluble form of tyrosine, N-Acetyl-L-Tyrosine (NAT). This amino acid composition has been specifically formulated to provide a well tolerated nitrogen source for nutritional support and therapy for infants and young children. When administered in conjunction with cysteine hydrochloride, 6% and 10% Amino Acid Injections result in the normalization of the plasma amino acid concentrations to a profile consistent with that of a breast-fed infant. 
                  The rationale for 6% and 10% Amino Acid Injections is based on the observation of inadequate levels of essential amino acids in the plasma of infants receiving total parenteral nutrition (TPN) using conventional amino acid solutions. These formulas were developed through the application of specific pharmacokinetic multiple regression analysis relating amino acid intake to the resulting plasma amino acid concentrations. 
                  Clinical studies in infants and young children who required TPN therapy showed that infusion of 6% and 10% Amino Acid Injections with a cysteine hydrochloride admixture resulted in a normalization of the plasma amino acid concentrations. In addition, weight gains, nitrogen balance, and serum protein concentrations were consistent with an improving nutritional status. 
                  When infused with hypertonic dextrose as a calorie source, supplemented with cysteine hydrochloride, electrolytes, vitamins, and minerals, PREMASOL - sulfite-free (Amino Acid) Injections provide total parenteral nutrition in infants and young children, with the exception of essential fatty acids. 
                  It is thought that the acetate from lysine acetate and acetic acid, under the conditions of parenteral nutrition, does not impact net acid-base balance when renal and respiratory functions are normal. Clinical evidence seems to support this thinking; however, confirmatory experimental evidence is not available. 
                  The amount of chloride present in PREMASOL - sulfite-free (Amino Acid) Injections is not of clinical significance. The addition of cysteine hydrochloride will contribute to the chloride load. 
                  The electrolyte content of any additives that are introduced should be carefully considered and included in total input computations.
               
               
            
         