
               
               
               DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
                  
            ACE-inhibitors
            
              Reports suggest that NSAIDs may diminish the antihypertensive
              effect of ACE-inhibitors. This interaction should be given consideration in
              patients taking NSAIDs concomitantly with ACE-inhibitors (see WARNINGS
                     ).
                  
                  
                  
                  Antacids 
              The concomitant administration of antacids has no apparent effect
              on the extent of absorption of etodolac. However, antacids can decrease the peak
              concentration reached by 15% to 20% but have no detectable effect on the
              time-to-peak.
            
                  
                  
                  Aspirin 
              When etodolac is administered with aspirin, its protein binding
              is reduced, although the clearance of free etodolac is not altered. The clinical
              significance of this interaction is not known; however, as with other NSAIDs,
              concomitant administration of etodolac and aspirin is not generally recommended
              because of the potential of increased adverse effects.
            
                  
                  
                  Cyclosporine, Digoxin, Methotrexate 
              Etodolac, like other NSAIDs, through effects on renal
              prostaglandins, may cause changes in the elimination of these drugs leading to
              elevated serum levels of cyclosporine, digoxin, methotrexate, and increased
              toxicity. Nephrotoxicity associated with cyclosporine may also be enhanced.
              Patients receiving these drugs who are given etodolac, or any other NSAID, and
              particularly those patients with altered renal function, should be observed for
              the development of the specific toxicities of these drugs. NSAIDs have been
              reported to competitively inhibit methotrexate accumulation in rabbit kidney
              slices. This may indicate that they could enhance the toxicity of methotrexate.
              Caution should be used when NSAIDs are administered concomitantly with
              methotrexate.
            
                  
                  
                  Diuretics 
              Etodolac has no apparent pharmacokinetic interaction when
              administered with furosemide or hydrochlorothiazide. Nevertheless, clinical
              studies, as well as postmarketing observations have shown that etodolac can
              reduce the natriuretic effect of furosemide and thiazides in some patients. This
              response has been attributed to inhibition of renal prostaglandin synthesis.
              During concomitant therapy with NSAIDs, the patient should be observed closely
              for signs of renal failure (see 
                WARNINGS,
              
                     
                        Renal Effects
                     
                     ), as well as to assure diuretic efficacy.
            
                  
                  
                  Glyburide 
              Etodolac has no apparent pharmacokinetic interaction when
              administered with glyburide.
            
                  
                  
                  Lithium 
              NSAIDs have produced an elevation of plasma lithium levels and a
              reduction in renal lithium clearance. The mean minimum lithium concentration
              increased 15% and the renal clearance was decreased by approximately 20%. These
              effects have been attributed to inhibition of renal prostaglandin synthesis by
              the NSAID. Thus, when NSAIDs and lithium are administered concurrently, subjects
              should be observed carefully for signs of lithium toxicity.
            
                  
                  
                  Phenylbutazone 
              Phenylbutazone causes increase (by about 80%) in the free
              fraction of etodolac. Although in vivo studies have
              not been done to see if etodolac clearance is changed by coadministration of
              phenylbutazone, it is not recommended that they be coadministered.
            
                  
                  
                  Phenytoin 
              Etodolac has no apparent pharmacokinetic interaction when
              administered with phenytoin.
            
                  
                  
                  Warfarin 
              The effects of warfarin and NSAIDs on GI bleeding are
              synergistic, such that users of both drugs together have a risk of serious GI
              bleeding higher than that of users of either drug alone. Short-term
              pharmacokinetic studies have demonstrated that concomitant administration of
              warfarin and etodolac results in reduced protein binding
              of warfarin, but there was no change in the clearance of free warfarin. There
              was no significant difference in the pharmacodynamic effect of warfarin
              administered alone and warfarin administered with etodolac as measured by
              prothrombin time. Thus, concomitant therapy with warfarin and etodolac should
              not require dosage adjustment of either drug. However, caution should be
              exercised because there have been a few spontaneous reports of prolonged
              prothrombin times, with or without bleeding, in etodolac-treated patients
              receiving concomitant warfarin therapy.
            
                  
                  
                  Drug/Laboratory Test Interactions 
              The urine of patients who take etodolac can give a false-positive
              reaction for urinary bilirubin (urobilin) due to the presence of phenolic
              metabolites of etodolac. Diagnostic dip-stick methodology, used to detect ketone
              bodies in urine, has resulted in false-positive findings in some patients
              treated with etodolac. Generally, this phenomenon has not been associated with
              other clinically significant events. No dose relationship has been observed.
            
                  
              Etodolac treatment is associated with a small decrease in serum uric acid
              levels. In clinical trials, mean decreases of 1 to 2 mg/dL were observed in
              arthritic patients receiving etodolac (600 mg to 1000 mg/day) after 4 weeks of
              therapy. These levels then remained stable for up to 1 year of therapy.
            
                  
                  
                  Carcinogenesis, Mutagenesis, and Impairment of
            Fertility 
              No carcinogenic effect of etodolac was observed in mice or rats
              receiving oral doses of 15 mg/kg/day (45 to 89 mg/m2,
              respectively) or less for periods of 2 years or 18 months, respectively.
              Etodolac was not mutagenic in in vitro tests
              performed with S. typhimurium and mouse lymphoma
              cells as well as in an in vivo mouse micronucleus
              test. However, data from the in vitro human
              peripheral lymphocyte test showed an increase in the number of gaps (3.0 to 5.3%
              unstained regions in the chromatid without dislocation) among the
              etodolac-treated cultures (50 to 200 mcg/mL) compared to negative controls
              (2.0%); no other difference was noted between the controls and drug-treated
              groups. Etodolac showed no impairment of fertility in male and female rats up to
              oral doses of 16 mg/kg (94 mg/m2). However, reduced
              implantation of fertilized eggs occurred in the 8 mg/kg group.
            
               
               
            
         