
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  
                  

                  
                  

                  

                  
                  Pharmacodynamics 
              Etodolac is a nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID) that
              exhibits anti-inflammatory, analgesic, and antipyretic activities in animal
              models. The mechanism of action of etodolac, like that of other NSAIDs, is not
              completely understood, but may be related to prostaglandin synthetase
              inhibition.
            
                  
              Etodolac is a racemic mixture of [-]R- and [+]S-etodolac. As with other
              NSAIDs, it has been demonstrated in animals that the [+]S-form is biologically
              active. Both enantiomers are stable and there is no [-]R to [+]S conversion in vivo.
            
                  
                  
                  Pharmacokinetics 
                  
                  
                  Absorption 
                  
              The systemic bioavailability of etodolac is 100% as compared to
              solution and at least 80% as determined from mass balance studies. Etodolac is
              well absorbed and had a relative bioavailability of 100% when 200 mg capsules
              were compared with a solution of etodolac. Based on mass balance studies, the
              systemic availability of etodolac from either the tablet or capsule formulation
              is at least 80%. Etodolac does not undergo significant first-pass metabolism
              following oral administration. Mean (± 1 SD) peak plasma concentrations (Cmax) range from approximately 14 ± 4 to 37 ± 9μg/mL after
              200 to 600 mg single doses and are reached in 80 ± 30 minutes (see tabel 1 for summary of pharmacokinetic parameters). The
              dose-proportionality based on the area under the plasma concentration-time curve
              (AUC) is linear following doses up to 600 mg every 12 hours. Peak concentrations
              are dose proportional for both total and free etodolac following doses up to
              400 mg every 12 hours, but following a 600 mg dose, the peak is about 20% higher
              than predicted on the basis of lower doses. The extent of absorption of etodolac
              is not affected when etodolac is administered after a meal. Food intake,
              however, reduces the peak concentration reached by approximately one-half and
              increases the time to peak concentration by 1.4 to 3.8 hours.
            
                  
                  

                  Distribution
              The mean apparent volume of distribution (Vd/F) of etodolac is
              approximately 390 mL/kg. Etodolac is more than 99% bound to plasma proteins,
              primarily to albumin. The free fraction is less than 1% and is independent of
              etodolac total concentration over the dose range studied. It is not known
              whether etodolac is excreted in human milk; however, based on its
              physical-chemical properties, excretion into breast milk is expected. Data from
              in vitro studies, using peak serum concentrations at
              reported therapeutic doses in humans, show that the etodolac free fraction is
              not significantly altered by acetaminophen, ibuprofen, indomethacin, naproxen,
              piroxicam, chlorpropamide, glipizide, glyburide, phenytoin, and probenecid.
            
                  

                  Metabolism
              Etodolac is extensively metabolized in the liver. The role, if
              any, of a specific cytochrome P450 system in the metabolism of etodolac is
              unknown. Several etodolac metabolites have been identified in human plasma and
              urine. Other metabolites remain to be identified. The metabolites include 6-,
              7-, and 8-hydroxylated-etodolac and etodolac glucuronide. After a single dose of
              14C-etodolac, hydroxylated metabolites accounted for less than 10% of total drug
              in serum. On chronic dosing, hydroxylated-etodolac metabolite does not
              accumulate in the plasma of patients with normal renal function. The extent of
              accumulation of hydroxylated-etodolac metabolites in patients with renal
              dysfunction has not been studied. The hydroxylated-etodolac metabolites undergo
              further glucuronidation followed by renal excretion and partial elimination in
              the feces. 

                  
                  
              Although renal elimination is a significant pathway of excretion for etodolac
              metabolites, no dosing adjustment in patients with mild to moderate renal
              dysfunction is generally necessary. The terminal half-life (t½) of etodolac is 6.4 hours (22% CV).
              In patients with severe renal dysfunction or under going.

            
                  Fecal excretion accounted for 16% of the dose.
                  

                  
                     

                  
                  
                     

                  
                  

               
               
            
         