
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           Patients who are receiving beta agonists may be unresponsive to the usual doses of epinephrine used to treat serious systemic reactions, including anaphylaxis (7.1)
                           Patients should discontinue medications known to suppress the histamine response prior to skin testing including: antihistamine (7.2), tricyclics (7.4), and topical corticosteroids and topical anesthetics (7.3)
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 Beta Adrenergic Drugs
                     
                        Patients receiving beta blocker drugs may not be responsive to beta adrenergic drugs used to treat anaphylaxis10, and may wish to temporarily postpone treatment day of skin testing. All such decisions should be made in consultation with the physician. [see Warnings and Precautions (5.2)
                           ].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 Antihistamines1
                     
                     
                        Skin testing with allergenic extracts should not be performed within 2-3 days of first-generation H1-histamine receptor blockers (e.g., clemastine, diphenhydramine) and within 3 to 10 days of second-generation antihistamines (e.g., loratadine, terfenadine), except for astemizole, which requires an interval of 30-60 days between allergenic extract exposure and use. These products suppress histamine skin test reactions and could mask a positive response.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3 Topical Corticosteroids and Topical Anesthetics1
                     
                     
                        Topical corticosteroids may suppress skin reactivity and should be discontinued at the skin test site for at least 2-3 weeks before skin testing. Topical local anesthetics may suppress flare responses and should be avoided at skin test sites.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4 Tricyclic Antidepressants1
                     
                     
                        Tricyclic antidepressants can have potent antihistamine effects and will affect skin testing. Since use of tricyclics may alter skin test results, dosing for both skin testing and immunotherapy should be done with caution. If tricyclic medication has been recently discontinued, allow 7-14 days prior to skin testing to obviate the antihistamine effect. The risk of anaphylaxis in these patients should be carefully weighed against the risks and benefits of stopping tricyclics.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.5 Other Drugs
                     
                        The suppressive action of other drugs should be considered and emphasizes the need for a histamine positive-control test.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         