
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Mechanism of Action
                     
                        
                           Olmesartan medoxomil
                        
                        Angiotensin II is formed from angiotensin I in a reaction catalyzed by angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE, kininase II). Angiotensin II is the principal pressor agent of the renin-angiotensin system, with effects that include vasoconstriction, stimulation of synthesis and release of aldosterone, cardiac stimulation and renal reabsorption of sodium. Olmesartan blocks the vasoconstrictor effects of angiotensin II by selectively blocking the binding of angiotensin II to the AT1 receptor in vascular smooth muscle. Its action is, therefore, independent of the pathways for angiotensin II synthesis.
                        An AT2 receptor is found also in many tissues, but this receptor is not known to be associated with cardiovascular homeostasis. Olmesartan has more than a 12,500-fold greater affinity for the AT1 receptor than for the AT2 receptor.
                        Blockade of the renin-angiotensin system with ACE inhibitors, which inhibit the biosynthesis of angiotensin II from angiotensin I, is a mechanism of many drugs used to treat hypertension. ACE inhibitors also inhibit the degradation of bradykinin, a reaction also catalyzed by ACE. Because olmesartan medoxomil does not inhibit ACE (kininase II), it does not affect the response to bradykinin. Whether this difference has clinical relevance is not yet known.
                        Blockade of the angiotensin II receptor inhibits the negative regulatory feedback of angiotensin II on renin secretion, but the resulting increased plasma renin activity and circulating angiotensin II levels do not overcome the effect of olmesartan on blood pressure.
                        
                           Hydrochlorothiazide
                        
                        Hydrochlorothiazide is a thiazide diuretic. Thiazides affect the renal tubular mechanisms of electrolyte reabsorption, directly increasing excretion of sodium and chloride in approximately equivalent amounts. Indirectly, the diuretic action of hydrochlorothiazide reduces plasma volume, with consequent increases in plasma renin activity, increases in aldosterone secretion, increases in urinary potassium loss, and decreases in serum potassium. The renin-aldosterone link is mediated by angiotensin II, so co-administration of an angiotensin II receptor antagonist tends to reverse the potassium loss associated with these diuretics.
                        The mechanism of the antihypertensive effect of thiazides is not fully understood.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        
                           
                              General
                           
                        
                        
                           Olmesartan medoxomil
                        
                        Olmesartan medoxomil is rapidly and completely bioactivated by ester hydrolysis to olmesartan during absorption from the gastrointestinal tract.  Olmesartan appears to be eliminated in a biphasic manner with a terminal elimination half-life of approximately 13 hours.  Olmesartan shows linear pharmacokinetics following single oral doses of up to 320 mg and multiple oral doses of up to 80 mg.  Steady-state levels of olmesartan are achieved within 3 to 5 days and no accumulation in plasma occurs with once-daily dosing.
                        The absolute bioavailability of olmesartan is approximately 26%.  After oral administration, the peak plasma concentration (Cmax) of olmesartan is reached after 1 to 2 hours.  Food does not affect the bioavailability of olmesartan.
                        
                           Hydrochlorothiazide
                        
                        When plasma levels have been followed for at least 24 hours, the plasma half-life has been observed to vary between 5.6 and 14.8 hours.
                        
                           
                              Metabolism and Excretion
                           
                        
                        
                           Olmesartan medoxomil
                        
                        Following the rapid and complete conversion of olmesartan medoxomil to olmesartan during absorption, there is virtually no further metabolism of olmesartan.  Total plasma clearance of olmesartan is 1.3 L/h, with a renal clearance of 0.6 L/h.  Approximately 35% to 50% of the absorbed dose is recovered in urine while the remainder is eliminated in feces via the bile.
                        
                           Hydrochlorothiazide
                        
                        Hydrochlorothiazide is not metabolized but is eliminated rapidly by the kidney.  At least 61% of the oral dose is eliminated unchanged within 24 hours.
                        
                           
                              Distribution
                           
                        
                        
                           Olmesartan
                        
                        The volume of distribution of olmesartan is approximately 17 L.  Olmesartan is highly bound to plasma proteins (99%) and does not penetrate red blood cells.  The protein binding is constant at plasma olmesartan concentrations well above the range achieved with recommended doses.
                        In rats, olmesartan crossed the blood-brain barrier poorly, if at all.  Olmesartan passed across the placental barrier in rats and was distributed to the fetus.  Olmesartan was distributed to milk at low levels in rats.
                        
                           Hydrochlorothiazide
                        
                        Hydrochlorothiazide crosses the placental but not the blood-brain barrier and is excreted in breast milk.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        Special Populations
                     
                     
                        
                           Pediatric: The pharmacokinetics of olmesartan have not been  	investigated in patients <18 years of age.
                        
                           Geriatric: The pharmacokinetics of olmesartan were studied in the elderly  	    (≥65 years).  Overall, maximum plasma concentrations of olmesartan were similar in young adults and the elderly.  Modest accumulation of olmesartan was observed in the elderly with repeated dosing; AUC	ss,τ	 was 33% higher in elderly patients, corresponding to an approximate 30% reduction in CL	R	.
                        
                           Gender: Minor differences were observed in the pharmacokinetics of olmesartan in women  	        compared to men.  AUC and C	max	 were 10-15% higher in women than in men.
                        
                           Renal Insufficiency: In patients with renal insufficiency,  	serum concentrations of olmesartan were elevated compared to subjects with normal renal function.  After repeated dosing, the AUC was approximately tripled in patients with severe renal impairment (creatinine clearance <20 mL/min).  The pharmacokinetics of olmesartan in patients undergoing hemodialysis has not been studied.
                        
                           Hepatic Insufficiency: Increases in AUC0-∞ and Cmax for  	    olmesartan were observed in patients with moderate hepatic impairment compared to those in matched controls, with an increase in AUC of about 60%.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                              Drug Interactions: 
                           See 
                              PRECAUTIONS, Drug Interactions.
                        
                        
                           
                              Drug interaction with bile acid sequestering agent colesevelam
                           
                        
                        Concomitant administration of 40 mg olmesartan medoxomil and 3750 mg colesevelam hydrochloride in healthy subjects resulted in 28% reduction in Cmax and 39% reduction in AUC of olmesartan. Lesser effects, 4% and 15% reduction in Cmax and AUC respectively, were observed when olmesartan medoxomil was administered 4 hours prior to colesevelam hydrochloride (see 
                              PRECAUTIONS, Drug Interactions).
                         
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        
                           Olmesartan medoxomil
                        
                        Olmesartan medoxomil doses of 2.5 to 40 mg inhibit the pressor effects of angiotensin I infusion.  The duration of the inhibitory effect was related to dose, with doses of olmesartan medoxomil >40 mg giving >90% inhibition at 24 hours.
                        Plasma concentrations of angiotensin I and angiotensin II and plasma renin activity (PRA) increase after single and repeated administration of olmesartan medoxomil to healthy subjects and hypertensive patients.  Repeated administration of up to 80 mg olmesartan medoxomil had minimal influence on aldosterone levels and no effect on serum potassium.
                        
                           Hydrochlorothiazide
                        
                        After oral administration of hydrochlorothiazide, diuresis begins within 2 hours, peaks in about 4 hours and lasts about 6 to 12 hours.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Clinical Trials
                     
                        
                           Olmesartan medoxomil
                        
                        The antihypertensive effects of olmesartan medoxomil have been demonstrated in seven placebo-controlled studies at doses ranging from 2.5 to 80 mg for 6 to 12 weeks, each showing statistically significant reductions in peak and trough blood pressure.  A total of 2693 patients (2145 olmesartan medoxomil; 548 placebo) with essential hypertension were studied.  Olmesartan medoxomil once daily (QD) lowered diastolic and systolic blood pressure.  The response was dose-related.  An olmesartan medoxomil dose of 20 mg daily produces a trough sitting BP reduction over placebo of about 10/6 mm Hg and a dose of 40 mg daily produces a trough sitting BP reduction over placebo of about 12/7 mm Hg.  Olmesartan medoxomil doses greater than 40 mg had little additional effect.  The onset of the antihypertensive effect occurred within 1 week and was largely manifest after 2 weeks.
                        The blood pressure lowering effect was maintained throughout the 24-hour period with olmesartan medoxomil once daily, with trough-to-peak ratios for systolic and diastolic response between 60 and 80%.
                        The blood pressure lowering effect of olmesartan medoxomil, with and without hydrochlorothiazide, was maintained in patients treated for up to 1 year.  There was no evidence of tachyphylaxis during long-term treatment with olmesartan medoxomil or rebound effect following abrupt withdrawal of olmesartan medoxomil after 1 year of treatment.
                        The antihypertensive effect of olmesartan medoxomil was similar in men and women and in patients older and younger than 65 years.  The effect was smaller in black patients (usually a low-renin population), as has been seen with other ACE inhibitors, angiotensin receptor blockers and beta-blockers.  Olmesartan medoxomil had an additional blood pressure lowering effect when added to hydrochlorothiazide.
                        
                           Olmesartan medoxomil-hydrochlorothiazide
                        
                        In clinical trials 1230 patients were exposed to the combination of olmesartan medoxomil (2.5 mg to 40 mg) and hydrochlorothiazide (12.5 mg to 25 mg).  These trials included one placebo-controlled factorial trial (n=502) in mild-moderate hypertensives with combinations of olmesartan medoxomil (10 mg, 20 mg, 40 mg or placebo) and hydrochlorothiazide (12.5 mg, 25 mg or placebo).  The antihypertensive effect of the combination on trough blood pressure was related to the dose of each component (see table below).
                        


                        


Once-daily dosing with 20 mg olmesartan medoxomil and 12.5 mg hydrochlorothiazide, 40 mg olmesartan medoxomil and 12.5 mg hydrochlorothiazide or 40 mg olmesartan medoxomil and 25 mg hydrochlorothiazide produced mean placebo-adjusted blood pressure reductions at trough (24 hours post-dosing) ranging from 17/8 to 24/14 mm Hg.
                        The onset of the antihypertensive effect occurred within 1 week and was near maximal at 4 weeks.  The antihypertensive effect was independent of gender, but there were too few subjects to identify response differences based on race or age greater than or less than 65 years.  No appreciable changes in trough heart rate were observed with combination therapy in the placebo-controlled trial.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         