
               
               
               12	CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1	Mechanism of Action
                     
                        BRAVELLE® administered for 7 to 12 days produces ovarian follicular growth in women who do not have primary ovarian failure. Treatment with BRAVELLE® in most instances results only in follicular growth and maturation. When sufficient follicular maturation has occurred, hCG must be given to induce ovulation.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3	Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        Single doses of 225 International Units and multiple daily doses (7 days) of 150 International Units of BRAVELLE® were administered to healthy volunteer female subjects while their endogenous FSH was suppressed. Sixteen subjects received BRAVELLE® subcutaneously and 12 received the drug intramuscularly. Serum FSH concentrations were determined. Based on the steady state ratio of FSH Cmax and AUC, subcutaneous and intramuscular administration of BRAVELLE® were not bioequivalent. Multiple doses of BRAVELLE® intramuscular resulted in Cmax and AUC of 77.7% and 81.8% compared to multiple doses of BRAVELLE® subcutaneous. The FSH pharmacokinetic parameters for single and multiple dose BRAVELLE®, administered subcutaneously and intramuscularly are in Table 3.
                        


                     



                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Absorption
                              
                              The subcutaneous route of administration trends toward greater bioavailability than the IM route for single and multiple doses of BRAVELLE®.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Distribution
                              
                              Human tissue or organ distribution of FSH has not been studied for BRAVELLE®.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Metabolism
                              
                              Metabolism of FSH has not been studied for BRAVELLE® in humans.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Elimination
                              
                              The mean elimination half-lives of FSH for subcutaneous and intramuscular single dosing are 31.8 and 37 hours, respectively. However, following multiple dosing (× 7 days) they are 20.6 and 15.2 hours for SC and IM, respectively.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         