
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
                  The following study results were obtained using zileuton immediate-release tablets but the conclusions also apply to ZYFLO CR.
               
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           Zileuton increases theophylline levels. Reduce theophylline dose and monitor levels. (7.1)
                           Zileuton increases warfarin levels.  Monitor prothrombin time and adjust warfarin dose accordingly. (7.2)
                           Zileuton increases propranolol levels and beta-blocker activity.  Monitor appropriately. (7.3)
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1	Theophylline
                     
                        In a drug-interaction study in 16 healthy subjects, co-administration of multiple doses of zileuton immediate-release tablets (800 mg every 12 hours) and theophylline (200 mg every 6 hours) for 5 days resulted in a significant decrease (approximately 50%) in steady-state clearance of theophylline, an approximate doubling of theophylline AUC, and an increase in theophylline Cmax (by 73%).  The elimination half-life of theophylline was increased by 24%.  Also, during co-administration, theophylline-related adverse reactions were observed more frequently than after theophylline alone.  Upon initiation of ZYFLO CR in patients receiving theophylline, the theophylline dosage should be reduced by approximately one-half and plasma theophylline concentrations monitored.  Similarly, when initiating therapy with theophylline in a patient receiving ZYFLO CR, the maintenance dose and/or dosing interval of theophylline should be adjusted accordingly and guided by serum theophylline determinations.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2	Warfarin
                     
                        Concomitant administration of multiple doses of zileuton immediate-release tablets (600 mg every 6 hours) and warfarin (fixed daily dose obtained by titration in each subject) to 30 healthy male subjects resulted in a 15% decrease in R-warfarin clearance and an increase in AUC of 22%.  The pharmacokinetics of S-warfarin were not affected.  These pharmacokinetic changes were accompanied by a clinically significant increase in prothrombin times.  Monitoring of prothrombin time, or other suitable coagulation tests, with the appropriate dose titration of warfarin is recommended in patients receiving concomitant ZYFLO CR and warfarin therapy.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3	Propranolol
                     
                        Co-administration of zileuton immediate-release tablets and propranolol results in a significant increase in propranolol concentrations.  Administration of a single 80 mg dose of propranolol in 16 healthy male subjects who received zileuton immediate-release tablets 600 mg every 6 hours for 5 days resulted in a 42% decrease in propranolol clearance.  This resulted in an increase in propranolol Cmax, AUC, and elimination half-life by 52%, 104%, and 25%, respectively.  There was an increase in β-blockade as shown by a decrease in heart rate associated with the co-administration of these drugs.  Patients concomitantly on ZYFLO CR and propranolol should be closely monitored and the dose of propranolol reduced as necessary. No formal drug-drug interaction studies between zileuton and other beta-adrenergic blocking agents (i.e., β-blockers) have been conducted.  It is reasonable to employ appropriate clinical monitoring when these drugs are co-administered with ZYFLO CR.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4	Other Concomitant Drug Therapy
                     
                        Drug-drug interaction studies conducted in healthy subjects between zileuton immediate-release tablets and prednisone and ethinyl estradiol (oral contraceptive), drugs known to be metabolized by the CYP3A4 isoenzyme, have shown no significant interaction.  However, no formal drug-drug interaction studies between zileuton and CYP3A4 inhibitors, such as ketaconazole, have been conducted.  It is reasonable to employ appropriate clinical monitoring when these drugs are co-administered with ZYFLO CR.
                        Drug-drug interaction studies in healthy subjects have been conducted with zileuton immediate-release tablets and digoxin, phenytoin, sulfasalazine, and naproxen.  There was no significant interaction between zileuton and any of these drugs. 
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         