
                     
                     
                     Drug Interactions
                     
                        Concurrent use of butorphanol with central nervous system depressants (e.g., alcohol, barbiturates, tranquilizers, and antihistamines) may result in increased central nervous system depressant effects. When used concurrently with such drugs, the dose of butorphanol should be the smallest effective dose and the frequency of dosing reduced as much as possible when administered concomitantly with drugs that potentiate the action of opioids.
                        In healthy volunteers, the pharmacokinetics of a 1 mg dose of butorphanol administered as butorphanol tartrate nasal solution were not affected by the coadministration of a single 6 mg subcutaneous dose of sumatriptan. However, in another study in healthy volunteers, the pharmacokinetics of butorphanol were significantly altered (29% decrease in AUC and 38% decrease in Cmax) when a 1 mg dose of butorphanol tartrate nasal solution was administered 1 minute after a 20 mg dose of sumatriptan nasal solution. (The two drugs were administered in opposite nostrils.) When butorphanol tartrate nasal solution was administered 30 minutes after the sumatriptan nasal solution, the AUC of butorphanol increased 11% and Cmax decreased 18%. In neither case were the pharmacokinetics of sumatriptan affected by coadministration with butorphanol tartrate nasal solution. These results suggest that the analgesic effect of butorphanol tartrate nasal solution may be diminished when it is administered shortly after sumatriptan nasal solution, but by 30 minutes any such reduction in effect should be minimal.
                        The safety of using butorphanol tartrate nasal solution and IMITREX® (sumatriptan) Nasal Spray during the same episode of migraine has not been established. However, it should be noted that both products are capable of producing transient increases in blood pressure.
                        The pharmacokinetics of a 1 mg dose of butorphanol administered as butorphanol tartrate nasal solution were not affected by the coadministration of cimetidine (300 mg QID). Conversely, the administration of butorphanol tartrate nasal solution (1 mg butorphanol QID) did not alter the pharmacokinetics of a 300 mg dose of cimetidine.
                        It is not known if the effects of butorphanol are altered by other concomitant medications that affect hepatic metabolism of drugs (erythromycin, theophylline, etc.), but physicians should be alert to the possibility that a smaller initial dose and longer intervals between doses may be needed.
                        The fraction of butorphanol tartrate nasal solution absorbed is unaffected by the concomitant administration of a nasal vasoconstrictor (oxymetazoline), but the rate of absorption is decreased. Therefore, a slower onset can be anticipated if butorphanol tartrate nasal solution is administered concomitantly with, or immediately following, a nasal vasoconstrictor.
                        No information is available about the use of butorphanol concurrently with MAO inhibitors.
                     
                     
                  
               