
               
               
               12	CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1	Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Studies suggest that EPA reduces hepatic very low-density lipoprotein triglycerides (VLDL-TG) synthesis and/or secretion and enhances TG clearance from circulating VLDL particles. Potential mechanisms of action include increased β-oxidation; inhibition of acyl-CoA:1,2-diacylglycerol acyltransferase (DGAT); decreased lipogenesis in the liver; and increased plasma lipoprotein lipase activity.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Absorption: After oral administration, VASCEPA is de-esterified during the absorption process and the active metabolite EPA is absorbed in the small intestine and enters the systemic circulation mainly via the thoracic duct lymphatic system. Peak plasma concentrations of EPA were reached approximately 5 hours following oral doses of VASCEPA.
                              VASCEPA was administered with or following a meal in all clinical studies; no food effect studies were performed. Take VASCEPA with or following a meal.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Distribution: The mean volume of distribution at steady-state of EPA is approximately 88 liters. The majority of EPA circulating in plasma is incorporated in phospholipids, triglycerides and cholesteryl esters, and <1% is present as the unesterified fatty acid. Greater than 99% of unesterified EPA is bound to plasma proteins.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Metabolism and Excretion: EPA is mainly metabolized by the liver via beta-oxidation similar to dietary fatty acids. Beta oxidation splits the long carbon chain of EPA into acetyl Coenzyme A, which is converted into energy via the Krebs cycle. Cytochrome P450-mediated metabolism is a minor pathway of elimination of EPA. The total plasma clearance of EPA at steady state is 684 mL/hr. The plasma elimination half-life (t1/2) of EPA is approximately 89 hours. VASCEPA does not undergo renal excretion.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Drug-Drug Interactions
                              
                              VASCEPA was studied at the 4 g/day dose level with the following medications which are typical substrates of cytochrome P450 enzymes, and no drug-drug interactions were observed:
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Omeprazole: In a drug-drug interaction study with 28 healthy adult subjects, VASCEPA 4 g/day at steady-state did not significantly change the steady-state AUCτ or Cmax of omeprazole when co-administered at 40 mg/day to steady-state.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Rosiglitazone:  In a drug-drug interaction study with 28 healthy adult subjects, VASCEPA 4 g/day at steady-state did not significantly change the single dose AUC or Cmax of rosiglitazone at 8 mg.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Warfarin: In a drug-drug interaction study with 25 healthy adult subjects, VASCEPA 4 g/day at steady-state did not significantly change the single dose AUC or Cmax of R- and S-warfarin or the anti-coagulation pharmacodynamics of warfarin when co-administered as racemic warfarin at 25 mg.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Atorvastatin:  In a drug-drug interaction study of 26 healthy adult subjects, VASCEPA 4 g/day at steady-state did not significantly change the steady-state AUCτ or Cmax of atorvastatin, 2-hydroxyatorvastatin, or 4-hydroxyatorvastatin when co-administered with atorvastatin 80 mg/day to steady-state.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Specific Populations
                              
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Gender: When administered VASCEPA in clinical trials, plasma total EPA concentrations did not differ significantly between men and women.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Pediatric: The pharmacokinetics of VASCEPA has not been studied in pediatric patients.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Hepatic or Renal Impairment: VASCEPA has not been studied in patients with renal or hepatic impairment.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         