
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
                  No drug interaction trials have been performed with PREZCOBIX or with darunavir coadministered with cobicistat as single entities. Drug interaction trials have been conducted with darunavir coadministered with ritonavir and with cobicistat alone.
               
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           Coadministration of PREZCOBIX with other drugs can alter the concentration of other drugs and other drugs may alter the concentrations of darunavir or cobicistat. Consult the full prescribing information prior to and during treatment for potential drug interactions. (4, 5.6, 7, 12.3).
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1   Potential for PREZCOBIX to Affect Other Drugs
                     
                        When evaluated separately, darunavir and cobicistat both inhibited CYP3A and CYP2D6. Cobicistat inhibits the following transporters: p-glycoprotein (P-gp), BCRP, OATP1B1 and OATP1B3. Therefore, coadministration of PREZCOBIX with drugs that are primarily metabolized by CYP3A and/or CYP2D6 or are substrates of P-gp, BCRP, OATP1B1 or OATP1B3 may result in increased plasma concentrations of such drugs, which could increase or prolong their therapeutic effect and can be associated with adverse events (see Table 2). Based on in vitro data, cobicistat is not expected to induce CYP1A2 or CYP2B6 and based on in vivo data, cobicistat is not expected to induce MDR1 or, in general, CYP3A to a clinically significant extent. The induction effect of cobicistat on CYP2C9, CYP2C19, or UGT1A1 is unknown, but is expected to be low based on CYP3A in vitro induction data.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2   Potential for Other Drugs to Affect PREZCOBIX
                     
                        Darunavir is metabolized by CYP3A. Cobicistat is metabolized by CYP3A, and to a minor extent, by CYP2D6. Drugs that induce CYP3A activity are expected to increase the clearance of darunavir and cobicistat, resulting in lowered plasma concentrations of darunavir and cobicistat which may lead to loss of therapeutic effect and development of resistance. Coadministration of PREZCOBIX and other drugs that inhibit CYP3A may result in increased plasma concentrations of darunavir and cobicistat (see Table 2).
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3   Potentially Significant Drug Interactions
                     
                        Table 2 provides dosing recommendations for expected clinically relevant interactions with PREZCOBIX. These recommendations are based on either drug interaction trials or predicted interactions due to the expected magnitude of interaction and potential for serious adverse events or loss of efficacy.
                        


                        


Clinically relevant drug-drug interactions are not anticipated with concomitant use of darunavir and cobicistat with rilpivirine, dolutegravir, raltegravir, nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors (NRTIs) other than didanosine, or acid modifying medications (antacids, H2-receptor antagonists, proton pump inhibitors).
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         