
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        PREZCOBIX is a fixed-dose combination of an HIV-1 antiviral drug, darunavir and a CYP3A inhibitor, cobicistat [see Microbiology (12.4)].
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Cardiac Electrophysiology
                              Separate thorough QT trials have been conducted for darunavir coadministered with ritonavir and for cobicistat. The effect of darunavir coadministered with cobicistat on the QT interval has not been evaluated.
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Darunavir: In an open-label, randomized, placebo- and active-controlled, four-way crossover trial, 40 healthy subjects were administered supratheraputic doses of darunavir 1600 mg and ritonavir 100 mg once daily and darunavir 800 mg and ritonavir 100 mg twice daily (approximately 2 times the recommended darunavir dose) for seven days. At the mean maximum darunavir concentration of 6599 ng/mL observed in this trial, the mean increase in QTcF was 2.2 ms with a 90% two-sided confidence interval (CI) of -2.0 to 6.3 ms. When evaluating the 2-sided 90% CI on the time-matched mean changes in QTcF versus placebo control, the upper bounds of both darunavir coadministered with ritonavir groups never exceeded the 10 ms boundary. In the setting of this trial, darunavir coadministered with ritonavir did not appear to prolong the QTc interval.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Cobicistat: The effect of a single dose of cobicistat 250 mg and 400 mg (approximately 1.7 and 2.7 times the recommended dose) on QTc interval was evaluated in a randomized, placebo- and active-controlled (moxifloxacin 400 mg) four-period crossover thorough QT trial in 48 healthy subjects. In this trial, no significant QTc prolongation effect of cobicistat was detected. The dose of 400 mg cobicistat is expected to provide information on a high exposure clinical scenario. Prolongation of the PR interval was noted in subjects receiving cobicistat in the same trial. The maximum mean (95% upper confidence bound) difference in PR from placebo after baseline-correction was 9.5 (12.1) msec for 250 mg and 20.2 (22.8) msec for 400 mg of cobicistat.
                                    
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Effects on Serum Creatinine
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Cobicistat: The effect of cobicistat on serum creatinine was investigated in a trial in subjects with normal renal function (eGFR ≥ 80 mL/min, N=12) and mild-to-moderate renal impairment (eGFR 50–79 mL/min, N=18). A statistically significant decrease in the estimated glomerular filtration rate, calculated by Cockcroft-Gault method (eGFRCG) from baseline, was observed after 7 days of treatment with cobicistat 150 mg among subjects with normal renal function (-9.9 ± 13.1 mL/min) and mild-to-moderate renal impairment (-11.9 ± 7.0 mL/min). No statistically significant changes in eGFRCG were observed compared to baseline for subjects with normal renal function or mild-to-moderate renal impairment 7 days after cobicistat was discontinued. The actual glomerular filtration rate, as determined by the clearance of probe drug iohexol, was not altered from baseline following treatment of cobicistat among subjects with normal renal function and mild-to-moderate renal impairment, indicating that cobicistat inhibits tubular secretion of creatinine, reflected as a reduction in eGFRCG, without affecting the actual glomerular filtration rate.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        The pharmacokinetics of darunavir coadministered with cobicistat (150 mg) have been evaluated in healthy adult subjects and in HIV-1 infected subjects.
                        Darunavir is primarily metabolized by CYP3A. Cobicistat inhibits CYP3A, thereby increasing the plasma concentrations of darunavir.
                        Under fed (535 total kcal, 171 kcal from fat, 268 kcal from carbohydrates, 96 kcal from protein) and fasted conditions in healthy subjects, the 90% confidence intervals when comparing darunavir exposure between PREZCOBIX and darunavir 800 mg coadministered with cobicistat 150 mg as single entities were within 80–125%.
                        Darunavir exposure when comparing darunavir coadministered with cobicistat (as single entities) to darunavir coadministered with ritonavir was evaluated in a relative bioavailability trial [see cobicistat full prescribing information]. Table 3 displays the population pharmacokinetic estimates of darunavir after oral administration of darunavir 800 mg coadministered with ritonavir 100 mg once daily (based on sparse sampling in 335 subjects in Trial TMC114-C211 and 280 subjects in Trial TMC114-C229) and darunavir 800 mg coadministered with cobicistat 150 mg once daily administered as single entities (based on sparse sampling in 298 subjects in Trial GS-US-216-0130) to HIV-1 infected subjects.
                        


                     



                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Absorption and Bioavailability
                              
                              In healthy subjects, under fed conditions, when single doses of the darunavir and cobicistat fixed dose combination tablet were administered, the maximum plasma concentration was achieved within approximately 4 to 4.5 hours for darunavir and approximately 4 to 5 hours for cobicistat.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Effects of Food on Oral Absorption
                              
                              When compared to fasted conditions, administration of PREZCOBIX to healthy adult subjects with a high-fat meal (965 total kcal: 129 kcal from protein, 236 kcal from carbohydrates and 600 kcal from fat) resulted in a 70% increase in AUC(0–inf) and a 127% increase in Cmax for darunavir. Cobicistat exposures were not affected by food. PREZCOBIX should be taken with food.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Distribution
                              
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Darunavir: Darunavir is approximately 95% bound to plasma proteins. Darunavir binds primarily to plasma alpha 1-acid glycoprotein (AAG).
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Cobicistat: Cobicistat is 97–98% bound to human plasma proteins and the mean blood–to-plasma ratio was approximately 0.5.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Metabolism
                              
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Darunavir: In vitro experiments with human liver microsomes (HLMs) indicate that darunavir primarily undergoes oxidative metabolism. Darunavir is extensively metabolized by CYP enzymes, primarily by CYP3A. A mass balance trial in healthy subjects showed that after single dose administration of 400 mg 14C-darunavir coadministered with 100 mg ritonavir, the majority of the radioactivity in the plasma was due to darunavir. At least 3 oxidative metabolites of darunavir have been identified in humans; all showed activity that was at least 90% less than the activity of darunavir against wild-type HIV-1.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Cobicistat: Cobicistat is metabolized by CYP3A and to a minor extent by CYP2D6 enzymes and does not undergo glucuronidation.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Elimination
                              
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Darunavir: A mass balance trial in healthy subjects showed that after single dose administration of 400 mg 14C-darunavir coadministered with 100 mg ritonavir, approximately 79.5% and 13.9% of the administered dose of 14C-darunavir was recovered in the feces and urine, respectively. Unchanged darunavir accounted for approximately 41.2% and 7.7% of the administered dose in feces and urine, respectively.
                                    When single doses of the darunavir and cobicistat fixed dose combination tablet were administered, the terminal elimination half-life of darunavir was approximately 7 hours under fed conditions.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Cobicistat: When single doses of the darunavir and cobicistat fixed dose combination tablet were administered, the terminal elimination half-life of cobicistat was approximately 4 hours under fed conditions. With single dose administration of 14C-cobicistat after multiple dosing of cobicistat for six days, the mean percent of the administered dose excreted in feces and urine was 86.2% and 8.2%, respectively.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Specific Populations
                              
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Hepatic impairment
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                       
                                       
                                          
                                             Darunavir: Darunavir is primarily metabolized by the liver. The steady-state pharmacokinetic parameters of darunavir were similar after multiple dose coadministration of darunavir 600 mg coadministered with ritonavir 100 mg twice daily to subjects with normal hepatic function (n=16), mild hepatic impairment (Child-Pugh Class A, n=8), and moderate hepatic impairment (Child-Pugh Class B, n=8). The effect of severe hepatic impairment on the pharmacokinetics of darunavir has not been evaluated [see 
                                                Use in Specific Populations (8.6)].
                                          
                                       
                                       
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                       
                                       
                                          
                                             Cobicistat: Cobicistat is primarily metabolized by the liver. A trial evaluating the pharmacokinetics of cobicistat was performed in non-HIV-1 infected subjects with moderate hepatic impairment. No clinically relevant differences in cobicistat pharmacokinetics were observed between subjects with moderate hepatic impairment (Child-Pugh Class B) and healthy subjects. The effect of severe hepatic impairment on the pharmacokinetics of cobicistat has not been evaluated [see Use in Specific Populations (8.6)].
                                          
                                       
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Hepatitis B or Hepatitis C Virus Co-infection
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                       
                                       
                                          
                                             Darunavir: In HIV-infected subjects taking darunavir coadministered with ritonavir, the 48 week analysis of the data from clinical studies in HIV-1 infected subjects indicated that hepatitis B and/or hepatitis C virus co-infection status had no apparent effect on the exposure of darunavir.
                                          The effect of hepatitis B and/or C virus infection on the pharmacokinetics of PREZCOBIX have not been evaluated.
                                       
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Renal Impairment
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                       
                                       
                                          
                                             Darunavir: Population pharmacokinetic analysis showed that the pharmacokinetics of darunavir were not significantly affected in HIV-1 infected subjects with moderate renal impairment taking darunavir coadministered with ritonavir (CrCL between 30–60 mL/min, n=20). There are no pharmacokinetic data available in HIV-1 infected patients with severe renal impairment or end stage renal disease taking darunavir coadminstered with either ritonavir or cobicistat [see Use in Specific Populations (8.7)].
                                          
                                       
                                       
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                       
                                       
                                          
                                             Cobicistat: A trial of the pharmacokinetics of cobicistat was performed in non-HIV infected subjects with severe renal impairment (estimated creatinine clearance below 30 mL/min). No clinically relevant differences in cobicistat pharmacokinetics were observed between subjects with severe renal impairment and healthy subjects [see Use in Special Populations (8.7)].
                                          
                                       
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Gender
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                       
                                       
                                          
                                             Darunavir: In HIV-infected subjects taking darunavir coadministered with ritonavir, population pharmacokinetic analysis showed higher mean darunavir exposure in HIV-1 infected females compared to males. This difference is not clinically relevant.
                                       
                                       
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                       
                                       
                                          
                                             Cobicistat: No clinically relevant pharmacokinetic differences have been observed between men and women for cobicistat.
                                       
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Race
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                       
                                       
                                          
                                             Darunavir: Population pharmacokinetic analysis of darunavir in HIV-1 infected subjects taking darunavir coadministered with ritonavir indicated that race had no apparent effect on the exposure to darunavir.
                                       
                                       
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                       
                                       
                                          
                                             Cobicistat: Population pharmacokinetic analysis of cobicistat in HIV-1 infected subjects indicated that race had no clinically relevant effect on the exposure of cobicistat.
                                       
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Geriatric Patients
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                       
                                       
                                          
                                             Darunavir: In HIV-infected subjects taking darunavir coadministered with ritonavir, population pharmacokinetic analysis showed no considerable differences in darunavir pharmacokinetics for ages 18 to 75 years compared to ages greater than or equal to 65 years (n=12) [see
                                                 Use in Specific Populations (8.5)].
                                       
                                       
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                       
                                       
                                          
                                             Cobicistat: Insufficient data are available to determine whether potential differences exist in the pharmacokinetics of cobicistat in geriatric (65 years of age and older) subjects compared to younger subjects.
                                       
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Pediatric Patients
                                    
                                    The pharmacokinetics of PREZCOBIX in pediatric subjects have not been established.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.4 Microbiology
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Mechanism of Action
                              
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Darunavir: Darunavir is an inhibitor of the HIV-1 protease. It selectively inhibits the cleavage of HIV-1 encoded Gag-Pol polyproteins in infected cells, thereby preventing the formation of mature virus particles.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Cobicistat: Cobicistat is a selective, mechanism-based inhibitor of cytochromes P450 of the CYP3A subfamily. Inhibition of CYP3A-mediated metabolism by cobicistat enhances the systemic exposure of CYP3A substrates.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Antiviral Activity
                              
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Darunavir: Darunavir exhibits activity against laboratory strains and clinical isolates of HIV-1 and laboratory strains of HIV-2 in acutely infected T-cell lines, human peripheral blood mononuclear cells, and human monocytes/macrophages with median EC50 values ranging from 1.2 to 8.5 nM (0.7 to 5.0 ng/mL). Darunavir demonstrates antiviral activity in cell culture against a broad panel of HIV-1 group M (A, B, C, D, E, F, G), and group O primary isolates with EC50 values ranging from less than 0.1 to 4.3 nM. The EC50 value of darunavir increases by a median factor of 5.4 in the presence of human serum. Darunavir did not show antagonism when studied in combination with the HIV protease inhibitors (PIs) amprenavir, atazanavir, indinavir, lopinavir, nelfinavir, ritonavir, saquinavir, or tipranavir, the N(t)RTIs abacavir, didanosine, emtricitabine, lamivudine, stavudine, tenofovir, zalcitabine, or zidovudine, the NNRTIs delavirdine, efavirenz, etravirine, rilpivirine, or nevirapine, and the fusion inhibitor enfuvirtide.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Cobicistat: Cobicistat does not inhibit recombinant HIV-1 protease in a biochemical assay and has no detectable antiviral activity in cell culture against HIV-1. The antiviral activity in cell culture of approved HIV-1 antiretroviral drugs was not antagonized by cobicistat.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Resistance
                              
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                          Cell Culture
                                       
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                       
                                       
                                          
                                             Darunavir: HIV-1 isolates with a decreased susceptibility to darunavir have been selected in cell culture and obtained from subjects treated with darunavir coadministered with ritonavir. Darunavir-resistant virus derived in cell culture from wild-type HIV-1 had 21- to 88-fold decreased susceptibility to darunavir and developed 2 to 4 of the following amino acid substitutions S37D, R41E/T, K55Q, H69Q, K70E, T74S, V77I, or I85V in the protease. Selection in cell culture of darunavir resistant HIV-1 from nine HIV-1 strains harboring multiple PI resistance-associated substitutions resulted in the overall emergence of 22 mutations in the protease gene, coding for amino acid substitutions L10F, V11I, I13V, I15V, G16E, L23I, V32I, L33F, S37N, M46I, I47V, I50V, F53L, L63P, A71V, G73S, L76V, V82I, I84V, T91A/S, and Q92R, of which L10F, V32I, L33F, S37N, M46I, I47V, I50V, L63P, A71V, and I84V were the most prevalent. These darunavir-resistant viruses had at least eight protease substitutions and exhibited 50- to 641-fold decreases in darunavir susceptibility with final EC50 values ranging from 125 nM to 3461 nM.
                                       
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                          Clinical Studies
                                       
                                    
                                    The resistance profile of PREZCOBIX is driven by darunavir. Cobicistat does not select any HIV resistance substitutions, due to its lack of antiviral activity. For the clinical resistance profile of darunavir, refer to the darunavir full prescribing information. 
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Cross-resistance
                              
                              Cross-resistance among PIs has been observed. Darunavir has a less than 10-fold decreased susceptibility in cell culture against 90% of 3309 clinical isolates resistant to amprenavir, atazanavir, indinavir, lopinavir, nelfinavir, ritonavir, saquinavir, and/or tipranavir showing that viruses resistant to these PIs remain susceptible to darunavir. A less than 10-fold decreased susceptibility was observed for the other PIs in 26% to 96% of these PI resistant clinical isolates (nelfinavir (26%), ritonavir (34%), lopinavir (46%), indinavir (57%), atazanavir (59%), saquinavir (64%), amprenavir (70%), and tipranavir (96%).
                              Cross-resistance between darunavir and nucleoside/nucleotide reverse transcriptase inhibitors, non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors, fusion inhibitors, CCR5 co-receptor antagonists, or integrase strand transfer inhibitors is unlikely because the viral targets are different.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Baseline Genotype/Phenotype and Virologic Outcome Analyses
                              
                              Baseline International AIDS Society (IAS)-defined PI resistance substitutions confer reduced virologic response to darunavir. Please refer to the "Baseline Genotype/Phenotype and Virologic Outcome Analyses" section in the darunavir full prescribing information.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         