
               
               
               7	DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           CNS depressants: Increased risk of respiratory depression, hypotension, profound sedation, coma or death. When combined therapy with CNS depressant is contemplated, the dose of one or both agents should be reduced. (7.2)
                           Mixed agonist/antagonist opioids (i.e., pentazocine, nalbuphine, and butorphanol): May reduce analgesic effect and/or precipitate withdrawal symptoms. (7.3)
                           Cimetidine: Combination use may precipitate confusion, disorientation, respiratory depression, apnea, seizures. (7.4)
                           Anticholinergics: May result in urinary retention and/or severe constipation, which may lead to paralytic ileus. (7.5)
                           Monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs): Potentiate the action of opioids. OPANA ER should not be used in patients taking MAOIs or within 14 days of stopping such treatment. (7.6)
                           Dose adjustment for CYP3A450 or 2C9-mediated drug-drug interactions is not required. (7.1)
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1   Drug-Drug Interactions
                     
                        Oxymorphone is highly metabolized principally in the liver and undergoes reduction or conjugation with glucuronic acid to form both active and inactive metabolites [see Pharmacokinetics (12.3)]). Clinical drug interaction studies with OPANA ER showed no induction of CYP450 3A4 or 2C9 enzyme activity, indicating that no dose adjustment for CYP 3A4- or 2C9-mediated drug-drug interactions is required [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2   Use with CNS Depressants
                     
                        The concomitant use of other CNS depressants including sedatives, hypnotics, tranquilizers, general anesthetics, phenothiazines, other opioids, and alcohol may produce additive CNS depressant effects.  OPANA ER should be started at 1/3 to 1/2 of the usual dose in patients who are concurrently receiving other central nervous system depressants because respiratory depression, hypotension, and profound sedation, coma and death may result, and titrated slowly as necessary for adequate pain relief.
                        When combined therapy with any of the above medications is considered, the dose of one or both agents should be reduced [see Dosage and Administration (2.5) and Warnings and Precautions (5.4)].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3   Interactions with Mixed Agonist/Antagonist Opioid Analgesics
                     
                        Agonist/antagonist analgesics (i.e., pentazocine, nalbuphine, butorphanol, or buprenorphine) should be administered with caution to a patient who has received or is receiving a course of therapy with a pure opioid agonist analgesic, such as oxymorphone.  In this situation, mixed agonist/antagonist analgesics may reduce the analgesic effect of oxymorphone and/or may precipitate withdrawal symptoms.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4   Cimetidine
                     
                        CNS side effects have been reported (e.g., confusion, disorientation, respiratory depression, apnea, seizures) following coadministration of cimetidine with opioid analgesics; a causal relationship has not been established.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.5   Anticholinergics
                     
                        Anticholinergics or other medications with anticholinergic activity when used concurrently with opioid analgesics may result in increased risk of urinary retention and/or severe constipation, which may lead to paralytic ileus.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.6	MAO Inhibitors
                     
                        OPANA ER is not recommended for use in patients who have received MAO inhibitors within 14 days, because severe and unpredictable potentiation by MAO inhibitors has been reported with opioid analgesics.  No specific interaction between oxymorphone and MAO inhibitors has been observed, but caution in the use of any opioid in patients taking this class of drugs is appropriate.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         