
                     
                     
                     
                        Drug Interactions
                     
                     
                        Limited clinical data on potential drug interactions are available.

                        
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           Drugs Metabolized By the Hepatic P450 System
                           
                              As tretinoin capsules are metabolized by the hepatic P450 system, there is a potential for alteration of pharmacokinetics parameters in patients administered concomitant medications that are also inducers or inhibitors of this system. Medications that generally induce hepatic P450 enzymes include rifampicin, glucocorticoids, phenobarbital and pentobarbital. Medications that generally inhibit hepatic P450 enzymes include ketoconazole, cimetidine, erythromycin, verapamil, diltiazem and cyclosporine. To date there are no data to suggest that co-use with these medications increases or decreases either efficacy or toxicity of tretinoin capsules.

                              
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           Agents Known to Cause Pseudotumor Cerebri/Intracranial Hypertension (Such as Tetracyclines)
                           
                              Tretinoin capsules may cause pseudotumor cerebri/intracranial hypertension. Concomitant administration of tretinoin capsules and agents known to cause pseudotumor cerebri/intracranial hypertension as well might increase the risk of this condition (see WARNINGS).

                              
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           Vitamin A
                           
                              As with other retinoids, tretinoin capsules must not be administered in combination with vitamin A because symptoms of hypervitaminosis A could be aggravated.

                              
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           Anti-fibrinolytic Agents (Such as Tranexamic Acid, Aminocaproic Acid, or Aprotinin)
                           
                              Cases of fatal thrombotic complications have been reported rarely in patients concomitantly treated with tretinoin capsules and anti-fibrinolytic agents. Therefore, caution should be exercised when administering tretinoin capsules concomitantly with these agents (see PRECAUTIONS: General).

                              
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               