
               
               
               12  CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1  Mechanism of Action
                     
                        DepoCyt® (cytarabine liposome injection) is a sustained-release formulation of the active ingredient cytarabine designed for direct administration into the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF).  Cytarabine is a cell cycle phase-specific antineoplastic agent, affecting cells only during the S-phase of cell division.  Intracellularly, cytarabine is converted into cytarabine-5-triphosphate (ara-CTP), which is the active metabolite.  The mechanism of action is not completely understood, but it appears that ara-CTP acts primarily through inhibition of DNA polymerase.  Incorporation into DNA and RNA may also contribute to cytarabine cytotoxicity.  Cytarabine is cytotoxic to proliferating mammalian cells in culture.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3  Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        Following intrathecal administration of DepoCyt 50 mg, peak levels of free CSF cytarabine were observed within 1 hour of dosing and ranged from 30 to 50 mcg/mL.  The terminal half-life for the free CSF cytarabine ranged from of 5.9 to 82.4 hours.  Systemic exposure to cytarabine was negligible following intrathecal administration of DepoCyt 50 mg.
                        Metabolism and Elimination
                        The primary route of elimination of cytarabine is metabolism to the inactive compound ara-U, followed by urinary excretion of ara-U.  In contrast to systemically administered cytarabine, which is rapidly metabolized to ara-U, conversion to ara-U in the CSF is negligible after intrathecal administration because of the significantly lower cytidine deaminase activity in the CNS tissues and CSF.  The CSF clearance rate of cytarabine is similar to the CSF bulk flow rate of 0.24 mL/min.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         