
               
               
               DRUG INTERACTIONS SECTION
               
                  Fluvoxamine The effect of fluvoxamine on the pharmacokinetics of 
tizanidine was studied in 10 healthy subjects. The Cmax, AUC, and half-life of 
tizanidine increased by 12-fold, 33-fold, and 3-fold, respectively. These 
changes resulted in significant decreases in blood pressure, increased 
drowsiness, and psychomotor impairment. (See 
                        CONTRAINDICATIONS
                      and 
                        WARNINGS
                     ).  
                  
                  
                     Ciprofloxacin 
                  
                  
                     The effect of ciprofloxacin on the pharmacokinetics 
of tizanidine was studied in 10 healthy subjects. The Cmax and AUC of tizanidine 
increased by 7-fold and 10-fold, respectively. These changes resulted in 
significant decreases in blood pressure, increased drowsiness, and psychomotor 
impairment. (See 
                        CONTRAINDICATIONS
                      and 
                        WARNINGS
                     ). 
                  CYP1A2 Inhibitors 
                  
                  
                     The interaction between tizanidine and either 
fluvoxamine or ciprofloxacin is most likely due to inhibition of CYP1A2 by 
fluvoxamine or ciprofloxacin. Although there have been no clinical studies 
evaluating the effects of other CYP1A2 inhibitors on tizanidine, other CYP1A2 
inhibitors, such as zileuton, other fluoroquinolones, antiarrythmics 
(amiodarone, mexiletine, propafenone and verapamil), cimetidine, famotidine oral 
contraceptives, acyclovir and ticlopidine, may also lead to substantial 
increases in tizanidine blood concentrations. (See 
                        WARNINGS
                     ) 
                  Oral Contraceptives
                  No specific pharmacokinetic study was conducted to investigate interaction 
between oral contraceptives and tizanidine. Retrospective analysis of population 
pharmacokinetic data following single and multiple dose administration of 4 mg 
tizanidine, however, showed that women concurrently taking oral contraceptives 
had 50% lower clearance of tizanidine compared to women not on oral 
contraceptives (see 
                        PRECAUTIONS
                     ).
               
               
            
         