
               
               
               Drug Interactions
               
                  
                     Carisoprodol:
                  
                   The sedative effect of carisoprodol and other CNS depressants (e.g., alcohol, benzodiazepines, opioids, tricyclic antidepressants) may be additive. Therefore, caution should be exercised with patients who take more than one of these CNS depressants simultaneously. Concomitant use of carisoprodol and meprobamate, a metabolite of carisoprodol, is not recommended (see 
                        WARNINGS, Sedation
                     ).
								
                  Carisoprodol is metabolized in the liver by CYP2C19 to form meprobamate (see 
                        CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
                     ).  Co-administration of CYP2C19 inhibitors, such as omeprazole or fluvoxamine, with carisoprodol could result in increased exposure of carisoprodol and decreased exposure of meprobamate. Co-administration of CYP2C19 inducers, such as rifampin or St. John’s Wort, with carisoprodol could result in decreased exposure of carisoprodol and increased exposure of meprobamate. Low dose aspirin also showed an induction effect of CYP2C19. The full pharmacological impact of these potential alterations of exposures in terms of either efficacy or safety of carisoprodol is unknown.
                  
                     Aspirin: Clinically important interactions may occur when certain drugs or alcohol are administered concomitantly with aspirin.
                  
                     Alcohol: Concomitant use of aspirin with ≥ 3 alcoholic drinks may increase the risk of GI bleeding (see 
                        WARNINGS, Serious Gastrointestinal Adverse Reactions
                     ). 
                  
                     Anticoagulants: Concomitant use of aspirin and anticoagulants (e.g., heparin, warfarin, clopidogrel) increase the risk of GI bleeding (see 
                        WARNINGS, Serious Gastrointestinal Adverse Reactions
                     ). Additionally, aspirin can displace warfarin from protein binding sites, leading to prolongation of the international normalized ratio (INR).
                  
                     Antihypertensives: The concomitant administration of aspirin with angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors, angiotensin receptor blockers (ARBs), beta-blockers, and diuretics may diminish the hypotensive effects of these anti-hypertensive products due to aspirin’s inhibition of renal
prostaglandins, which may lead to decreased renal blood flow and increased sodium and fluid retention. Concomitant use of aspirin and acetazolamide can lead to high serum concentrations of acetazolamide due to competition at the renal tubule for secretion.
                  
                     Corticosteroids: Concomitant administration of aspirin and corticosteroids may decrease salicylate plasma levels.
                  
                     Methotrexate: Aspirin may enhance the toxicity of methotrexate due to displacement of methotrexate from its plasma protein binding sites and/or reduction of the renal clearance of methotrexate.
                  
                     Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs): The concurrent use of aspirin with selective and nonselective NSAIDs increases the risk of serious GI adverse reactions (see 
                        WARNINGS, Serious Gastrointestinal Adverse Reactions
                     ).
								
                  
                     Oral Hypoglycemics Agents:  Aspirin may increase the serum glucose lowering action of insulin and sulfonylureas leading to hypoglycemia.
                  
                     Products that effect urinary pH:  Ammonium chloride and other drugs that acidify the urine can elevate plasma salicylate concentrations. In contrast, antacids, by alkalinizing the urine, may decrease plasma salicylate concentrations.
                  
                     Uricosuric Agents: Salicylates antagonize the uricosuric action of probenecid and sulfinpyrazone.
               
               
            
         