
               
               
               7. DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                             Granisetron Hydrochloride Injection has been administered safely with benzodiazepines, neuroleptics, and anti-ulcer medications. (7) 
                             Does not appear to interact with emetogenic cancer chemotherapies. (7) 
                             Inducers or inhibitors of CYP450 enzymes may change the clearance and therefore the half-life of granisetron. (7) 
                             Coadministration of granisetron hydrochloride with drugs known to prolong the QT interval and/or are arrhythmogenic may result in clinical consequences. (7)  
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        Granisetron does not induce or inhibit the cytochrome P-450 drug-metabolizing enzyme system in vitro. There have been no definitive drug-drug interaction studies to examine pharmacokinetic or pharmacodynamic interaction with other drugs; however, in humans, Granisetron Hydrochloride Injection has been safely administered with drugs representing benzodiazepines, neuroleptics and anti-ulcer medications commonly prescribed with antiemetic treatments. Granisetron Hydrochloride Injection also does not appear to interact with emetogenic cancer chemotherapies. Because granisetron is metabolized by hepatic cytochrome P-450 drug-metabolizing enzymes, inducers or inhibitors of these enzymes may change the clearance and, hence, the half-life of granisetron. In addition, the activity of the cytochrome P-450 subfamily 3A4 (involved in the metabolism of some of the main narcotic analgesic agents) is not modified by granisetron hydrochloride in vitro. 
                        In in vitro human microsomal studies, ketoconazole inhibited ring oxidation of granisetron hydrochloride. However, the clinical significance of in vivo pharmacokinetic interactions with ketoconazole is not known. In a human pharmacokinetic study, hepatic enzyme induction with phenobarbital resulted in a 25% increase in total plasma clearance of intravenous granisetron hydrochloride. The clinical significance of this change is not known. 
                        QT prolongation has been reported with granisetron hydrochloride. Use of granisetron hydrochloride in patients concurrently treated with drugs known to prolong the QT interval and/or are arrhythmogenic may result in clinical consequences.
                        Serotonin syndrome (including altered mental status, autonomic instability, and neuromuscular symptoms) has been described following the concomitant use of 5-HT3 receptor antagonists and other serotonergic drugs, including selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) and serotonin and noradrenaline reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs) [see Warnings and Precautions (5.4)].
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         