
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  
                     
                        Absorption
                     
                  
                  Following 60-minute intravenous infusions of 200 mg and 400 mg ciprofloxacin to normal volunteers, the mean maximum serum concentrations achieved were 2.1 and 4.6 mcg/mL, respectively; the concentrations at 12 hours were 0.1 and 0.2 mcg/mL, respectively.
                  


                  


The pharmacokinetics of ciprofloxacin are linear over the dose range of 200 to 400 mg administered intravenously. Comparison of the pharmacokinetic parameters following the 1st and 5th IV dose on a q12h regimen indicates no evidence of drug accumulation. 
                  The absolute bioavailability of oral ciprofloxacin is within a range of 70 to 80% with no substantial loss by first pass metabolism. An intravenous infusion of 400 mg ciprofloxacin given over 60 minutes every 12 hours has been shown to produce an area under the serum concentration time curve (AUC) equivalent to that produced by a 500 mg oral dose given every 12 hours. An intravenous infusion of 400 mg ciprofloxacin given over 60 minutes every 8 hours has been shown to produce an AUC at steady-state equivalent to that produced by a 750 mg oral dose given every 12 hours. A 400 mg IV dose results in a Cmax similar to that observed with a 750 mg oral dose. An infusion of 200 mg ciprofloxacin given every 12 hours produces an AUC equivalent to that produced by a 250 mg oral dose given every 12 hours.
                  


                  



                     
                        Distribution
                     
                  
                  After intravenous administration, ciprofloxacin is present in saliva, nasal and bronchial secretions, sputum, skin blister fluid, lymph, peritoneal fluid, bile, and prostatic secretions. It has also been detected in the lung, skin, fat, muscle, cartilage, and bone. Although the drug diffuses into cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), CSF concentrations are generally less than 10% of peak serum concentrations. Levels of the drug in the aqueous and vitreous chambers of the eye are lower than in serum.
                  
                     
                        Metabolism
                     
                  
                  After IV administration, three metabolites of ciprofloxacin have been identified in human urine which together account for approximately 10% of the intravenous dose. The binding of ciprofloxacin to serum proteins is 20 to 40%. Ciprofloxacin is an inhibitor of human cytochrome P450 1A2 (CYP1A2) mediated metabolism. Coadministration of ciprofloxacin with other drugs primarily metabolized by CYP1A2 results in increased plasma concentrations of these drugs and could lead to clinically significant adverse events of the coadministered drug (see 
                        CONTRAINDICATIONS
                        ,
                      
                        WARNINGS
                        ,
                      and 
                        PRECAUTIONS: Drug Interactions
                     ).
                  
                     
                        Excretion
                     
                  
                  The serum elimination half-life is approximately 5 to 6 hours and the total clearance is around 35 L/hr. After intravenous administration, approximately 50% to 70% of the dose is excreted in the urine as unchanged drug. Following a 200 mg IV dose, concentrations in the urine usually exceed 200 mcg/mL 0 to 2 hours after dosing and are generally greater than 15 mcg/mL 8 to 12 hours after dosing. Following a 400 mg IV dose, urine concentrations generally exceed 400 mcg/mL 0 to 2 hours after dosing and are usually greater than 30 mcg/mL 8 to 12 hours after dosing. The renal clearance is approximately 22 L/hr. The urinary excretion of ciprofloxacin is virtually complete by 24 hours after dosing.
                  Although bile concentrations of ciprofloxacin are several fold higher than serum concentrations after intravenous dosing, only a small amount of the administered dose (<1%) is recovered from the bile as unchanged drug. Approximately 15% of an IV dose is recovered from the feces within 5 days after dosing.
                  
                     
                        Special Populations
                     
                  
                  Pharmacokinetic studies of the oral (single dose) and intravenous (single and multiple dose) forms of ciprofloxacin indicate that plasma concentrations of ciprofloxacin are higher in elderly subjects (>65 years) as compared to young adults. Although the Cmax is increased 16 to 40%, the increase in mean AUC is approximately 30%, and can be at least partially attributed to decreased renal clearance in the elderly. Elimination half-life is only slightly (~20%) prolonged in the elderly. These differences are not considered clinically significant. (See 
                        PRECAUTIONS: Geriatric Use
                     .)
                  
                     
                        Patients with Renal Impairment
                     
                  
                  In patients with reduced renal function, the half-life of ciprofloxacin is slightly prolonged and dosage adjustments may be required. (See 
                        DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION
                     .)
                  
                     
                        Patients with Hepatic Impairment
                     
                  
                  In preliminary studies in patients with stable chronic liver cirrhosis, no significant changes in ciprofloxacin pharmacokinetics have been observed. However, the kinetics of ciprofloxacin in patients with acute hepatic insufficiency have not been fully elucidated.
                  
                     
                        Pediatrics
                     
                  
                  Following a single oral dose of 10 mg/kg ciprofloxacin suspension to 16 children ranging in age from 4 months to 7 years, the mean Cmax was 2.4 mcg/mL (range: 1.5 to 3.4 mcg/mL) and the mean AUC was 9.2 mcg•h/mL (range: 5.8 to 14.9 mcg•h/mL). There was no apparent age-dependence, and no notable increase in Cmax or AUC upon multiple dosing (10 mg/kg TID). In children with severe sepsis who were given intravenous ciprofloxacin (10 mg/kg as a 1-hour infusion), the mean Cmax was 6.1 mcg/mL (range: 4.6 to 8.3 mcg/mL) in 10 children less than 1 year of age; and 7.2 mcg/mL (range: 4.7 to 11.8 mcg/mL) in 10 children between 1 and 5 years of age. The AUC values were 17.4 mcg•h/mL (range: 11.8 to 32.0 mcg•h/mL) and 16.5 mcg•h/mL (range: 11.0 to 23.8 mcg•h/mL) in the respective age groups. These values are within the range reported for adults at therapeutic doses. Based on population pharmacokinetic analysis of pediatric patients with various infections, the predicted mean half-life in children is approximately 4 to 5 hours, and the bioavailability of the oral suspension is approximately 60%.
                  
                     
                        Drug-drug Interactions
                     
                  
                  Concomitant administration with tizanidine is contraindicated (see 
                        CONTRAINDICATIONS
                     ). The potential for pharmacokinetic drug interactions between ciprofloxacin and theophylline, caffeine, cyclosporins, phenytoin, sulfonylurea glyburide, metronidazole, warfarin, probenecid, and piperacillin sodium has been evaluated. (See 
                        WARNINGS
                      and 
                        PRECAUTIONS: Drug Interactions
                     .)
                  
                     
                        Microbiology
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Mechanism of Action
                     
                  
                  The bactericidal action of ciprofloxacin results from inhibition of the enzymes topoisomerase II (DNA gyrase) and topoisomerase IV (both Type II topoisomerases), which are required for bacterial DNA replication, transcription, repair, and recombination. 
                  
                     
                        Mechanism of Resistance
                     
                  
                  The mechanism of action of fluoroquinolones, including ciprofloxacin, is different from that of penicillins, cephalosporins, aminoglycosides, macrolides, and tetracyclines; therefore, microorganisms resistant to these classes of drugs may be susceptible to ciprofloxacin. Resistance to fluoroquinolones occurs primarily by either mutations in the DNA gyrases, decreased outer membrane permeability, or drug efflux. 
                        In vitro
                      resistance to ciprofloxacin develops slowly by multiple step mutations. Resistance to ciprofloxacin due to spontaneous mutations occurs at a general frequency of between <10-9 to 1x10-6.
                  
                     
                        Cross Resistance
                     
                  
                  There is no known cross-resistance between ciprofloxacin and other classes of antimicrobials.
                  Ciprofloxacin has been shown to be active against most isolates of the following bacteria, both 
                        in vitro
                      and in clinical infections as described in the 
                        INDICATIONS AND USAGE
                      section of the package insert for Ciprofloxacin Injection, USP in 5% dextrose.
                  
                     
                        Gram-positive bacteria
                     
                     

                     
                        Enterococcus faecalis
                      (vancomycin-susceptible isolates only)

                     
                        Staphylococcus aureus
                      (methicillin-susceptible isolates only)

                     
                        Staphylococcus epidermidis
                      (methicillin-susceptible isolates only)

                     
                        Staphylococcus saprophyticus
                     
                     

                     
                        Streptococcus pneumoniae
                      (penicillin-susceptible isolates only)

                     
                        Streptococcus pyogenes
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Gram-negative bacteria

                        
                        Citrobacter koseri (diversus)            Morganella morganii
                     
                     

                     
                        Citrobacter freundii                          Proteus mirabilis
                     
                     

                     
                        Enterobacter cloacae                        Proteus vulgaris
                     
                     

                     
                        Escherichia coli                                Providencia rettgeri
                     
                     

                     
                        Haemophilus influenzae                   Providencia stuartii
                     
                     

                     
                        Haemophilus parainfluenzae           Pseudomonas aeruginosa
                     
                     

                     
                        Klebsiella pneumoniae                     Serratia marcescens
                     
                     

                     
                        Moraxella catarrhalis
                     
                  
                  Ciprofloxacin has been shown to be active against 
                        Bacillus anthracis
                      both 
                        in vitro
                      and by use of serum levels as a surrogate marker. (See 
                        INDICATIONS AND USAGE
                      and 
                        INHALATIONAL ANTHRAX – ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
                        .
                     )
                  The following 
                        in vitro
                      data are available, 
                        but their clinical significance is unknown.
                      At least 90 percent of the following bacteria exhibit an 
                        in vitro
                      minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) less than or equal to the susceptible breakpoint for ciprofloxacin (≤1 mcg/mL). However, the efficacy of ciprofloxacin in treating clinical infections due to these bacteria 
                        has not been
                      established in adequate and well-controlled clinical trials.
                  
                     
                        Gram-positive bacteria
                      

                     
                        Staphylococcus haemolyticus
                      (methicillin-susceptible isolates only)

                     
                        Staphylococcus hominis 
                     (methicillin-susceptible isolates only)

                     
                        Bacillus anthracis
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Gram-negative bacteria
                     
                     

                     
                        Acinetobacter lwoffi
                      

                     
                        Aeromonas hydrophila
                     
                     

                     
                        Edwardsiella tarda
                      

                     
                        Enterobacter aerogenes
                     
                     

                     
                        Klebsiella oxytoca
                     
                     

                     
                        Legionella pneumophila
                     
                     

                     
                        Pasteurella multocida
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Susceptibility Test Methods
                     
                  
                  When available, the clinical microbiology laboratory should provide the results of 
                        in vitro 
                     susceptibility test results for antimicrobial drug products used in resident hospitals to the physician as periodic reports that describe the susceptibility profile of nosocomial and community-acquired pathogens. These reports should aid the physician in selecting an antibacterial drug product for treatment. 
                  
                     
                        •
                        
                           Dilution Techniques
                        
                        
Quantitative methods are used to determine antimicrobial minimum inhibitory concentrations (MICs). These MICs provide estimates of the susceptibility of bacteria to antimicrobial compounds. The MICs should be determined using a standardized test method (broth and/or agar).1,3,4 The MIC values should be interpreted according to criteria provided in Table 1.
                     
                        •
                        
                           Diffusion Techniques
                        
                        
Quantitative methods that require measurement of zone diameters can also provide reproducible estimates of the susceptibility of bacteria to antimicrobial compounds. The zone size provides an estimate of the susceptibility of bacteria to antimicrobial compounds. The zone size should be determined using a standardized test method.2,3,4 This procedure uses paper disks impregnated with 5 mcg ciprofloxacin to test the susceptibility of bacteria to ciprofloxacin. The disc diffusion interpretive criteria are provided in Table 1. 
                  
                  


                  


A report of “Susceptible” indicates that the antimicrobial is likely to inhibit growth of the pathogen if the antimicrobial compound reaches the concentrations at the site of infection necessary to inhibit growth of the pathogen. A report of “Intermediate” indicates that the result should be considered equivocal, and, if the microorganism is not fully susceptible to alternative, clinically feasible drugs, the test should be repeated. This category implies possible clinical applicability in body sites where the drug is physiologically concentrated or in situations where high dosage of drug can be used. This category also provides a buffer zone that prevents small uncontrolled technical factors from causing major discrepancies in interpretation. A report of “Resistant” indicates that the antimicrobial is not likely to inhibit growth of the pathogen if the antimicrobial compound reaches the concentration usually achievable at the infection site; other therapy should be selected.
                  
                     
                        •
                        
                           Quality Control
                        
                        
Standardized susceptibility test procedures require the use of laboratory controls to monitor the accuracy and precision of supplies and reagents used in the assay, and the techniques of the individuals performing the test.1,2,3,4 Standard ciprofloxacin powder should provide the following range of MIC values noted in Table 2. For the diffusion technique using the ciprofloxacin 5 mcg disk the criteria in Table 2 should be achieved.
                  
                  


