
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Golimumab is a human monoclonal antibody that binds to both the soluble and transmembrane bioactive forms of human TNFα. This interaction prevents the binding of TNFα to its receptors, thereby inhibiting the biological activity of TNFα (a cytokine protein). There was no evidence of the golimumab antibody binding to other TNF superfamily ligands; in particular, the golimumab antibody did not bind or neutralize human lymphotoxin. Golimumab did not lyse human monocytes expressing transmembrane TNF in the presence of complement or effector cells.
                        Elevated TNFα levels in the blood, synovium, and joints have been implicated in the pathophysiology of rheumatoid arthritis. TNFα is an important mediator of the articular inflammation that is characteristic of RA. Golimumab modulated the in vitro biological effects mediated by TNF in several bioassays, including the expression of adhesion proteins responsible for leukocyte infiltration (E-selectin, ICAM-1 and VCAM-1) and the secretion of proinflammatory cytokines (IL-6, IL-8, G-CSF and GM-CSF).  The clinical relevance of these findings is unknown.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        Following treatment with SIMPONI ARIA in patients with RA, decreases from baseline were observed in tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinases 1 (TIMP-1), matrix metalloproteinase-1 (MMP-1), matrix metalloproteinase-3 (MMP-3), resistin, interleukin-6 (IL-6), macrophage inflammatory protein-1 (MIP-1b), vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), serum amyloid A (SAA), S100A12, and high sensitivity C-Reactive protein (hsCRP). Conversely, increases from baseline were observed in tartrate-resistant acid phosphatase (TRAP-5b). The clinical relevance of this information is not known.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Absorption
                              
                              Following a single intravenous administration of 2 mg/kg SIMPONI ARIA, a mean Cmax of 44.4 ±11.3 µg/mL was observed in patients with RA. Data directly comparing 2 mg/kg intravenous administration and 50 mg subcutaneous administration are not available.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Distribution
                              
                              Following a single intravenous administration of 2 mg/kg SIMPONI ARIA, the mean volume of distribution was estimated to be 115 ± 19 mL/kg in healthy subjects, and 151 ± 61 mL/kg in patients with RA. The volume of distribution of golimumab may indicate that golimumab is distributed primarily in the circulatory system with limited extravascular distribution.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Elimination
                              
                              The elimination pathways for golimumab have not been characterized.
                              Following a single intravenous administration of 2 mg/kg SIMPONI ARIA, the systemic clearance of golimumab was estimated to be 6.9 ± 2.0 mL/day/kg in healthy subjects and 7.6 ± 2.0 mL/day/kg in patients with RA. The mean terminal half-life was estimated to be 12 ± 3 days in healthy subjects and the mean terminal half-life in RA patients was 14 ± 4 days.
                              When 2 mg/kg SIMPONI ARIA was administered intravenously to patients with RA at weeks 0, 4 and every 8 weeks thereafter, serum concentrations reached steady state by Week 12. Following IV administration, concomitant administration of methotrexate decreases the clearance of SIMPONI ARIA by approximately 9% based on population PK analysis. In addition, concomitant administration of methotrexate decreases the SIMPONI ARIA clearance by reducing the development of anti-golimumab antibodies. With concomitant use of MTX, treatment with 2 mg/kg golimumab every 8 weeks resulted in a mean steady-state trough serum concentration of approximately 0.4 ± 0.4 µg/mL in patients with active RA despite MTX therapy.
                              Population PK analysis indicated that concomitant use of NSAIDs, oral corticosteroids or sulfasalazine did not influence the apparent clearance of SIMPONI following SC administration.
                              Patients who developed anti-golimumab antibodies generally had low trough steady-state serum concentrations of golimumab.
                              No formal study of the effect of renal or hepatic impairment on the PK of golimumab was conducted.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Linearity
                              
                              Golimumab exhibited approximately dose-proportional pharmacokinetics in patients with RA over the dose range of 0.1 to 10.0 mg/kg following a single intravenous dose.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Effect of weight on pharmacokinetics
                              
                              Following intravenous administration, patients with higher body weight tended to have higher serum golimumab concentrations than patients with lower body weights when golimumab was administered on a mg/kg (body weight) basis. However, based on population PK analysis, there were no clinically relevant differences in golimumab exposure following intravenous administration of 2 mg/kg SIMPONI ARIA in patients across a range of different body weights.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         