
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           Biologics, including abatacept and anakinra: Increased risk of serious infection (5.1, 5.5, 5.6, 5.7, 7.2)
                           Live vaccines should not be given with SIMPONI ARIA (5.9, 7.3).
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1    Methotrexate
                     
                        SIMPONI ARIA should be used with methotrexate (MTX) [see Clinical Studies (14)]. Following IV administration, concomitant administration of methotrexate decreases the clearance of SIMPONI ARIA by approximately 9% based on population PK analysis. In addition, concomitant administration of methotrexate decreases the SIMPONI ARIA clearance by reducing the development of anti-golimumab antibodies.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2   Biologic Products for RA
                     
                        An increased risk of serious infections has been seen in clinical RA studies of other TNF-blockers used in combination with anakinra or abatacept, with no added benefit; therefore, use of SIMPONI ARIA with other biologic products, including abatacept or anakinra is not recommended [see Warnings and Precautions (5.5 and 5.6)]. A higher rate of serious infections has also been observed in RA patients treated with rituximab who received subsequent treatment with a TNF-blocker. The concomitant use of SIMPONI ARIA with biologics approved to treat RA is not recommended because of the possibility of an increased risk of infection.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3   Live Vaccines/Therapeutic Infectious Agents
                     
                        Live vaccines should not be given concurrently with SIMPONI ARIA [see Warnings and Precautions (5.9)].
                        Therapeutic infectious agents should not be given concurrently with SIMPONI ARIA [see Warnings and Precautions (5.9)].
                        Infants born to women treated with SIMPONI ARIA during their pregnancy may be at increased risk of infection for up to 6 months. Administration of live vaccines to infants exposed to SIMPONI ARIA in utero is not recommended for 6 months following the mother's last SIMPONI ARIA infusion during pregnancy [see Use in Specific Populations (8.1)].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4   Cytochrome P450 Substrates
                     
                        The formation of CYP450 enzymes may be suppressed by increased levels of cytokines (e.g., TNFα) during chronic inflammation. Therefore, it is expected that for a molecule that antagonizes cytokine activity, such as golimumab, the formation of CYP450 enzymes could be normalized. Upon initiation or discontinuation of SIMPONI ARIA in patients being treated with CYP450 substrates with a narrow therapeutic index, monitoring of the effect (e.g., warfarin) or drug concentration (e.g., cyclosporine or theophylline) is recommended and the individual dose of the drug product may be adjusted as needed.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         