
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              Anti-Hypertensives: May increase risk of hypotension. Monitor blood pressure (7.1)
                           
                              CYP3A4 Moderate and Weak Inhibitors: May increase risk of hypotension. Monitor blood pressure. Dose reduction of NYMALIZE may be needed. Avoid grapefruit juice. (7.2)
                           
                              CYP3A4 Moderate and Weak Inducers: May reduce efficacy of NYMALIZE. Dose increase may be needed (7.3)
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 Blood Pressure Lowering Drugs
                     
                        Nimodipine may increase the blood pressure lowering effect of concomitantly administered anti-hypertensives such as diuretics, beta-blockers, ACE inhibitors, angiotensin receptor blockers, other calcium channel blockers, α-adrenergic blockers, PDE5 inhibitors, and α-methyldopa. In Europe, nimodipine was observed to occasionally intensify the effect of antihypertensive drugs taken concomitantly by hypertensive patients; this phenomenon was not observed in North American clinical trials. Blood pressure should be carefully monitored, and dose adjustment of the blood pressure lowering drug(s) may be necessary.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 CYP3A4 Inhibitors
                     
                        Nimodipine plasma concentration can be significantly increased when concomitantly administered with strong CYP3A4 inhibitors. As a consequence, the blood pressure lowering effect may be increased. Therefore, the concomitant administration of NYMALIZE and strong CYP3A4 inhibitors should generally be avoided [see Warnings and Precautions (5.3)
                           ]. Strong CYP3A4 inhibitors include some members of the following classes:
                        
                           
                              -macrolide antibiotics (e.g., clarithromycin, telithromycin,),
                           
                              -HIV protease inhibitors (e.g. indinavir, nelfinavir, ritonavir, saquinavir),
                           
                              -HCV protease inhibitors (e.g., boceprevir, telaprevir),
                           
                              -azole antimycotics (e.g., ketoconazole, itraconazole, posaconazole, voriconazole),
                           
                              -conivaptan, delaviridine, nefazodone
                        
                        Nimodipine plasma concentration can also be increased in the presence of moderate and weak inhibitors of CYP3A4. If nimodipine is concomitantly administered with these drugs, blood pressure should be monitored, and a reduction of the nimodipine dose may be necessary. Moderate and weak CYP3A4 inhibitors include alprozalam, ameprenavir, amiodarone, aprepitant, atazanavir, cimetidine, cyclosporine, diltiazem, erythromycin, fluconazole, fluoxetine, isoniazid, oral contraceptives, quinuprestin/dalforpristin, valproic acid, and verapamil.
                        A study in eight healthy volunteers has shown a 50% increase in mean peak nimodipine plasma concentrations and a 90% increase in mean area under the curve, after a one-week course of cimetidine at 1,000 mg/day and nimodipine at 90 mg/day. This effect may be mediated by the known inhibition of hepatic cytochrome P-450 (CYP) by cimetidine, which could decrease first-pass metabolism of nimodipine.
                        Grapefruit juice inhibits CYP3A4. Ingestion of grapefruit/grapefruit juice is not recommended while taking nimodipine.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3 CYP3A4 Inducers
                     
                        Nimodipine plasma concentration and efficacy may be significantly reduced when concomitantly administered with strong CYP3A4 inducers. Therefore, concomitant use of NYMALIZE with strong CYP3A4 inducers (e.g., carbamazepine, phenobarbital, phenytoin, rifampin, St. John's Wort) should generally be avoided [see Warnings and Precautions (5.4)].
                        Moderate and weak inducers of CYP3A4 may also reduce the efficacy of nimodipine. Patients on these should be closely monitored for lack of effectiveness, and a nimodipine dosage increase may be required. Moderate and weak CYP3A4 inducers include, for example: amprenavir, aprepitant, armodafinil, bosentan, efavirnenz, etravirine, Echinacea, modafinil, nafcillin, pioglitazone, prednisone, rufinamide, and vemurafenib.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         