
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  
                     Mechanism of Action: ProAmatine
                     ® forms an active metabolite, desglymidodrine, that is an 
alpha1-agonist, and exerts its actions via activation of 
the alpha-adrenergic receptors of the arteriolar and venous vasculature, 
producing an increase in vascular tone and elevation of blood pressure. 
Desglymidodrine does not stimulate cardiac beta-adrenergic receptors. 
Desglymidodrine diffuses poorly across the blood-brain barrier, and is therefore 
not associated with effects on the central nervous system.
                  Administration of ProAmatine
                     ® 
results in a rise in standing, sitting, and supine systolic and diastolic blood 
pressure in patients with orthostatic hypotension of various etiologies. 
Standing systolic blood pressure is elevated by approximately 15 to 30 mmHg at 1 
hour after a 10-mg dose of midodrine, with some effect persisting for 2 to 3 
hours. ProAmatine
                     ® has no 
clinically significant effect on standing or supine pulse rates in patients with 
autonomic failure.
                  
                     Pharmacokinetics:
                     ProAmatine
                     ® is a prodrug, i.e., the 
therapeutic effect of orally administered midodrine is due to the major 
metabolite desglymidodrine, formed by deglycination of midodrine. After oral 
administration, ProAmatine
                     ® is 
rapidly absorbed. The plasma levels of the prodrug peak after about half an 
hour, and decline with a half-life of approximately 25 minutes, while the 
metabolite reaches peak blood concentrations about 1 to 2 hours after a dose of 
midodrine and has a half-life of about 3 to 4 hours. The absolute 
bioavailability of midodrine (measured as desglymidodrine) is 93%. The 
bioavailability of desglymidodrine is not affected by food. Approximately the 
same amount of desglymidodrine is formed after intravenous and oral 
administration of midodrine. Neither midodrine nor desglymidodrine is bound to 
plasma proteins to any significant extent.
                  
                     Metabolism and Excretion: Thorough metabolic studies 
have not been conducted, but it appears that deglycination of midodrine to 
desglymidodrine takes place in many tissues, and both compounds are metabolized 
in part by the liver. Neither midodrine nor desglymidodrine is a substrate for 
monoamine oxidase.
                  Renal elimination of midodrine is insignificant. The renal clearance of 
desglymidodrine is of the order of 385 mL/minute, most, about 80%, by active 
renal secretion. The actual mechanism of active secretion has not been studied, 
but it is possible that it occurs by the base-secreting pathway responsible for 
the secretion of several other drugs that are bases (see also 
                        Potential for Drug 
Interactions
                     ).
                  
                  
                  Clinical Studies Midodrine has been studied in 3 principal controlled trials, one 
of 3-weeks duration and 2 of 1 to 2 days duration. All studies were randomized, 
double-blind and parallel-design trials in patients with orthostatic hypotension 
of any etiology and supine-to-standing fall of systolic blood pressure of at 
least 15 mmHg accompanied by at least moderate dizziness/lightheadedness. 
Patients with pre-existing sustained supine hypertension above 180/110 mmHg were 
routinely excluded. In a 3-week study in 170 patients, most previously untreated 
with midodrine, the midodrine-treated patients (10 mg t.i.d., with the last dose 
not later than 6 P.M.) had significantly higher (by about 20 mmHg) 1-minute 
standing systolic pressure 1 hour after dosing (blood pressures were not 
measured at other times) for all 3 weeks. After week 1, midodrine-treated 
patients had small improvements in dizziness/lightheadedness/unsteadiness scores 
and global evaluations, but these effects were made difficult to interpret by a 
high early drop-out rate (about 25% vs 5% on placebo). Supine and sitting blood 
pressure rose 16/8 and 20/10 mmHg, respectively, on average.
                  In a 2-day study, after open-label midodrine, known midodrine responders 
received midodrine 10 mg or placebo at 0, 3, and 6 hours. One-minute standing 
systolic blood pressures were increased 1 hour after each dose by about 15 mmHg 
and 3 hours after each dose by about 12mmHg; 3-minute standing pressures were 
increased also at 1, but not 3, hours after dosing. There were increases in 
standing time seen intermittently 1 hour after dosing, but not at 3 hours.
                  In a 1-day, dose-response trial, single doses of 0, 2.5, 10, and 20 mg of 
midodrine were given to 25 patients. The 10- and 20-mg doses produced increases 
in standing 1- minute systolic pressure of about 30 mmHg at 1 hour; the increase 
was sustained in part for 2 hours after 10 mg and 4 hours after 20 mg. Supine 
systolic pressure was =200 mmHg in 22% of patients on 10mg and 45% of patients 
on 20 mg; elevated pressures often lasted 6 hours or more.
                  
                     Special Populations
                  
                  A study with 16 patients undergoing hemodialysis demonstrated that ProAmatine
                     ® is removed by dialysis.
               
               
            
         