
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  Central Nervous System: Oxycodone is a pure agonist opioid whose principal therapeutic 
action is analgesia. Other therapeutic effects of oxycodone include anxiolysis, 
euphoria and feeling of relaxation. Like all pure opioid agonists, there is no 
ceiling effect to analgesia, such as is seen with partial agonists or non-opioid 
analgesics. The precise mechanism of the analgesic action is unknown. However, 
specific CNS opioid receptors for endogenous compounds with opioid-like activity 
have been identified throughout the brain and spinal cord and play a role in the 
analgesic effects of this drug.
                  Oxycodone produces respiratory depression by direct action on brain stem 
respiratory centers. The respiratory depression involves both a reduction in the 
responsiveness of the brain stem respiratory centers to increases in carbon 
dioxide tension and to electrical stimulation.
                  Oxycodone depresses the cough reflex by direct effect on the cough center in 
the medulla. Antitussive effects may occur with doses lower than those usually 
required for analgesia.
                  Oxycodone causes miosis, even in total darkness. Pinpoint pupils are a sign 
of opioid overdose but are not pathognomonic. Marked mydriasis rather than 
miosis may be seen due to hypoxia in overdose situations.
                  
                  
                  Gastrointestinal Tract And Other Smooth Muscle: Oxycodone causes a reduction in motility associated with an 
increase in smooth muscle tone in the antrum of the stomach and duodenum. 
Digestion of food in the small intestine is delayed and propulsive contractions 
are decreased. Propulsive peristaltic waves in the colon are decreased, while 
tone may be increased to the point of spasm resulting in constipation. Other 
opioid-induced effects may include a reduction in gastric, biliary and 
pancreatic secretions, spasm of sphincter of Oddi, and transient elevations in 
serum amylase.
                  
                  
                  Cardiovascular System: Oxycodone may produce release of histamine with or without 
associated peripheral vasodilation. Manifestations of histamine release and/or 
peripheral vasodilation may include pruritus, flushing, red eyes, sweating, 
and/or orthostatic hypotension.
                  
                  
                  Concentration—Efficacy Relationships 
(Pharmacodynamics): Studies in normal volunteers and patients reveal predictable 
relationships between oxycodone dosage and plasma oxycodone concentrations, as 
well as between concentrations and certain expected opioid effects. In normal 
volunteers these include pupillary constriction, sedation and overall “drug 
effect” and in patients, analgesia and feelings of “relaxation”. In non-tolerant 
patients, analgesia is not usually seen at a plasma oxycodone concentration of 
less than 5-10 ng/mL.
                  As with all opioids, the minimum effective plasma concentration for analgesia 
will vary widely among patients, especially among patients who have been 
previously treated with potent agonist opioids. As a result, patients need to be 
treated with individualized titration of dosage to the desired effect. The 
minimum effective analgesic concentration of oxycodone for any individual 
patient may increase with repeated dosing due to an increase in pain and/or the 
development of tolerance.
                  
                  
                  Concentration—Adverse Experience Relationships: Oxycodone Hydrochloride Capsules are associated with typical 
opioid-related adverse experiences similar to those seen with all opioids. There 
is a general relationship between increasing oxycodone plasma concentration and 
increasing frequency of dose-related opioid adverse experiences such as nausea, 
vomiting, CNS effects and respiratory depression. In opioid-tolerant patients, 
the situation is altered by the development of tolerance to opioid-related side 
effects, and the relationship is poorly understood. As with all opioids, the 
dose must be individualized because the effective analgesic dose for some 
patients will be too high to be tolerated by other patients.
               
               
            
         