
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY

               
                  Intravenous administration provides peak serum levels approximately 5 minutes after the injection is completed. Slow I.V. administration of 500 mg gives a peak serum level of 43 mcg/mL after 5 minutes with a half-life of 20-30 minutes.

                  The penicillinase-resistant penicillins bind to serum protein, mainly albumin. The degree of protein binding reported for oxacillin is 94.2% ± 2.1%. Reported values vary with the method of study and the investigator.

                  The penicillinase-resistant penicillins vary in the extent to which they are distributed in the body fluids. With normal doses, insignificant concentrations are found in the cerebrospinal fluid and aqueous humor. All the drugs in this class are found in therapeutic concentrations in the pleural, bile, and amniotic fluids.

                  The penicillinase-resistant penicillins are rapidly excreted primarily as unchanged drug in the urine by glomerular filtration and active tubular secretion. The elimination half-life for oxacillin is about 0.5 hours. Nonrenal elimination includes hepatic inactivation and excretion in bile.

                  Probenecid blocks the renal tubular secretion of penicillins. Therefore, the concurrent administration of probenecid prolongs the elimination of oxacillin and, consequently, increases the serum concentration.

               
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Microbiology

                     
                        Penicillinase-resistant penicillins exert a bactericidal action against penicillin susceptible microorganisms during the state of active multiplication. All penicillins inhibit the biosynthesis of the bacterial cell wall.

                        The drugs in this class are highly resistant to inactivation by staphylococcal penicillinase and are active against penicillinase producing strains of Staphylococcus aureus. The penicillinase-resistant penicillins are active in vitro against a variety of other bacteria.

                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Susceptibility Test Methods

                     
                        When available, the clinical microbiology laboratory should provide the results of in vitro susceptibility test results for antimicrobial drugs used in local hospitals and practice areas to the physician as periodic reports that describe the susceptibility profile of nosocomial and community-acquired pathogens. These reports should aid the physician in selecting the most effective antimicrobial.

                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Dilution Techniques

                           
                              Quantitative methods are used to determine antimicrobial minimum inhibitory concentrations (MICs). These MICs provide estimates of the susceptibility of bacteria to antimicrobial compounds. The MICs should be determined using a standardized procedure. Standardized procedures are based on dilution method 1, 2 (broth, agar or microdilution) or equivalent using standardized inoculum and concentrations of oxacillin. The MIC values should be interpreted according to the criteria in Table 1.

                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Diffusion Techniques

                           
                              Quantitative methods that require measurement of zone diameters also provide reproducible estimates of the susceptibility of bacteria to antimicrobial compounds. One such standardized procedure2,3 requires the use of standardized inoculum concentrations. It has been determined that the most accurate method to test the susceptibility of microorganisms to penicillinase-resistant penicillins, including oxacillin, by disk diffusion is achieved using disks impregnated with 30 mcg cefoxitin. Interpretation involves correlation of the diameter obtained in the cefoxitin disk test with the MIC for oxacillin.2,4,5 Reports from the laboratory providing results of the standard single-disk susceptibility test with a 30 microgram cefoxitin disk should be interpreted according to the following criteria in Table 1.

                              


                              


A report of “Susceptible” indicates that the pathogen is likely to be inhibited by usually achievable concentrations of the antimicrobial compound in blood. A report of “Resistant” indicates that usually achievable concentrations of the antimicrobial compound in the blood are unlikely to be inhibitory and that other therapy should be selected.

                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Quality Control

                           
                              Standardized susceptibility test procedures require the use of laboratory control microorganisms to monitor and ensure the accuracy and precision of the supplies and reagents used in the assay, and the techniques of the individuals performing the test. Standard oxacillin powder should provide MIC values provided below. For the diffusion technique, the 30 mcg cefoxitin disk should provide the following zone diameters with the quality control strains:

                              


