
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           Mixed agonist/antagonist and partial agonist opioid analgesics: Avoid use with Fentanyl Transdermal System because they may reduce analgesic effect of Fentanyl Transdermal System or precipitate withdrawal symptoms. (5.1, 7. 4)
                           Monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs): Avoid Fentanyl Transdermal System in patients taking MAOIs or within 14 days of stopping such treatment. (7.3)
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1	Central Nervous System Depressants
                     
                        The concomitant use of Fentanyl Transdermal System with other CNS depressants, including sedatives, hypnotics, tranquilizers, general anesthetics, phenothiazines, other opioids, and alcohol, can increase the risk of respiratory depression, profound sedation, coma and death. Monitor patients receiving CNS depressants and Fentanyl Transdermal System for signs of respiratory depression, sedation and hypotension.
                        When combined therapy with any of the above medications is considered, the dose of one or both agents should be reduced [see Dosage and Administration (2.2)
                            and 
                              Warnings and Precautions (5.5)].
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2	Drugs Affecting Cytochrome P450 3A4 Isoenzymes
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Inhibitors of CYP3A4 
                              
                              Because the CYP3A4 isoenzyme plays a major role in the metabolism of fentanyl, drugs that inhibit CYP3A4 activity may cause decreased clearance of fentanyl which could lead to an increase in fentanyl plasma concentrations and result in increased or prolonged opioid effects. These effects could be more pronounced with concomitant use of 3A4 inhibitors. If co-administration with Fentanyl Transdermal System is necessary, monitor patients for respiratory depression and sedation at frequent intervals and consider dose adjustments until stable drug effects are achieved [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                              
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Inducers of CYP3A4
                              
                              CYP450 3A4 inducers may induce the metabolism of fentanyl and, therefore, may cause increased clearance of the drug which could lead to a decrease in fentanyl plasma concentrations, lack of efficacy or, possibly, development of a withdrawal syndrome in a patient who had developed physical dependence to fentanyl. If co-administration with Fentanyl Transdermal System is necessary, monitor for signs of opioid withdrawal and consider dose adjustments until stable drug effects are achieved [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                              
                              After stopping the treatment of a CYP3A4 inducer, as the effects of the inducer decline, the fentanyl plasma concentration will increase which could increase or prolong both the therapeutic and adverse effects, and may cause serious respiratory depression [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                              
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3	MAO Inhibitors
                     
                        Avoid use of Fentanyl Transdermal System in the patient who would require the concomitant administration of a monoamine oxidase (MAO) inhibitor, or within 14 days of stopping such treatment because severe and unpredictable potentiation by MAO inhibitors has been reported with opioid analgesics.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4	Mixed Agonist/Antagonist and Partial Agonist Opioid Analgesics
                     
                        Mixed agonist/antagonist (i.e., pentazocine, nalbuphine, and butorphanol) and partial agonist (buprenorphine) analgesics may reduce the analgesic effect of Fentanyl Transdermal System or may precipitate withdrawal symptoms. Avoid the use of agonist/antagonist and partial agonist analgesics in patients receiving Fentanyl Transdermal System.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.5	Anticholinergics
                     
                        Anticholinergics or other medications with anticholinergic activity when used concurrently with opioid analgesics may result in increased risk of urinary retention and/or severe constipation, which may lead to paralytic ileus. Monitor patients for signs of urinary retention or reduced gastrointestinal motility when Fentanyl Transdermal System is used concurrently with anticholinergic drugs.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         