
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY

               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action

                     
                        Telavancin is an antibacterial drug [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.4)].

                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics

                     
                        The antimicrobial activity of telavancin appears to best correlate with the ratio of area under the concentration-time curve to minimum inhibitory concentration (AUC/MIC) for Staphylococcus aureus based on animal models of infection. Exposure-response analyses of the clinical trials support the dose of 10 mg/kg every 24 hours.

                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Cardiac Electrophysiology
                              
                              The effect of telavancin on cardiac repolarization was assessed in a randomized, double-blind, multiple-dose, positive-controlled, and placebo-controlled, parallel study (n=160). Healthy subjects received VIBATIV 7.5 mg/kg, VIBATIV 15 mg/kg, positive control, or placebo infused over 60 minutes once daily for 3 days. Based on interpolation of the data from VIBATIV 7.5 mg/kg and 15 mg/kg, the mean maximum baseline-corrected, placebo-corrected QTc prolongation at the end of infusion was estimated to be 12-15 msec for VIBATIV 10 mg/kg and 22 msec for the positive control (Table 7). By 1 hour after infusion the maximum QTc prolongation was 6-9 msec for VIBATIV and 15 msec for the positive control.

                              


                              


ECGs were performed prior to and during the treatment period in patients receiving VIBATIV 10 mg/kg in 3 cSSSI studies to monitor QTc intervals. In these trials, 214 of 1029 (21%) patients allocated to treatment with VIBATIV and 164 of 1033 (16%) allocated to vancomycin received concomitant medications known to prolong the QTc interval and known to be associated with definite or possible risk of torsades de pointes. The incidence of QTc prolongation >60 msec was 1.5% (15 patients) in the VIBATIV group and 0.6% (6 patients) in the vancomycin group. Nine of the 15 VIBATIV patients received concomitant medications known to prolong the QTc interval and definitely or possibly associated with a risk of torsades de pointes, compared with 1 of the 6 patients who received vancomycin. A similar number of patients in each treatment group (<1%) who did not receive a concomitant medication known to prolong the QTc interval experienced a prolongation >60 msec from baseline. In a separate analysis, 1 patient in the VIBATIV group and 2 patients in the vancomycin group experienced QTc >500 msec. No cardiac adverse events were ascribed to prolongation of the QTc interval. In the Phase 3 HABP/VABP studies, the incidence of QTc prolongation >60 msec or mean value >500 msec was 8% (52 patients) in the telavancin group and 7% (48 patients) in the vancomycin group.

                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics

                     
                        The mean pharmacokinetic parameters of telavancin (10 mg/kg) after a single and multiple 60-minute intravenous infusions (10 mg/kg every 24 hours) are summarized in Table 8.

                        


                        


In healthy young adults, the pharmacokinetics of telavancin administered intravenously were linear following single doses from 5 to 12.5 mg/kg and multiple doses from 7.5 to 15 mg/kg administered once daily for up to 7 days. Steady-state concentrations were achieved by the third daily dose.

                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Distribution
                              
                              Telavancin binds to human plasma proteins, primarily to serum albumin, in a concentration-independent manner. The mean binding is approximately 90% and is not affected by renal or hepatic impairment.

                              Concentrations of telavancin in pulmonary epithelial lining fluid (ELF) and alveolar macrophages (AM) were measured through collection of bronchoalveolar lavage fluid at various times following administration of VIBATIV 10 mg/kg once daily for 3 days to healthy adults.  Telavancin concentrations in ELF and AM exceeded the MIC90 for S. aureus (0.5 mcg/mL) for at least 24 hours following dosing.

                              Concentrations of telavancin in skin blister fluid were 40% of those in plasma (AUC0-24hr ratio) after 3 daily doses of 7.5 mg/kg VIBATIV in healthy young adults.

                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Metabolism
                              
                              No metabolites of telavancin were detected in in vitro studies using human liver microsomes, liver slices, hepatocytes, and kidney S9 fraction. None of the following recombinant CYP 450 isoforms were shown to metabolize telavancin in human liver microsomes: CYP 1A2, 2C9, 2C19, 2D6, 3A4, 3A5, 4A11. The clearance of telavancin is not expected to be altered by inhibitors of any of these enzymes.

                              In a mass balance study in male subjects using radiolabeled telavancin, 3 hydroxylated metabolites were identified with the predominant metabolite (THRX-651540) accounting for <10% of the radioactivity in urine and <2% of the radioactivity in plasma. The metabolic pathway for telavancin has not been identified.

                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Excretion
                              
                              Telavancin is primarily eliminated by the kidney. In a mass balance study, approximately 76% of the administered dose was recovered from urine and <1% of the dose was recovered from feces (collected up to 216 hours) based on total radioactivity.

                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Specific Populations
                              
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Geriatric Patients
                              
                              The impact of age on the pharmacokinetics of telavancin was evaluated in healthy young (range 21-42 years) and elderly (range 65-83 years) subjects. The mean CrCl of elderly subjects was 66 mL/min. Age alone did not have a clinically meaningful impact on the pharmacokinetics of telavancin [see Use in Specific Populations (8.5)].

                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Pediatric Patients
                              
                              The pharmacokinetics of telavancin in patients less than 18 years of age have not been studied.

                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Gender
                              
                              The impact of gender on the pharmacokinetics of telavancin was evaluated in healthy male (n=8) and female (n=8) subjects. The pharmacokinetics of telavancin were similar in males and females. No dosage adjustment is recommended based on gender.

                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Renal Impairment
                              
                              The pharmacokinetics of telavancin were evaluated in subjects with normal renal function and subjects with varying degrees of renal impairment following administration of a single dose of telavancin 7.5 mg/kg (n=28). The mean AUC0-∞ values were approximately 13%, 29%, and 118% higher for subjects with CrCl >50 to 80 mL/min, CrCl 30 to 50 mL/min, and CrCl <30 mL/min, respectively, compared with subjects with normal renal function. Dosage adjustment is required in patients with CrCl ≤50 mL/min [see Dosage and Administration (2)].

                              Creatinine clearance was estimated from serum creatinine based on the Cockcroft-Gault formula:

                              
                                 
                                     
CrCl = [140 – age (years)] x ideal body weight (kg)* {x 0.85 for female patients}
                [72 x serum creatinine (mg/dL)]

                                 
                                     

                                    
*Use actual body weight if < ideal body weight (IBW)
IBW (male) = 50 kg + 0.9 kg/cm over 152 cm height
IBW (female) = 45.5 kg + 0.9 kg/cm over 152 cm height

                              
                              Following administration of a single dose of VIBATIV 7.5 mg/kg to subjects with end-stage renal disease, approximately 5.9% of the administered dose of telavancin was recovered in the dialysate following 4 hours of hemodialysis. The effects of peritoneal dialysis have not been studied.

                              Following a single intravenous dose of VIBATIV 7.5 mg/kg, the clearance of hydroxypropyl-beta-cyclodextrin was reduced in subjects with renal impairment, resulting in a higher exposure to hydroxypropyl-beta-cyclodextrin. In subjects with mild, moderate, and severe renal impairment, the mean clearance values were 38%, 59%, and 82% lower, respectively, compared with subjects with normal renal function. Multiple infusions of VIBATIV may result in accumulation of hydroxypropyl-beta-cyclodextrin.

                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Hepatic Impairment
                              
                              The pharmacokinetics of telavancin were not altered in subjects with moderate hepatic impairment (n= 8, Child-Pugh B) compared with healthy subjects with normal hepatic function matched for gender, age, and weight. The pharmacokinetics of telavancin have not been evaluated in patients with severe hepatic impairment (Child-Pugh C).

                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Drug Interactions
                              
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 In Vitro
                              
                              The inhibitory activity of telavancin against the following CYP 450 enzymes was evaluated in human liver microsomes: CYP 1A2, 2C9, 2C19, 2D6, and 3A4/5. Telavancin inhibited CYP 3A4/5 at potentially clinically relevant concentrations. Upon further evaluation in a Phase 1 clinical trial, telavancin was found not to inhibit the metabolism of midazolam, a sensitive CYP3A substrate (see below).

                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Midazolam
                              
                              The impact of telavancin on the pharmacokinetics of midazolam (CYP 3A4/5 substrate) was evaluated in 16 healthy adult subjects following administration of a single dose of VIBATIV 10 mg/kg, intravenous midazolam 1 mg, and both. The results showed that telavancin had no impact on the pharmacokinetics of midazolam and midazolam had no effect on the pharmacokinetics of telavancin.

                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Aztreonam
                              
                              The impact of telavancin on the pharmacokinetics of aztreonam was evaluated in 11 healthy adult subjects following administration of a single dose of VIBATIV 10 mg/kg, aztreonam 2 g, and both. Telavancin had no impact on the pharmacokinetics of aztreonam and aztreonam had no effect on the pharmacokinetics of telavancin. No dosage adjustment of telavancin or aztreonam is recommended when both drugs are coadministered.

                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Piperacillin-tazobactam
                              
                              The impact of telavancin on the pharmacokinetics of piperacillin-tazobactam was evaluated in 12 healthy adult subjects following administration of a single dose of VIBATIV 10 mg/kg, piperacillin-tazobactam 4.5 g, and both. Telavancin had no impact on the pharmacokinetics of piperacillin-tazobactam and piperacillin-tazobactam had no effect on the pharmacokinetics of telavancin. No dosage adjustment of telavancin or piperacillin-tazobactam is recommended when both drugs are coadministered.

                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.4 Microbiology

                     
                        Telavancin is a semisynthetic, lipoglycopeptide antibiotic. Telavancin exerts concentration-dependent, bactericidal activity against Gram-positive organisms in vitro, as demonstrated by time-kill assays and MBC/MIC (minimum bactericidal concentration/minimum inhibitory concentration) ratios using broth dilution methodology. In vitro studies demonstrated a telavancin post-antibiotic effect ranging from 1 to 6 hours against S. aureus and other Gram-positive pathogens.

                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                              
                                 To reduce the development of drug-resistant bacteria and maintain the effectiveness of VIBATIV and other antibacterial drugs VIBATIV should only be used to treat or prevent infections that are proven or strongly suspected to be caused by bacteria. (1)

                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Mechanism of Action
                              
                              Telavancin inhibits cell wall biosynthesis by binding to late-stage peptidoglycan precursors, including lipid II.  Telavancin also binds to the bacterial membrane and disrupts membrane barrier function.

                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Interactions with Other Antibacterial Drugs
                              
                              
                                 In vitro investigations demonstrated no antagonism between telavancin and amikacin, aztreonam, cefepime, ceftriaxone, ciprofloxacin, gentamicin, imipenem, meropenem, oxacillin, piperacillin/tazobactam, rifampin, and trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole when tested in various combinations against telavancin-susceptible staphylococci, streptococci, and enterococci. This information is not available for other bacteria.

                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Cross-Resistance
                              
                              Some vancomycin-resistant enterococci have a reduced susceptibility to telavancin. There is no known cross-resistance between telavancin and other classes of antibacterial drugs.

                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Antibacterial Activity
                              
                              Telavancin has been shown to be active against most isolates of the following microorganisms both in vitro and in clinical infections as described in the Indications and Usage section [see Indications and Usage (1)]:

                              
                                 Facultative Gram-Positive Microorganisms
                              
                              
                                 
                                     

                                    Staphylococcus aureus (including methicillin-resistant isolates)

                                 
                                     

                                    Enterococcus faecalis (vancomycin-susceptible isolates only)

                                 
                                     

                                    Streptococcus agalactiae
                                 
                                 
                                     

                                    Streptococcus anginosus group (includes S. anginosus, S. intermedius, and S. constellatus)

                                 
                                     

                                    Streptococcus pyogenes
                                 
                              
                              Greater than 90% of the following microorganisms exhibit an in vitro MIC less than or equal to the telavancin-susceptible breakpoint for organisms of similar genus shown in Table 9. The safety and effectiveness of telavancin in treating clinical infections due to these microorganisms have not been established in adequate and well-controlled clinical trials.

                              
                                 Facultative Gram-Positive Microorganisms
                              
                              
                                 
                                     

                                    Enterococcus faecium (vancomycin-susceptible isolates only)

                                 
                                     

                                    Staphylococcus haemolyticus
                                 
                                 
                                     

                                    Streptococcus dysgalactiae subsp. equisimilis
                                 
                                 
                                     

                                    Staphylococcus epidermidis
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Susceptibility Test Methods
                              
                              When available, the clinical microbiology laboratory should provide cumulative results of the in vitro susceptibility test results for antimicrobial drugs used in local hospitals and practice areas to the physician as periodic reports that describe the susceptibility profile of nosocomial and community-acquired pathogens. These reports should aid the physician in selecting an antimicrobial drug.

                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Dilution technique
                              
                              Quantitative methods are used to determine antimicrobial minimum inhibitory concentrations (MICs). These MICs provide estimates of the susceptibility of bacteria to antimicrobial compounds. The MICs should be determined using a standardized procedure [see References (15)]. Standardized procedures are based on a broth dilution method or equivalent with standardized inoculum concentrations and standardized concentrations of telavancin powder. The test method treats telavancin as a water-insoluble agent. Dimethyl sulfoxide is used as solvent and diluent, and the cation-adjusted Mueller Hinton Broth test medium is supplemented with polysorbate 80 to a final concentration of 0.002%. Telavancin should not be tested by the agar dilution method.  The MIC values should be interpreted according to the criteria provided in Table 9.

                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Diffusion technique
                              
                              Quantitative methods that require measurement of zone diameters also provide reproducible estimates of the susceptibility of bacteria to antimicrobial compounds. One such standardized procedure requires the use of standardized inoculum concentrations [see References (15)]. This procedure uses paper disks impregnated with 30 mcg of telavancin to test the susceptibility of microorganisms to telavancin. The disk diffusion interpretive criteria are provided in Table 9.

                              


                              


A report of “susceptible" indicates that the antimicrobial is likely to inhibit growth of the pathogen if the antimicrobial compound in the blood reaches the concentrations usually achievable.

                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Quality Control
                              
                              Standardized susceptibility test procedures require the use of laboratory control microorganisms to monitor the performance of the supplies and reagents used in the assay, and the techniques of the individuals performing the test [see References (15)]. Standard telavancin powder should provide the range of values noted in Table 10.

                              Quality control microorganisms are specific strains of organisms with intrinsic biological properties relating to resistance mechanisms and their genetic expression within bacteria; the specific strains used for microbiological quality control are not clinically significant.

                              


