
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
                  Specific drug interaction studies have not been conducted with Enbrel. 
               
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           Live vaccines – should not be given with Enbrel (5.8, 7.1) 

                           Anakinra – increased risk of serious infection (5.12, 7.2) 

                           Abatacept – increased risk of serious adverse events, including infections (5.12, 7.2) 

                           Cyclophosphamide – use with Enbrel is not recommended (7.3)
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 Vaccines
                     
                        Most PsA patients receiving Enbrel were able to mount effective B-cell immune responses to pneumococcal polysaccharide vaccine, but titers in aggregate were moderately lower and fewer patients had 2-fold rises in titers compared to patients not receiving Enbrel. The clinical significance of this is unknown. Patients receiving Enbrel may receive concurrent vaccinations, except for live vaccines. No data are available on the secondary transmission of infection by live vaccines in patients receiving Enbrel. 
                        Patients with a significant exposure to varicella virus should temporarily discontinue Enbrel therapy and be considered for prophylactic treatment with varicella zoster immune globulin [see Warnings and Precautions (5.8, 5.10)].
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 Immune-Modulating Biologic Products
                     
                        In a study in which patients with active RA were treated for up to 24 weeks with concurrent Enbrel and anakinra therapy, a 7% rate of serious infections was observed, which was higher than that observed with Enbrel alone (0%) [see Warnings and Precautions (5.12)] and did not result in higher ACR response rates compared to Enbrel alone. The most common infections consisted of bacterial pneumonia (4 cases) and cellulitis (4 cases). One patient with pulmonary fibrosis and pneumonia died due to respiratory failure. Two percent of patients treated concurrently with Enbrel and anakinra developed neutropenia (ANC < 1 x 109/L).
                        In clinical studies, concurrent administration of abatacept and Enbrel resulted in increased incidences of serious adverse events, including infections, and did not demonstrate increased clinical benefit [see Warnings and Precautions (5.12)].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3 Cyclophosphamide
                     
                        The use of Enbrel in patients receiving concurrent cyclophosphamide therapy is not recommended [see Warnings and Precautions (5.11)].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4 Sulfasalazine
                     
                        Patients in a clinical study who were on established therapy with sulfasalazine, to which Enbrel was added, were noted to develop a mild decrease in mean neutrophil counts in comparison to groups treated with either Enbrel or sulfasalazine alone. The clinical significance of this observation is unknown.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         