
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        TNF is a naturally occurring cytokine that is involved in normal inflammatory and immune responses. It plays an important role in the inflammatory processes of RA, polyarticular JIA, PsA, and AS and the resulting joint pathology. In addition, TNF plays a role in the inflammatory process of PsO. Elevated levels of TNF are found in involved tissues and fluids of patients with RA, JIA, PsA, AS, and PsO.
                        Two distinct receptors for TNF (TNFRs), a 55 kilodalton protein (p55) and a 75 kilodalton protein (p75), exist naturally as monomeric molecules on cell surfaces and in soluble forms. Biological activity of TNF is dependent upon binding to either cell surface TNFR.
                        Etanercept is a dimeric soluble form of the p75 TNF receptor that can bind TNF molecules. Etanercept inhibits binding of TNF-α and TNF-β (lymphotoxin alpha [LT-α]) to cell surface TNFRs, rendering TNF biologically inactive. In in vitro studies, large complexes of etanercept with TNF-α were not detected and cells expressing transmembrane TNF (that binds Enbrel) are not lysed in the presence or absence of complement.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        Etanercept can modulate biological responses that are induced or regulated by TNF, including expression of adhesion molecules responsible for leukocyte migration (eg, E-selectin, and to a lesser extent, intercellular adhesion molecule-1 [ICAM-1]), serum levels of cytokines (eg, IL-6), and serum levels of matrix metalloproteinase-3 (MMP-3 or stromelysin). Etanercept has been shown to affect several animal models of inflammation, including murine collagen-induced arthritis.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        After administration of 25 mg of Enbrel by a single SC injection to 25 patients with RA, a mean ± standard deviation half‑life of 102 ± 30 hours was observed with a clearance of 160 ± 80 mL/hr.  A maximum serum concentration (Cmax) of 1.1 ± 0.6 mcg/mL and time to Cmax of 69 ± 34 hours was observed in these patients following a single 25 mg dose.  After 6 months of twice weekly 25 mg doses in these same RA patients, the mean Cmax was 2.4 ± 1.0 mcg/mL (N = 23).  Patients exhibited a 2‑ to 7‑fold increase in peak serum concentrations and approximately 4‑fold increase in AUC0‑72 hr (range 1- to 17-fold) with repeated dosing.  Serum concentrations in patients with RA have not been measured for periods of dosing that exceed 6 months.  The pharmacokinetic parameters in patients with PsO were similar to those seen in patients with RA. 
                        In another study, serum concentration profiles at steady state were comparable among patients with RA treated with 50 mg Enbrel once weekly and those treated with 25 mg Enbrel twice weekly.  The mean (± standard deviation) Cmax, Cmin, and partial AUC were 2.4 ± 1.5 mcg/mL, 1.2 ± 0.7 mcg/mL, and 297 ± 166 mcg•h/mL, respectively, for patients treated with 50 mg Enbrel once weekly (N = 21); and 2.6 ± 1.2 mcg/mL, 1.4 ± 0.7 mcg/mL, and 316 ± 135 mcg•h/mL for patients treated with 25 mg Enbrel twice weekly (N = 16). 
                        Patients with JIA (ages 4 to 17 years) were administered 0.4 mg/kg of Enbrel twice weekly (up to a maximum dose of 50 mg per week) for up to 18 weeks.  The mean serum concentration after repeated SC dosing was 2.1 mcg/mL, with a range of 0.7 to 4.3 mcg/mL.  Limited data suggest that the clearance of etanercept is reduced slightly in children ages 4 to 8 years.  Population pharmacokinetic analyses predict that the pharmacokinetic differences between the regimens of 0.4 mg/kg twice weekly and 0.8 mg/kg once weekly in JIA patients are of the same magnitude as the differences observed between twice weekly and weekly regimens in adult RA patients.  
                        In clinical studies with Enbrel, pharmacokinetic parameters were not different between men and women and did not vary with age in adult patients.  The pharmacokinetics of etanercept were unaltered by concomitant MTX in RA patients.  No formal pharmacokinetic studies have been conducted to examine the effects of renal or hepatic impairment on etanercept disposition.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         