
               
               
               DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
                  
                  
                     See also Contraindications (4), Clinical Pharmacology (12.3).
                  If LEXIVA is used in combination with ritonavir, see full prescribing information for ritonavir for additional information on drug interactions.
                  
 

                  
                  Amprenavir, the active metabolite of fosamprenavir, is an inhibitor of CYP3A4 metabolism and therefore should not be administered concurrently with medications with narrow therapeutic windows that are substrates of CYP3A4. Data also suggest that amprenavir induces CYP3A4.
                  Amprenavir is metabolized by CYP3A4. Coadministration of LEXIVA and drugs that induce CYP3A4, such as rifampin, may decrease amprenavir concentrations and reduce its therapeutic effect. Coadministration of LEXIVA and drugs that inhibit CYP3A4 may increase amprenavir concentrations and increase the incidence of adverse effects.
                  The potential for drug interactions with LEXIVA changes when LEXIVA is coadministered with the potent CYP3A4 inhibitor ritonavir. The magnitude of CYP3A4-mediated drug interactions (effect on amprenavir or effect on coadministered drug) may change when LEXIVA is coadministered with ritonavir. Because ritonavir is a CYP2D6 inhibitor, clinically significant interactions with drugs metabolized by CYP2D6 are possible when coadministered with LEXIVA plus ritonavir.
                  There are other agents that may result in serious and/or life-threatening drug interactions [see Contraindications (4)].
                  
 

                  
                  
                     See Contraindications (4).
                  
                  
 

                  
                  Table 7 provides a listing of established or potentially clinically significant drug interactions. Information in the table applies to LEXIVA with or without ritonavir, unless otherwise indicated.
                  


                  



                     a  
                     See Clinical Pharmacology (12.3) Tables 10, 11, 12, or 13 for magnitude of interaction.
                  
                  
 

               
               
            
         