
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Micafungin is a member of the echinocandin class of antifungal agents [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.4)]
                           _Refi4i_section_id_914a92f5-5b2a-44d1-9d.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        
                           
                              
                                 Adults
                              
                           
                        
                        The pharmacokinetics of micafungin were determined in healthy subjects, hematopoietic stem cell transplant recipients, and patients with esophageal candidiasis up to a maximum daily dose of 8 mg/kg body weight.
                        The relationship of area under the concentration-time curve (AUC) to micafungin dose was linear over the daily dose range of 50 mg to 150 mg and 3 mg/kg to 8 mg/kg body weight. 
                        Steady-state pharmacokinetic parameters in relevant patient populations after repeated daily administration are presented in Table 7.
                        


                        



                           
                              
                                 Pediatric Patients 4 months of age and older
                              
                           
                        
                        Micafungin pharmacokinetics in 229 pediatric patients 4 months through 16 years of age were characterized using population pharmacokinetics. Micafungin exposure was dose proportional across the dose and age range studied. 
                        


                        


 
                        
                           
                              
                                 Special Populations
                              
                           
                        
                        
                           
                              Adult Patients with Renal Impairment
                           
                        
                        Mycamine does not require dose adjustment in patients with renal impairment. A single 1-hour infusion of 100 mg Mycamine was administered to 9 adult subjects with severe renal impairment (creatinine clearance less than 30 mL/min) and to 9 age-, gender-, and weight-matched subjects with normal renal function (creatinine clearance greater than 80 mL/min). The maximum concentration (Cmax) and AUC were not significantly altered by severe renal impairment. 
                        Since micafungin is highly protein bound, it is not dialyzable. Supplementary dosing should not be required following hemodialysis.
                        
                           
                              Adult Patients with Hepatic Impairment
                           
                        
                        
                           
                              •A single 1-hour infusion of 100 mg Mycamine was administered to 8 adult subjects with moderate hepatic impairment (Child-Pugh score 7-9) and 8 age-, gender-, and weight-matched subjects with normal hepatic function. The Cmax and AUC values of micafungin were lower by approximately 22% in subjects with moderate hepatic impairment compared to normal subjects. This difference in micafungin exposure does not require dose adjustment of Mycamine in patients with moderate hepatic impairment. 
                           
                              •A single 1-hour infusion of 100 mg Mycamine was administered to 8 adult subjects with severe hepatic impairment (Child-Pugh score 10-12) and 8 age-, gender-, ethnic- and weight-matched subjects with normal hepatic function. The mean Cmax and AUC values of micafungin were lower by approximately 30% in subjects with severe hepatic impairment compared to normal subjects. The mean Cmax and AUC values of M-5 metabolite were approximately 2.3-fold higher in subjects with severe hepatic impairment compared to normal subjects; however, this exposure (parent and metabolite) was comparable to that in patients with systemic Candida infection. Therefore, no Mycamine dose adjustment is necessary in patients with severe hepatic impairment. 
                        
                        
                           
                              Distribution
                           
                        
                        The mean ± standard deviation volume of distribution of micafungin at terminal phase was 0.39 ± 0.11 L/kg body weight when determined in adult patients with esophageal candidiasis at the dose range of 50 mg to 150 mg.
                        Micafungin is highly (greater than 99%) protein bound in vitro, independent of plasma concentrations over the range of 10 to 100 mcg/mL. The primary binding protein is albumin; however, micafungin, at therapeutically relevant concentrations, does not competitively displace bilirubin binding to albumin. Micafungin also binds to a lesser extent to α1-acid-glycoprotein.
                        
                           
                              Metabolism
                           
                        
                        Micafungin is metabolized to M-1 (catechol form) by arylsulfatase, with further metabolism to M-2 (methoxy form) by catechol-O-methyltransferase. M-5 is formed by hydroxylation at the side chain (ω-1 position) of micafungin catalyzed by cytochrome P450 (CYP) isozymes. Even though micafungin is a substrate for and a weak inhibitor of CYP3A in vitro, hydroxylation by CYP3A is not a major pathway for micafungin metabolism in vivo. Micafungin is neither a P-glycoprotein substrate nor inhibitor in vitro. 
                        In four healthy volunteer studies, the ratio of metabolite to parent exposure (AUC) at a dose of 150 mg/day was 6% for M-1, 1% for M-2, and 6% for M-5. In patients with esophageal candidiasis, the ratio of metabolite to parent exposure (AUC) at a dose of 150 mg/day was 11% for M-1, 2% for M-2, and 12% for M-5.
                        
                           
                              Excretion
                           
                        
                        The excretion of radioactivity following a single intravenous dose of 14C-micafungin sodium for injection (25 mg) was evaluated in healthy volunteers. At 28 days after administration, mean urinary and fecal recovery of total radioactivity accounted for 82.5% (76.4% to 87.9%) of the administered dose. Fecal excretion is the major route of elimination (total radioactivity at 28 days was 71% of the administered dose). 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.4 Microbiology 
                     
                        
                           
                              Mechanism of Action
                           
                        
                        Micafungin inhibits the synthesis of 1, 3-beta-D-glucan, an essential component of fungal cell walls, which is not present in mammalian cells.
                        
                           
                              Drug Resistance
                           
                        
                        There have been reports of clinical failures in patients receiving Mycamine therapy due to the development of drug resistance. Some of these reports have identified specific mutations in the FKS protein component of the glucan synthase enzyme that are associated with higher MICs and breakthrough infection.
                        
                           
                              Activity In Vitro and In Clinical Infections
                           
                        
                        Micafungin has been shown to be active against most isolates of the following Candida species, both 
                              in vitro and in clinical infections:
                        
                           Candida albicans 
                           

                           Candida glabrata
                           

                           Candida guilliermondii 
                           

                           Candida krusei 
                           

                           Candida parapsilosis
                           

                           Candida tropicalis 
                        
                        
                           
                              Susceptibility Testing Methods
                           
                        
                        The interpretive standards for micafungin against Candida species are applicable only to tests performed using Clinical Laboratory and Standards Institute (CLSI) microbroth dilution reference method M27-A3 for minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC; based on partial inhibition endpoint) and CLSI disk diffusion reference method M44-A2; both MIC and zone diameter results are read at 24 hours.
                        When available, the clinical microbiology laboratory should provide the results of in vitro susceptibility test results for antimicrobial drug products used in resident hospitals to the physician as periodic reports that describe the susceptibility profile of pathogens. These reports should aid the physician in selecting an antifungal drug product for treatment. The techniques for Broth Microdilution and Disk Diffusion are described below.
                        
                           Broth Microdilution Technique
                        
                        Quantitative methods are used to determine antifungal MICs. These MICs provide estimates of the susceptibility of Candida species to antifungal agents. MICs should be determined using a standardized CLSI procedure1,2. Standardized procedures are based on a microdilution method (broth) with standardized inoculum concentrations and standardized concentrations of micafungin powder. The MIC values should be interpreted according to the criteria provided in Table 9.
                        
                           Disk Diffusion Technique
                        
                        Qualitative methods that require measurement of zone diameters also provide reproducible estimates of the susceptibility of Candida species to antifungal agents. The CLSI procedure3 uses standardized inoculum concentrations and paper disks impregnated with 10 mcg of micafungin to test the susceptibility of Candida species to micafungin at 24 hours. Disk diffusion interpretive criteria are provided in Table 9.
                        


                        


A report of “Susceptible” indicates that the isolate is likely to be inhibited if the antimicrobial compound in the blood reaches the concentrations usually achievable.
                        The “Intermediate” category implies that an infection due to the isolate may be appropriately treated in body sites where the drug is physiologically concentrated or when a high dosage of drug is used. The “Resistant” category implies that the isolates are not inhibited by the concentrations of the drug usually achievable with normal dosage schedules and clinical efficacy of the drug against the pathogen has not been reliably shown in treatment studies.
                        
                           
                              Quality Control
                           
                        
                        Standardized susceptibility test procedures require the use of quality control organisms to monitor and ensure the accuracy and precision of supplies and reagents used in the assay, and the technique of the individual performing the test1, 2, 3. Standard micafungin powder and 10 mcg disks should provide the following range of values noted in Table 10.
                        


