
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Vancomycin is an antibacterial drug (see CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY, Microbiology [12.4]). 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        Vancomycin is poorly absorbed after oral administration.  During multiple dosing of 250 mg every 8 hours for 7 doses, fecal concentrations of vancomycin in volunteers exceeded 100 mg/kg in the majority of samples.  No blood concentrations were detected and urinary recovery did not exceed 0.76%.  In anephric subjects with no inflammatory bowel disease who received vancomycin oral solution 2 g for 16 days, blood concentrations of vancomycin were less than or equal to 0.66 μg/mL in 2 of 5 subjects. No measurable blood concentrations were attained in the other 3 subjects. Following doses of 2 g daily, concentrations of drug were >3100 mg/kg in the feces and <1 μg/mL in the serum of subjects with normal renal function who had C. difficile-associated diarrhea.  After multiple-dose oral administration of vancomycin, measurable serum concentrations may occur in patients with active C. difficile-associated diarrhea, and, in the presence of renal impairment, the possibility of accumulation exists. It should be noted that the total systemic and renal clearances of vancomycin are reduced in the elderly (see USE IN SPECIFIC POPULATIONS, Geriatric Use [8.5]). 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.4 Microbiology 
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Mechanism of action 
                              The bactericidal action of vancomycin against Staphylococcus aureus and the vegetative cells of Clostridium difficile results primarily from inhibition of cell-wall biosynthesis.  In addition, vancomycin alters bacterial-cell-membrane permeability and RNA synthesis. 
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Mechanism of resistance 
                              
                                 
                                     
                                    Staphylococcus aureus
                                 
                                 
                                     
                                    S. aureus isolates with vancomycin minimal inhibitory concentrations (MICs) as high as 1024 mcg/mL have been reported. 
                                 
                                     The exact mechanism of this resistance is not clear but is believed to be due to cell wall thickening and potentially the transfer of genetic material. 
                                 
                                     
                                    Clostridium difficile
                                 
                                 
                                     Isolates of C. difficile generally have vancomycin MICs of <1 mcg/mL, however vancomycin MICs ranging from 4 mcg/mL to 16 mcg/mL have been reported. The mechanism which mediates C. difficile's decreased susceptibility to vancomycin has not been fully elucidated. 
                              
                              Vancomycin has been shown to be active against susceptible isolates of the following bacteria in clinical infections as described in the INDICATIONS AND USAGE section. 
                              Gram-positive bacteria 
                              
                                 
                                     
                                    Staphylococcus aureus (including methicillin-resistant isolates) associated with enterocolitis. 
                              
                              Anaerobic gram-positive bacteria 
                              
                                 
                                     
                                    Clostridium difficile isolates associated with C. difficile associated diarrhea. 
                              
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         