
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  Like other topical corticosteroids, CLOBEX速 (clobetasol propionate) Lotion, 0.05% has anti-inflammatory, 
antipruritic, and vasoconstrictive properties. The mechanism of the 
anti-inflammatory activity of the topical steroids in general is unclear. 
However, corticosteroids are thought to act by induction of phospholipase A2 inhibitory proteins, collectively called lipocortins. It is 
postulated that these proteins control the biosynthesis of potent mediators of 
inflammation such as prostaglandins and leukotrienes by inhibiting the release 
of their common precursor, arachidonic acid. Arachidonic acid is released from 
membrane phospholipids by phospholipase A2.
                  
                  PharmacokineticsThe extent of percutaneous absorption of topical corticosteroids 
is determined by many factors, including the vehicle, the integrity of the 
epidermal barrier and occlusion. For example, occlusive dressing with 
hydrocortisone for up to 24 hours has not been demonstrated to increase 
penetration; however, occlusion of hydrocortisone for 96 hours markedly enhances 
penetration. Topical corticosteroids can be absorbed from normal intact skin. 
Inflammation and other disease processes in the skin may increase percutaneous 
absorption.
                  There are no human data regarding the distribution of corticosteroids to body 
organs following topical application. Nevertheless, once absorbed through the 
skin, topical corticosteroids are handled through pharmacokinetic pathways 
similar to systematically administered corticosteroids. Due to the fact that 
circulating levels are usually below the level of detection, the use of 
pharmacodynamic endpoints for assessing the systemic exposure of topical 
corticosteroids is necessary. They are metabolized, primarily in the liver, and 
are then excreted by the kidneys. In addition, some corticosteroids and their 
metabolites are also excreted in the bile.
                  CLOBEX速 (clobetasol propionate) Lotion, 0.05% is in 
the super-high range of potency as compared with other topical corticosteroids 
in vasoconstrictor studies.
                  In studies evaluating the potential for hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) 
axis suppression, CLOBEX速 Lotion, 0.05% demonstrated 
rates of suppression that were numerically higher than those of a clobetasol 
propionate 0.05% cream (Temovate E速 Emollient, 0.05%), 
(See PRECAUTIONS).
               
               
            
         