
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  Dobutamine is a direct-acting inotropic agent whose primary 
activity results from stimulation of the β receptors of the heart while 
producing comparatively mild chronotropic, hypertensive, arrhythmogenic, and 
vasodilative effects. It does not cause the release of endogenous 
norepinephrine, as does dopamine. In animal studies, dobutamine produces less 
increase in heart rate and less decrease in peripheral vascular resistance for a 
given inotropic effect than does isoproterenol.
                  In patients with depressed cardiac function, both dobutamine and 
isoproterenol increase the cardiac output to a similar degree. In the case of 
dobutamine, this increase is usually not accompanied by marked increases in 
heart rate (although tachycardia is occasionally observed), and the cardiac 
stroke volume is usually increased. In contrast, isoproterenol increases the 
cardiac index primarily by increasing the heart rate while stroke volume changes 
little or declines.
                  Facilitation of atrioventricular conduction has been observed in human 
electrophysiologic studies and in patients with atrial fibrillation.
                  Systemic vascular resistance is usually decreased with administration of 
dobutamine. Occasionally, minimum vasoconstriction has been observed.
                  Most clinical experience with dobutamine is short-term-not more than several hours in duration. In 
the limited number of patients who were studied for 24, 48, and 72 hours, a 
persistent increase in cardiac output occurred in some, whereas output returned 
toward baseline values in others.
                  The onset of action of dobutamine is within 1 to 2 minutes; however, as much 
as 10 minutes may be required to obtain the peak effect of a particular infusion 
rate.
                  The plasma half-life of dobutamine in humans is 2 minutes. The principal 
routes of metabolism are methylation of the catechol and conjugation. In human 
urine, the major excretion products are the conjugates of dobutamine and 
3-O-methyl dobutamine. The 3-O-methyl derivative of dobutamine is inactive.
                  Alteration of synaptic concentrations of catecholamines with either reserpine 
or tricyclic antidepressants does not alter the actions of dobutamine in 
animals, which indicates that the actions of dobutamine are not dependent on 
presynaptic mechanisms.
               
               
            
         