
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Introduction
                     
                        Wilson's disease (hepatolenticular degeneration) is an autosomal recessive metabolic defect in hepatic excretion of copper in the bile, resulting in accumulation of excess copper in the liver, and subsequently in other organs, including the brain, kidneys, eyes, bone, and muscles. In this disease, hepatocytes store excess copper, but when their capacity is exceeded copper is released into the blood and is taken up in extrahepatic sites, such as the brain, resulting in motor disorders (ataxia, tremors, speech difficulties) and psychiatric manifestations (irritability, depression, deterioration of work performance). Redistribution of excess copper in hepatocytes leads to hepatocellular injury, inflammation, necrosis, and eventual cirrhosis. Patients may present clinically with predominantly hepatic, neurologic, or psychiatric symptoms.
                        The disease has been treated by restricting copper in the diet, and the use of chelating agents to bind free copper to reduce its toxicity and facilitate its excretion. The purpose of initial treatment of symptomatic patients with a chelating agent is to detoxify copper. Once the patient's symptoms have stabilized clinically, maintenance treatment begins. Clinical measures are used to determine whether the patient remains stable (See PRECAUTIONS: Monitoring Patients).
                        The active moiety in zinc acetate is zinc cation. Regardless of the ligand, zinc blocks the intestinal absorption of copper from the diet and the reabsorption of endogenously secreted copper such as that from the saliva, gastric juice and bile. Zinc induces the production of metallothionein in the enterocyte, a protein that binds copper thereby preventing its serosal transfer into the blood. The bound copper is then lost in the stool following desquamation of the intestinal cells.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        Because the proposed site of action of zinc is an effect on copper uptake at the level of the intestinal cell, pharmacokinetic evaluations based on blood levels of zinc do not provide useful information on zinc bioavailability at the site of action. Determinations of zinc content in the liver and the plasma zinc concentration after the oral administration of zinc acetate have yielded inconsistent results. However, foods and beverages have been shown to decrease the uptake of zinc thereby decreasing the levels of zinc in the plasma of healthy volunteers. For this reason, the oral dose of zinc should be separated from food and beverages, other than water, by at least one hour.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        In pharmacodynamic studies, the methods used included net copper balance and radiolabeled copper uptake in Wilson’s disease patients. These studies showed that a regimen of 50 mg t.i.d. of zinc acetate was effective in inducing a negative mean copper balance (-0.44 mg/day) and an adequate mean 64Cu uptake (0.82% of the administered dose). A regimen of 25 mg t.i.d. of zinc acetate was also pharmacodynamically active but fewer patients have been treated with this regimen than 50 mg t.i.d.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         