
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  Cimetidine competitively inhibits the action of histamine at the histamine H receptors of the parietal cells and thus is a histamine H -receptor antagonist.
                            2
                     2
                  
                  Cimetidine is not an anticholinergic agent. Studies have shown that cimetidine inhibits both daytime and nocturnal basal gastric acid secretion. Cimetidine also inhibits gastric acid secretion stimulated by food, histamine, pentagastrin, caffeine and insulin.
               
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Antisecretory Activity
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           1) Acid Secretion
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    Nocturnal
                                 
                                 
                                    An 800 mg oral dose of cimetidine at bedtime reduces mean hourly H activity by greater than 85% over an 8-hour period in duodenal ulcer patients, with no effect on daytime acid secretion. A 1600 mg oral dose of cimetidine at bedtime produces 100% inhibition of mean hourly H activity over an 8-hour period in duodenal ulcer patients, but also reduces H activity by 35% for an additional 5 hours into the following morning. Cimetidine given as 400 mg twice daily and 300 mg 4 times daily decreases nocturnal acid secretion in a dose related manner, i.e., 47% to 83% over a 6 to 8-hour period and 54% over a 9-hour period, respectively.
                                                    +
                                       +
                                       +
                                    
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    Food Stimulated
                                 
                                 
                                    During the first hour after a standard experimental meal, a 300 mg oral dose of cimetidine inhibited gastric acid secretion in duodenal ulcer patients by at least 50%. During the subsequent 2 hours cimetidine inhibited gastric acid secretion by at least 75%.
                                    The effect of a 300 mg breakfast dose of cimetidine continued for at least 4 hours and there was partial suppression of the rise in gastric acid secretion following the luncheon meal in duodenal ulcer patients. This suppression of gastric acid output was enhanced and could be maintained by another 300 mg dose of cimetidine given with lunch.
                                    In another study, a 300 mg dose of cimetidine given with the meal increased gastric pH as compared with placebo.
                                    


                                 



                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    24-Hour Mean H+ Activity
                                 
                                 
                                    Cimetidine dosed at 800 mg at bedtime, 400 mg twice daily and 300 mg 4 times daily all provide a similar, moderate (less than 60%) level of 24 hour acid suppression. However, the 800 mg bedtime dose regimen exerts its entire effect on nocturnal acid, and does not affect daytime gastric physiology.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    Chemically Stimulated
                                 
                                 
                                    Cimetidine administered orally significantly inhibited gastric acid secretion stimulated by betazole (an isomer of histamine), pentagastrin, caffeine and insulin as follows:
                                    


                                    


When food and betazole were used to stimulate secretion, inhibition of hydrogen ion concentration usually ranged from 45% to 75% and the inhibition of volume ranged from 30% to 65%.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           2) Pepsin
                           
                              300 mg of cimetidine taken orally reduced total pepsin output as a result of the decrease in volume of gastric juice.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           3) Intrinsic Factor
                           
                              Intrinsic factor secretion was studied with betazole as a stimulant. Cimetidine dosed at 300 mg orally inhibited the rise in intrinsic factor concentration produced by betazole, but some intrinsic factor was secreted at all times.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Other
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Lower Esophageal Sphincter Pressure and Gastric Emptying
                           
                              Cimetidine has no effect on lower esophageal sphincter (LES) pressure or the rate of gastric emptying.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        Cimetidine is rapidly absorbed after oral administration and peak levels occur in 45 to 90 minutes. The half-life of cimetidine is approximately 2 hours. Blood concentrations remain above that required to provide 80% inhibition of basal gastric acid secretion for 4 to 5 hours following a dose of 300 mg.
                        Following parenteral administration, most of the drug is excreted as the parent compound in the urine, the principle route of excretion of cimetidine. After oral administration, the drug is extensively metabolized in which the sulfoxide is the major metabolite. Following a single oral dose, 48% of the drug is recovered from the urine after 24 hours as the parent compound.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         