
               
               
               
                  12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
               
                  
                     Figure 2: Average plasma oxybutynin concentrations (Cp) in 24 healthy male and female volunteers during single-dose application of OXYTROL 3.9 mg/day to the abdomen, buttock, and hip (System removal at 96 hours).
                     
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     Figure 3: Average (SEM) steady-state oxybutynin and N-desethyloxybutynin plasma concentrations (Cp) measured in 13 healthy volunteers following the second transdermal system application in a multiple-dose, randomized, crossover study.
                     
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     Figure 4: Average plasma concentrations (Cp) measured after a single, 96-hour application of the OXYTROL 3.9 mg/day system (AUCinf/96) and a single, 5 mg, oral immediate-release dose of oxybutynin chloride (AUCinf/8) in 16 healthy male and female volunteers.
                     
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                     
                        The free base form of oxybutynin is pharmacologically equivalent to oxybutynin hydrochloride. Oxybutynin acts as a competitive antagonist of acetylcholine at postganglionic muscarinic receptors, resulting in relaxation of bladder smooth muscle. In patients with conditions characterized by involuntary detrusor contractions, cystometric studies have demonstrated that oxybutynin increases maximum urinary bladder capacity and increases the volume to first detrusor contraction. 
                        Oxybutynin is a racemic (50:50) mixture of R- and S-isomers. Antimuscarinic activity resides predominantly in the R-isomer. The active metabolite, N-desethyloxybutynin, has pharmacological activity on the human detrusor muscle that is similar to that of oxybutynin in in vitro studies.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                     
                        
                           Absorption
                        
                        Oxybutynin is transported across intact skin and into the systemic circulation by passive diffusion across the stratum corneum. The average daily dose of oxybutynin absorbed from the 39 cm2 OXYTROL system is 3.9 mg. The average (SD) nominal dose, 0.10 (0.02) mg oxybutynin per cm2 surface area, was obtained from analysis of residual oxybutynin content of systems worn over a continuous 4-day period during 303 separate occasions in 76 healthy volunteers. Following application of the first OXYTROL 3.9 mg/day system, oxybutynin plasma concentrations increase for approximately 24 to 48 hours, reaching average maximum concentrations of 3 to 4 ng/mL. Thereafter, steady concentrations are maintained for up to 96 hours. Absorption of oxybutynin is bioequivalent when OXYTROL is applied to the abdomen, buttocks, or hip. Average plasma concentrations measured during a randomized, crossover study of the three recommended application sites in 24 healthy men and women are shown in Figure 2.
                        
                           Figure 2: Average plasma oxybutynin concentrations (Cp) in 24 healthy male and female volunteers during single-dose application of OXYTROL 3.9 mg/day to the abdomen, buttock, and hip (System removal at 96 hours).
                        
                        Steady-state conditions are reached during the second OXYTROL application. Average steady-state plasma concentrations were 3.1 ng/mL for oxybutynin and 3.8 ng/mL for N-desethyloxybutynin (Figure 3). Table 3 provides a summary of pharmacokinetic parameters of oxybutynin in healthy volunteers after single and multiple applications of OXYTROL.
                        
                           Figure 3: Average (SEM) steady-state oxybutynin and N-desethyloxybutynin plasma concentrations (Cp) measured in 13 healthy volunteers following the second transdermal system application in a multiple-dose, randomized, crossover study.
                        
                        


                        



                           ‡  T
                           
                              max
                            given as median

                           §  AUCinf
                           

                           ¶  AUC0-96
                           

                           #Þ  AUC0-84
                        
                        
                           Distribution
                        
                        Oxybutynin is widely distributed in body tissues following systemic absorption. The volume of distribution was estimated to be 193 L after intravenous administration of 5 mg oxybutynin chloride.
                        
                           Metabolism
                        
                        Oxybutynin is metabolized primarily by the cytochrome P450 enzyme systems, particularly CYP3A4, found mostly in the liver and gut wall. Metabolites include phenylcyclohexylglycolic acid, which is pharmacologically inactive, and N-desethyloxybutynin, which is pharmacologically active.
                        After oral administration of oxybutynin, pre-systemic first-pass metabolism results in an oral bioavailability of approximately 6% and higher plasma concentration of the N-desethyl metabolite compared to oxybutynin (see Figure 4). The plasma concentration area under the time-concentration curve (AUC) ratio of N-desethyl metabolite to parent compound following a single 5 mg oral dose of oxybutynin chloride was 11.9:1.
                        Transdermal administration of oxybutynin bypasses first-pass gastrointestinal and hepatic metabolism, reducing the formation of the N-desethyl metabolite (see Figure 4). Only small amounts of CYP3A4 are found in skin, limiting pre-systemic metabolism during transdermal absorption. The resulting plasma concentration AUC ratio of N-desethyl metabolite to parent compound following multiple OXYTROL applications was 1.3:1.
                        
                           Figure 4: Average plasma concentrations (Cp) measured after a single, 96-hour application of the OXYTROL 3.9 mg/day system (AUCinf/96) and a single, 5 mg, oral immediate-release dose of oxybutynin chloride (AUCinf/8) in 16 healthy male and female volunteers.
                        
                        Following intravenous administration, the elimination half-life of oxybutynin is approximately 2 hours. Following removal of OXYTROL, plasma concentrations of oxybutynin and N-desethyloxybutynin decline with an apparent half-life of approximately 7 to 8 hours.
                        
                           Excretion
                        
                        Oxybutynin is extensively metabolized by the liver, with less than 0.1% of the administered dose excreted unchanged in the urine. Also, less than 0.1% of the administered dose is excreted as the metabolite N-desethyloxybutynin.
                        
                           Specific Populations:
                        
                        
                           Renal Impairment
                           : The effects of renal impairment on the pharmacokinetics of oxybutynin and N-desethyloxybutynin are not known. 
                        
                           Hepatic Impairment
                           : The effects of hepatic impairment on the pharmacokinetics of oxybutynin and N-desethyloxybutynin are not known.
                        
                           Geriatric
                           : The pharmacokinetics of oxybutynin and N-desethyloxybutynin were similar in older and younger patients.
                        
                           Pediatric
                           : The pharmacokinetics of oxybutynin and N-desethyloxybutynin were not evaluated in individuals younger than 18 years of age.
                        
                           Gender
                           : There were no significant differences in the pharmacokinetics of oxybutynin in healthy male and female volunteers following application of OXYTROL.
                        
                           Race: Available data suggest that there are no significant differences in the pharmacokinetics of oxybutynin based on race in healthy volunteers following administration of OXYTROL. Japanese volunteers demonstrated a somewhat lower metabolism of oxybutynin to N-desethyloxybutynin compared to Caucasian volunteers.

                        
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         