
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              
                                 Cyclosporine:  Combination increases rosuvastatin exposure. Limit CRESTOR dose to 5 mg once daily. (2.5, 7.1)
                           
                           
                              
                                 Gemfibrozil: Combination should be avoided. If used together, limit CRESTOR dose to 10 mg once daily. (5.1, 7.2)
                           
                           
                              
                                 Lopinavir/Ritonavir or atazanavir/ritonavir:  Combination increases rosuvastatin exposure. Limit CRESTOR dose to 10 mg once daily. (2.5, 5.1, 7.3)
                           
                           
                              
                                 Coumarin anticoagulants: Combination prolongs INR. Achieve stable INR prior to starting CRESTOR. Monitor INR frequently until stable upon initiation or alteration of CRESTOR therapy. (5.3, 7.4)
                           
                           
                              
                                 Concomitant lipid-lowering therapies:  Use with fibrates or lipid-modifying doses (≥1 g/day) of niacin increases the risk of adverse skeletal muscle effects. Caution should be used when prescribing with CRESTOR. (5.1, 7.5, 7.6)
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 Cyclosporine
                     
                        Cyclosporine significantly increased rosuvastatin exposure.  Therefore, in patients taking cyclosporine, therapy should be limited to CRESTOR 5 mg once daily [see Dosage and Administration (2.5), Warnings and Precautions (5.1), and  Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 Gemfibrozil
                     
                        Gemfibrozil significantly increased rosuvastatin exposure.  Therefore, combination therapy with CRESTOR and gemfibrozil should be avoided.  If used, do not exceed CRESTOR 10 mg once daily  [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3 Protease Inhibitors
                     
                        Coadministration of rosuvastatin with certain protease inhibitors given in combination with ritonavir has differing effects on rosuvastatin exposure. The protease inhibitor combinations lopinavir/ritonavir and atazanavir/ritonavir increase rosuvastatin exposure (AUC) up to threefold [see Table 3 – Clinical Pharmacology  (12.3)]. For these combinations the dose of CRESTOR should be limited to 10 mg. The combinations of tipranavir/ritonavir or fosamprenavir/ritonavir produce little or no change in rosuvastatin exposure. Caution should be exercised when rosuvastatin is coadministered with protease inhibitors given in combination with ritonavir [see Dosage and Administration (2.5), Warnings and Precautions (5.1) and Clinical Pharmacology  (12.3)].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4 Coumarin Anticoagulants
                     
                        CRESTOR significantly increased INR in patients receiving coumarin anticoagulants. Therefore, caution should be exercised when coumarin anticoagulants are given in conjunction with CRESTOR.  In patients taking coumarin anticoagulants and CRESTOR concomitantly, INR should be determined before starting CRESTOR and frequently enough during early therapy to ensure that no significant alteration of INR occurs [see Warnings and Precautions (5.3) and  Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.5 Niacin
                     
                        The risk of skeletal muscle effects may be enhanced when CRESTOR is used in combination with lipid-modifying doses (≥1 g/day) of niacin; caution should be used when prescribing with CRESTOR [see Warnings and Precautions (5.1)].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.6 Fenofibrate
                     
                        When CRESTOR was coadministered with fenofibrate, no clinically significant increase in the AUC of rosuvastatin or fenofibrate was observed. Because it is known that the risk of myopathy during treatment with HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors is increased with concomitant use of fenofibrates, caution should be used when prescribing fenofibrates with CRESTOR [see Warnings and Precautions (5.1) and Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         