


CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
Pralidoxime chloride is a cholinesterase reactivator.The principal action of pralidoxime is to reactivate cholinesterase (mainly outside of the central nervous system) which has been inactivated by phosphorylation due to an organophosphate pesticide or related compound. The destruction of accumulated acetylcholine can then proceed and neuromuscular junctions will again function normally. Pralidoxime also slows the process of "aging" of phosphorylated cholinesterase to a non-reactivatable form, and detoxifies certain organophosphates by direct chemical reaction. The drug has its most critical effect in relieving paralysis of the muscles of respiration. Because pralidoxime is less effective in relieving depression of the respiratory center, atropine is always required concomitantly to block the effect of accumulated acetylcholine at this site. Pralidoxime relieves muscarinic signs and symptoms, salivation, bronchospasm, etc., but this action is relatively unimportant since atropine is adequate for this purpose.Pralidoxime is distributed throughout the extracellular water, it is not bound to plasma protein. The drug is rapidly excreted in the urine partly unchanged, and partly as a metabolite produced by the liver. Consequently, pralidoxime is relatively short acting and repeated doses may be needed, especially where there is any evidence of continuing absorption of the poison.The minimum therapeutic concentration of pralidoxime in plasma is 4 μg/mL, this level is reached in about 16 minutes after a single injection of 600 mg pralidoxime chloride. The apparent half-life of pralidoxime chloride is 74-77 minutes.μg/mL, this level is reached in about 16 minutes after a single injection of 600 mg pralidoxime chloride. The apparent half-life of pralidoxime chloride is 74-77 minutes.It has been reported that the supplemental use of oxime cholinesterase reactivators (such as pralidoxime) reduces the incidence and severity of developmental defects in chick embryos exposed to such known teratogens as parathion, bidrin, carbachol and neostigmine. This protective effect of the oximes was shown to be dose related.


