
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1	Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Marqibo is a sphingomyelin/cholesterol liposome-encapsulated formulation of vincristine sulfate.  Non-liposomal vincristine sulfate binds to tubulin, altering the tubulin polymerization equilibrium, resulting in altered microtubule structure and function.  Non-liposomal vincristine sulfate stabilizes the spindle apparatus, preventing chromosome segregation, triggering metaphase arrest and inhibition of mitosis.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        The plasma pharmacokinetics of Marqibo was investigated in 13 adult patients with relapsed ALL who received a Marqibo dose of 2.25 mg/m2 administered as a 1-hour intravenous infusion.  The calculated pharmacokinetic parameters for total plasma vincristine sulfate are given in Table 3.  The vincristine sulfate levels reported in Table 3 reflect liposome-encapsulated drug that may not be immediately bioavailable and may not be directly comparable to plasma levels of vincristine sulfate after administration of non-liposomal vincristine sulfate, which is immediately bioavailable.
                        


                        


The plasma clearance (CL) of Marqibo is slow, 345 mL/h, at a dose of 2.25 mg/m2.  This is in comparison to the rapid clearance of non-liposomal vincristine sulfate at 189 mL/min/m2 (11,340 mL/h).  The slow clearance of Marqibo contributes to a much higher AUC for Marqibo relative to non-liposomal vincristine sulfate.
                        Following intravenous administration of Marqibo, urinary excretion was a minor route of elimination for vincristine sulfate and its metabolite.  Less than 8% of the administered Marqibo dose was eliminated in urine over a 96-hour observation period, which is similar to the urinary excretion of non-liposomal vincristine sulfate.  Following non-liposomal vincristine sulfate infusion, the main route of vincristine sulfate excretion was the fecal route, accounting for 69% of the administered dose over 72 hours.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         