
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
                  No formal drug interaction studies have been conducted with Marqibo.  Marqibo is expected to interact with drugs known to interact with non-liposomal vincristine sulfate.
                  Simultaneous oral or intravenous administration of phenytoin and antineoplastic chemotherapy combinations that included non-liposomal vincristine sulfate have been reported to reduce blood levels of phenytoin and to increase seizure activity.
               
               
               
                  
                     
                        Marqibo is expected to interact with drugs known to interact with non-liposomal vincristine sulfate (7).
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1	CYP3A Interactions
                     
                        Vincristine sulfate, the active agent in Marqibo, is a substrate for cytochrome P450 3A isozymes (CYP3A); therefore, the concomitant use of strong CYP3A inhibitors should be avoided (e.g., ketoconazole, itraconazole, voriconazole, posaconazole, clarithromycin, atazanavir, indinavir, nefazodone, nelfinavir, ritonavir, saquinavir, telithromycin).  Similarly, the concomitant use of strong CYP3A inducers should be avoided (e.g., dexamethasone, phenytoin, carbamazepine, rifampin, rifabutin, rifapentine, phenobarbital, St. John's Wort).
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2	P-glycoprotein Interactions
                     
                        Vincristine sulfate, the active agent in Marqibo, is also a substrate for P-glycoprotein (P-gp).  The effect of concomitant use of potent P-gp inhibitors or inducers has not been investigated; it is likely that these agents will alter the pharmacokinetics or pharmacodynamics of Marqibo.  Therefore the concomitant use of potent P-gp inhibitors or inducers should be avoided.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         