
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              •Cholinesterase inhibitors have the potential to interfere with the activity of anticholinergic medications (7.2).
                           
                              •A synergistic effect may be expected with concomitant administration of succinylcholine, similar neuromuscular blocking agents, or cholinergic agonists (7.3).
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 Effects of Other Drugs on the Metabolism of Donepezil Hydrochloride
                     
                        Ketoconazole and quinidine, inhibitors of CYP450, 3A4 and 2D6, respectively, inhibit donepezil metabolism in vitro. Whether there is a clinical effect of quinidine is not known. In a 7-day crossover study in 18 healthy volunteers, ketoconazole (200 mg q.d.) increased mean donepezil (5 mg q.d.) concentrations (AUC0-24 and Cmax) by 36%. The clinical relevance of this increase in concentration is unknown.
                        Inducers of CYP 3A4 (e.g., phenytoin, carbamazepine, dexamethasone, rifampin, and phenobarbital) could increase the rate of elimination of donepezil hydrochloride.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 Use with Anticholinergics
                     
                        Because of their mechanism of action, cholinesterase inhibitors have the potential to interfere with the activity of anticholinergic medications.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3 Use with Cholinomimetics and Other Cholinesterase Inhibitors
                     
                        A synergistic effect may be expected when cholinesterase inhibitors are given concurrently with succinylcholine, similar neuromuscular blocking agents or cholinergic agonists such as bethanechol.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         