
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Hydroxyprogesterone caproate is a synthetic progestin.
                                    The mechanism by which hydroxyprogesterone caproate reduces the
                                    risk of recurrent preterm birth is not known.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        No specific pharmacodynamic studies were conducted with
                                    Makena.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        
                           Absorption: Peak
                                    serum levels of hydroxyprogesterone caproate appeared after 3-7
                                    days in non-pregnant female subjects following a single
                                    intramuscular injection of 1000 mg hydroxyprogesterone caproate.
                                    Based on pharmacokinetic analysis of five non-pregnant female
                                    subjects who received a single intramuscular administration of
                                    1000 mg hydroxyprogesterone caproate, the mean (±SD)
                                    Cmax is estimated to be 27.8 (±5.3) ng/mL, and the
                                        Tmax is estimated to be 4.6 (±1.7) days. The
                                    elimination half-life of hydroxyprogesterone caproate was 7.8
                                    (±3.0) days. Once-weekly intramuscular administration of 1000 mg
                                    hydroxyprogesterone caproate to non-pregnant women resulted in
                                    trough concentration of 60.0 (±14) ng/mL after 13 weeks. The
                                    pharmacokinetics of the 250 mg dose of hydroxyprogesterone
                                    caproate has not been evaluated.
                        
                           Distribution:
                                    Hydroxyprogesterone caproate binds extensively to plasma
                                    proteins including albumin and corticosteroid binding globulins.
                        
                           Metabolism: In
                                    vitro studies have shown that hydroxyprogesterone caproate can
                                    be metabolized by human hepatocytes, both by phase I and phase
                                    II reactions. Hydroxyprogesterone caproate undergoes extensive
                                    reduction, hydroxylation and conjugation. The conjugated
                                    metabolites include sulfated, glucuronidated and acetylated
                                    products. In vitro data indicate that the metabolism of
                                    hydroxyprogesterone caproate is predominantly mediated by CYP3A4
                                    and CYP3A5. The in vitro data indicate that the caproate group
                                    is retained during metabolism of hydroxyprogesterone caproate.
                        
                           Excretion: Both
                                    conjugated metabolites and free steroids are excreted in the
                                    urine and feces, with the conjugated metabolites being
                                    prominent. Following intramuscular administration to pregnant
                                    women at 10-12 weeks gestation, approximately 50% of a dose was
                                    recovered in the feces and approximately 30% recovered in the
                                    urine.
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Specific Populations
                           
                           
                              
                                 Renal
                                            Impairment: The effect of renal impairment on
                                            the pharmacokinetics of Makena has not been evaluated.
                              
                                 Hepatic
                                            Impairment: The effect of hepatic impairment
                                            on the pharmacokinetics of Makena has not been
                                            evaluated.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Drug Interactions
                           
                           
                              
                                 Cytochrome P450
                                                (CYP) enzymes: An in vitro inhibition
                                            study using human liver microsomes and CYP
                                            isoform-selective substrates indicated that
                                            hydroxyprogesterone caproate increased the metabolic
                                            rate of CYP1A2, CYP2A6, and CYP2B6 by approximately 80%,
                                            150%, and 80%, respectively. However, in another
                                                in vitro
                                            study using human hepatocytes under conditions where the
                                            prototypical inducers or inhibitors caused the
                                            anticipated increases or decreases in CYP enzyme
                                            activities, hydroxyprogesterone caproate did not induce
                                            or inhibit CYP1A2, CYP2A6, or CYP2B6 activity. Overall,
                                            the findings indicate that hydroxyprogesterone caproate
                                            has minimal potential for CYP1A2, CYP2A6, and CYP2B6
                                            related drug-drug interactions at the clinically
                                            relevant concentrations.
                              
                                 In vitro
                                            data indicated that therapeutic concentration of
                                            hydroxyprogesterone caproate is not likely to inhibit
                                            the activity of CYP2C8, CYP2C9, CYP2C19, CYP2D6, CYP2E1,
                                            and CYP3A4.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         