
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Miconazole is an antifungal drug [ see Clinical Pharmacology (12.4)].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        
                           Absorption and Distribution
                        
                        
                           Salivary
                        
                        Single dose application of ORAVIG containing 50 mg of miconazole to the buccal mucosa of 18 healthy volunteers provided mean maximum salivary concentrations of 15 mcg/mL at 7 hours after application of the tablet. This provided an average saliva exposure to miconazole estimated from the AUC (0-24h) of 55.23 mcg⋅h/mL. The pharmacokinetic parameters of miconazole in the saliva of healthy volunteers are provided in Table 4.
                        


                        


In healthy volunteers, the duration of buccal adhesion was on average 15 hours following a single dose application of ORAVIG 50 mg.
                        
                           Plasma
                        
                        Plasma concentrations of miconazole were below the lower limit of quantification (0.4 mcg/mL) in 157/162 (97%) samples from healthy volunteers following single-dose application of ORAVIG 50 mg. Measurable plasma concentrations ranged from 0.5 to 0.83 mcg/mL.
                        Plasma concentrations of miconazole evaluated after 7 days of treatment in 40 HIV-positive patients were all below the limit of quantification (0.1 mcg/mL).
                        
                           Metabolism and Excretion 
                        
                        Most of the absorbed miconazole is metabolized by the liver with less than 1% of the administered dose found unchanged in urine. In healthy volunteers, the terminal half-life is 24 hours following systemic administration. There are no active metabolites of miconazole.
                        
                           Food Effect
                        
                        There was no formal food effect study conducted with ORAVIG; however, in clinical studies patients were allowed to eat and drink while taking ORAVIG.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.4 Microbiology
                     
                        
                           
                              Mechanism of Action
                           
                        
                        Miconazole inhibits the enzyme cytochrome P450 14α-demethylase which leads to inhibition of ergosterol synthesis, an essential component of the fungal cell membrane. Miconazole also affects the synthesis of triglycerides and fatty acids and inhibits oxidative and peroxidative enzymes, increasing the amount of reactive oxygen species within the cell.
                        
                           Activity in vitro and in vivo
                           
                        
                        Miconazole is active against Candida albicans, C. parapsilosis, and C. tropicalis. Correlation between minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) results in vitro and clinical outcome has yet to be established.
                        
                           Drug Resistance
                        
                        
                           In vitro studies have shown that some Candida strains that demonstrate reduced susceptibility to one antifungal azole may also exhibit reduced susceptibility to other azoles suggesting cross-resistance. 
                        Clinically relevant resistance to systemically utilized triazoles may occur in Candida species.  Resistance may occur by multiple mechanisms such as changes in amino acids and/or in the regulation of the target enzyme and of a variety of efflux pump proteins.  Multiple mechanisms may co-exist in the same isolate. Resistance breakpoints, correlating in vitro activity with clinical efficacy, have not been established for miconazole.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         