
               
               
               7	DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              •May impact absorption of orally administered medications (7.1, 12.3).
                           
                              •Warfarin: Postmarketing reports with exenatide of increased INR sometimes associated with bleeding. Monitor INR frequently until stable upon initiation of BYDUREON therapy (6.2, 7.2).
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1	Orally Administered Drugs
                     
                        Exenatide slows gastric emptying. Therefore, BYDUREON has the potential to reduce the rate of absorption of orally administered drugs. Use caution when administering oral medications with BYDUREON [see 
                              Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)
                           ].
                        In patients with type 2 diabetes, BYDUREON did not affect the absorption of orally administered acetaminophen to any clinically relevant degree.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2	Warfarin
                     
                        BYDUREON has not been studied with warfarin. However, in a drug interaction study, BYETTA did not have a significant effect on INR [see
                               Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)
                           ]. There have been postmarketing reports for BYETTA of increased INR with concomitant use of warfarin, sometimes associated with bleeding [see
                               Adverse Reactions (6.2)
                           ]. In patients taking warfarin, the INR should be monitored more frequently after initiating BYDUREON. Once a stable INR has been documented, the INR can be monitored at the intervals usually recommended for patients on warfarin.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         