
               
               
               12	CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1	Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Incretins, such as glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1), enhance glucose-dependent insulin secretion and exhibit other antihyperglycemic actions following their release into the circulation from the gut. BYDUREON is a GLP-1 receptor agonist that enhances glucose-dependent insulin secretion by the pancreatic beta-cell, suppresses inappropriately elevated glucagon secretion, and slows gastric emptying.
                        The amino acid sequence of exenatide partially overlaps that of human GLP-1. Exenatide is a GLP-1 receptor agonist that has been shown to bind and activate the human GLP-1 receptor in vitro. This leads to an increase in both glucose-dependent synthesis of insulin and in vivo secretion of insulin from pancreatic beta cells, by mechanisms involving cyclic AMP and/or other intracellular signaling pathways. Exenatide promotes insulin release from pancreatic beta-cells in the presence of elevated glucose concentrations.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2	Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        Exenatide improves glycemic control by reducing fasting and postprandial glucose concentrations in patients with type 2 diabetes through the actions described below.
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Glucose-Dependent Insulin Secretion
                           
                           
                              The effect of exenatide infusion on glucose-dependent insulin secretion rates (ISR) was investigated in 11 healthy subjects. In these healthy subjects, on average, the ISR response was glucose-dependent (Figure 1). Exenatide did not impair the normal glucagon response to hypoglycemia.
                              
                                 Figure 1: Mean (SE) Insulin Secretion Rates During Infusion of Exenatide or Placebo by Treatment, Time, and Glycemic Condition in Healthy Subjects
                              
                              
                              SE = standard error.
Notes: 5 mmol = 90 mg/dL, 4 mmol/L = 72 mg/dL, 3.2 mmol/L = 58 mg/dL; Study medication infusion was started at time = 0 minutes.
Statistical assessments were for the last 30 minutes of each glycemic step, during which the target glucose concentrations were maintained.
*  p <0.05, exenatide treatment relative to placebo.
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Figure 1
                                 
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Glucagon Secretion
                           
                           
                              In patients with type 2 diabetes, exenatide moderates glucagon secretion and lowers serum glucagon concentrations during periods of hyperglycemia.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Gastric Emptying
                           
                           
                              Exenatide slows gastric emptying, thereby reducing the rate at which postprandial glucose appears in the circulation.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Food Intake
                           
                           
                              Infusion of exenatide in 8 healthy subjects resulted in a 19% decrease in caloric intake following an ad libitum meal.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Fasting and Postprandial Glucose
                           
                           
                              In a separate 15-week controlled study where fasting glucose was assessed on a weekly basis, BYDUREON treatment resulted in a mean reduction in fasting glucose of 17 mg/dL following 2 weeks of therapy with full effect on fasting glucose not observed until approximately 9 weeks.
                              In a 30-week controlled study of exenatide extended-release compared to BYETTA, postprandial glucose levels were measured during a mixed meal tolerance test in a subset of patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus. Following treatment for 14 weeks, when steady-state concentrations had been achieved (approximately 280-310 pg/mL), the LS mean change from baseline was significantly greater with BYETTA (−126 mg/dL) than exenatide extended-release (−96 mg/dL).
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Cardiac Electrophysiology
                           
                           
                              The effect of exenatide at therapeutic (253 pg/mL) and supratherapeutic (627 pg/mL) concentrations, following an intravenous infusion on QTc interval was evaluated in a randomized, placebo- and active-controlled (moxifloxacin 400 mg) three-period crossover thorough QT study in 74 healthy subjects. The upper bound of the one-sided 95% confidence interval for the largest placebo adjusted, baseline-corrected QTc based on population correction method (QTcP) was below 10 ms. Therefore, exenatide was not associated with prolongation of the QTc interval at therapeutic and supratherapeutic concentrations.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3	Pharmacokinetics
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Absorption
                           
                           
                              Following a single dose of BYDUREON, exenatide is released from the microspheres over approximately 10 weeks. There is an initial period of release of surface-bound exenatide followed by a gradual release of exenatide from the microspheres, which results in two subsequent peaks of exenatide in plasma at around week 2 and week 6 to 7, respectively, representing the hydration and erosion of the microspheres.
                              Following initiation of once every 7 days (weekly) administration of 2 mg BYDUREON, gradual increase in the plasma exenatide concentration is observed over 6 to 7 weeks. After 6 to 7 weeks, mean exenatide concentrations of approximately 300 pg/mL were maintained over once every 7 days (weekly) dosing intervals indicating that steady state was achieved.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Distribution
                           
                           
                              The mean apparent volume of distribution of exenatide following subcutaneous administration of a single dose of BYETTA is 28.3 L and is expected to remain unchanged for BYDUREON.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Metabolism and Elimination
                           
                           
                              Nonclinical studies have shown that exenatide is predominantly eliminated by glomerular filtration with subsequent proteolytic degradation. The mean apparent clearance of exenatide in humans is 9.1 L/hour and is independent of the dose. Approximately 10 weeks after discontinuation of BYDUREON therapy, plasma exenatide concentrations generally fall below the minimal detectable concentration of 10 pg/mL.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Drug Interactions
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    Acetaminophen
                                 
                                 
                                    When 1000 mg acetaminophen tablets were administered, either with or without a meal, following 14 weeks of BYDUREON therapy (2 mg weekly), no significant changes in acetaminophen AUC were observed compared to the control period. Acetaminophen Cmax decreased by 16% (fasting) and 5% (fed) and Tmax was increased from approximately 1 hour in the control period to 1.4 hours (fasting) and 1.3 hours (fed).
                                    The following drug interactions have been studied using BYETTA. The potential for drug-drug interaction with BYDUREON is expected to be similar to that of BYETTA.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    Digoxin
                                 
                                 
                                    Administration of repeated doses of BYETTA 30 minutes before oral digoxin (0.25 mg once daily) decreased the Cmax of digoxin by 17% and delayed the Tmax of digoxin by approximately 2.5 hours; however, the overall steady-state pharmacokinetic exposure (e.g., AUC) of digoxin was not changed.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    Lovastatin
                                 
                                 
                                    Administration of BYETTA (10 mcg twice daily) 30 minutes before a single oral dose of lovastatin (40 mg) decreased the AUC and Cmax of lovastatin by approximately 40% and 28%, respectively, and delayed the Tmax by about 4 hours compared with lovastatin administered alone. In the 30-week controlled clinical trials of BYETTA, the use of BYETTA in patients already receiving HMG CoA reductase inhibitors was not associated with consistent changes in lipid profiles compared to baseline.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    Lisinopril
                                 
                                 
                                    In patients with mild to moderate hypertension stabilized on lisinopril (5-20 mg/day), BYETTA (10 mcg twice daily) did not alter steady-state Cmax or AUC of lisinopril. Lisinopril steady-state Tmax was delayed by 2 hours. There were no changes in 24-hour mean systolic and diastolic blood pressure.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    Oral Contraceptives
                                 
                                 
                                    The effect of BYETTA (10 mcg twice daily) on single and on multiple doses of a combination oral contraceptive (30 mcg ethinyl estradiol plus 150 mcg levonorgestrel) was studied in healthy female subjects. Repeated daily doses of the oral contraceptive (OC) given 30 minutes after BYETTA administration decreased the Cmax of ethinyl estradiol and levonorgestrel by 45% and 27%, respectively, and delayed the Tmax of ethinyl estradiol and levonorgestrel by 3.0 hours and 3.5 hours, respectively, as compared to the oral contraceptive administered alone. Administration of repeated daily doses of the OC one hour prior to BYETTA administration decreased the mean Cmax of ethinyl estradiol by 15%, but the mean Cmax of levonorgestrel was not significantly changed as compared to when the OC was given alone. BYETTA did not alter the mean trough concentrations of levonorgestrel after repeated daily dosing of the oral contraceptive for both regimens. However, the mean trough concentration of ethinyl estradiol was increased by 20% when the OC was administered 30 minutes after BYETTA administration injection as compared to when the OC was given alone. The effect of BYETTA on OC pharmacokinetics is confounded by the possible food effect on OC in this study [see
                                           Drug Interactions (7.1)
                                       ].
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    Warfarin
                                 
                                 
                                    Administration of warfarin (25 mg) 35 minutes after repeated doses of BYETTA (5 mcg twice daily on days 1-2 and 10 mcg twice daily on days 3-9) in healthy volunteers delayed warfarin Tmax by approximately 2 hours. No clinically relevant effects on Cmax or AUC of S- and R-enantiomers of warfarin were observed. BYETTA did not significantly alter the pharmacodynamic properties (e.g., international normalized ratio) of warfarin [see 
                                          Drug Interactions (7.2)
                                       ].
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Specific Populations
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    Renal Impairment
                                 
                                 
                                    BYDUREON has not been studied in patients with severe renal impairment (creatinine clearance <30 mL/min) or end-stage renal disease receiving dialysis. Population pharmacokinetic analysis of renally impaired patients receiving 2 mg BYDUREON indicate that there is a 62% and 33% increase in exposure in moderate (N=10) and mild (N=56) renally impaired patients, respectively, as compared to patients with normal renal function (N=84).
                                    In a study of BYETTA in subjects with end-stage renal disease receiving dialysis, mean exenatide exposure increased by 3.4-fold compared to that of subjects with normal renal function [see
                                           Use in Specific Populations (8.6)
                                       ].
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    Hepatic Impairment
                                 
                                 
                                    BYDUREON has not been studied in patients with acute or chronic hepatic impairment [see
                                           Use in Specific Populations (8.7)
                                       ].
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    Age
                                 
                                 
                                    Population pharmacokinetic analysis of patients ranging from 22 to 73 years of age suggests that age does not influence the pharmacokinetic properties of exenatide [see
                                           Use in Specific Populations (8.5)
                                       ].
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    Gender
                                 
                                 
                                    Population pharmacokinetic analysis suggests that gender does not influence the steady-state concentrations of exenatide following BYDUREON administration.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    Race
                                 
                                 
                                    There were no apparent differences in steady-state concentrations of exenatide among Caucasian, Hispanic, and Black patients following BYDUREON administration.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    Body Mass Index
                                 
                                 
                                    Population pharmacokinetic analysis of patients with body mass indices (BMI) ≥30 kg/m2 and <30 kg/m2 suggests that BMI has no significant effect on the pharmacokinetics of exenatide.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    Pediatric
                                 
                                 
                                    BYDUREON has not been studied in pediatric patients [see 
                                          Use in Specific Populations (8.4)
                                       ].
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         