
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1	Mechanism of Action
                     
                        COCs lower the risk of becoming pregnant primarily by suppressing ovulation.  Other possible mechanisms may include cervical mucus changes that inhibit sperm penetration and endometrial changes that reduce the likelihood of implantation.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2	Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        No specific pharmacodynamic studies were conducted with ORTHO TRI-CYCLEN Lo.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3	Pharmacokinetics
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Absorption
                              
                              Norgestimate (NGM) and EE are rapidly absorbed following oral administration. NGM is rapidly and completely metabolized by first pass (intestinal and/or hepatic) mechanisms to norelgestromin (NGMN) and norgestrel (NG), which are the major active metabolites of NGM. Mean pharmacokinetic parameters for NGMN, NG and EE during three cycles of administration of ORTHO TRI-CYCLEN Lo are summarized in Table 3.
                              Peak serum concentrations of NGMN and EE were generally reached by 2 hours after administration of ORTHO TRI-CYCLEN Lo. Accumulation following multiple dosing of the 0.180 mg NGM / 0.025 mg EE dose is approximately 1.5 to 2 fold for NGMN and approximately 1.5 fold for EE compared with single dose administration, in agreement with that predicted based on linear kinetics of NGMN and EE. The pharmacokinetics of NGMN is dose proportional following NGM doses of 0.180 to 0.250 mg. Steady-state conditions for NGMN following each NGM dose and for EE were achieved during the three cycle study. Non-linear accumulation (4.5–14.5 fold) of NG was observed as a result of high affinity binding to SHBG, which limits its biological activity.
                              Table 3 Summary of NGMN, NG and EE pharmacokinetic parameters.
                              


                           



                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Food Effect
                                    
                                    The effect of food on the pharmacokinetics of ORTHO TRI-CYCLEN Lo has not been studied.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Distribution
                              
                              NGMN and NG are highly bound (>97%) to serum proteins. NGMN is bound to albumin and not to SHBG, while NG is bound primarily to SHBG. EE is extensively bound (>97%) to serum albumin and induces an increase in the serum concentrations of SHBG.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Metabolism
                              
                              NGM is extensively metabolized by first-pass mechanisms in the gastrointestinal tract and/or liver. NGM's primary active metabolite is NGMN. Subsequent hepatic metabolism of NGMN occurs and metabolites include NG, which is also active and various hydroxylated and conjugated metabolites. Although NGMN and its metabolites inhibit a variety of P450 enzymes in human liver microsomes, under the recommended dosing regimen, the in vivo concentrations of NGMN and its metabolites, even at the peak serum levels, are relatively low compared to the inhibitory constant (Ki). EE is also metabolized to various hydroxylated products and their glucuronide and sulfate conjugates.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Excretion
                              
                              Following 3 cycles of administration of ORTHO TRI-CYCLEN Lo, the mean (± SD) elimination half-life values, at steady-state, for NGMN, NG and EE were 28.1 (± 10.6) hours, 36.4 (± 10.2) hours and 17.7 (± 4.4) hours, respectively (Table 2). The metabolites of NGMN and EE are eliminated by renal and fecal pathways.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Use in Specific Populations
                              
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Effects of Body Weight, Body Surface Area, and Age
                                    
                                    The effects of body weight, body surface area, age and race on the pharmacokinetics of NGMN, NG and EE were evaluated in 79 healthy women using pooled data following single dose administration of NGM 0.180 or 0.250 mg / EE 0.025 mg tablets in four pharmacokinetic studies. Increasing body weight and body surface area were each associated with decreases in Cmax and AUC0–24h values for NGMN and EE and increases in CL/F (oral clearance) for EE. Increasing body weight by 10 kg is predicted to reduce the following parameters: NGMN Cmax by 9% and AUC0–24h by 19%, NG Cmax by 12% and AUC0–24h by 46%, EE Cmax by 13% and AUC0–24h by 12%. These changes were statistically significant. Increasing age was associated with slight decreases (6% with increasing age by 5 years) in Cmax and AUC0–24h for NGMN and were statistically significant, but there was no significant effect for NG or EE. Only a small to moderate fraction (5–40%) of the overall variability in the pharmacokinetics of NGMN and EE following ORTHO TRI-CYCLEN Lo Tablets may be explained by any or all of the above demographic parameters.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         