
                     
                     
                     Drug Interactions
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Vasoconstrictors
                           
                           
                              Migranal®  (dihydroergotamine mesylate, USP) Nasal Spray should not be used with peripheral vasoconstrictors because the combination may cause synergistic elevation of blood pressure.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Sumatriptan
                           
                           
                              Sumatriptan has been reported to cause coronary artery vasospasm, and its effect could be additive with Migranal®  (dihydroergotamine mesylate, USP) Nasal Spray. Sumatriptan and Migranal®  (dihydroergotamine mesylate, USP) Nasal Spray should not be taken within 24 hours of each other. (See CONTRAINDICATIONS)
                              
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Beta Blockers
                           
                           
                              Although the results of a clinical study did not indicate a safety problem associated with the administration of Migranal®  (dihydroergotamine mesylate, USP) Nasal Spray to subjects already receiving propranolol, there have been reports that propranolol may potentiate the vasoconstrictive action of ergotamine by blocking the vasodilating property of epinephrine.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Nicotine
                           
                           
                              Nicotine may provoke vasoconstriction in some patients, predisposing to a greater ischemic response to ergot therapy.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              CYP 3A4 Inhibitors (e.g. Macrolide Antibiotics and Protease Inhibitors)
                           
                           
                              
                                 See CONTRAINDICATIONS and WARNINGS.
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              SSRI's
                           
                           
                              Weakness, hyperreflexia, and incoordination have been reported rarely when 5HT1 agonists have been coadministered with SSRI's (e.g., fluoxetine, fluvoxamine, paroxetine, sertraline). There have been no reported cases from spontaneous reports of drug interaction between SSRI's and Migranal®  (dihydroergotamine mesylate, USP) Nasal Spray or D.H.E. 45®.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Oral Contraceptives
                           
                           
                              The effect of oral contraceptives on the pharmacokinetics of Migranal®  (dihydroergotamine mesylate, USP) Nasal Spray has not been studied.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               