
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY:
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Cellular Resistance and Sensitivity
                     
                        The selective toxicity of 2-chloro-2’-deoxy-ß-D-adenosine towards certain normal and malignant lymphocyte and monocyte populations is based on the relative activities of deoxycytidine kinase to deoxynucleotidase.  Cladribine passively crosses the cell membrane.  In cells with a high ratio of deoxycytidine kinase to deoxynucleotidase, it is phosphorylated by deoxycytidine kinase to 2-chloro-2’-deoxy-ß-D-adenosine monophosphate (2-CdAMP).  Since 2-chloro-2’-deoxy-ß-D-adenosine is resistant to deamination by adenosine deaminase and there is little deoxynucleotide deaminase in lymphocytes and monocytes, 2-CdAMP accumulates intracellularly and is subsequently converted into the active triphosphate deoxynucleotide,2-chloro-2’-deoxy-ß-D-adenosine triphosphate (2-CdATP).  It is postulated that cells with high deoxycytidine kinase and low deoxynucleotidase activities will be selectively killed by 2-chloro-2’-deoxy-ß-D-adenosine as toxic deoxynucleotides accumulate intracellularly.
                        Cells containing high concentrations of deoxynucleotides are unable to properly repair single-strand DNA breaks.  The broken ends of DNA activate the enzyme poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase resulting in NAD and ATP depletion and disruption of cellular metabolism.  There is evidence, also, that 2-CdATP is incorporated into the DNA of dividing cells, resulting in impairment of DNA synthesis.  Thus, 2-chloro-2’-deoxy-ß-D-adenosine can be distinguished from other chemotherapeutic agents affecting purine metabolism in that it is cytotoxic to both actively dividing and quiescent lymphocytes and monocytes, inhibiting both DNA synthesis and repair.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        In a clinical investigation, 17 patients with Hairy Cell Leukemia (HCL) and normal renal function were treated for seven days with the recommended treatment regimen of cladribine injection (0.09 mg/kg/day) by continuous intravenous infusion.  The mean steady-state serum concentration was estimated to be 5.7 ng/mL with an estimated systemic clearance of 663.5 mL/h/kg when cladribine injection was given by continuous infusion over seven days.  In Hairy Cell Leukemia patients, there does not appear to be a relationship between serum concentrations and ultimate clinical outcome.
                        In another study, eight patients with hematologic malignancies received a two (2) hour infusion of cladribine injection (0.12 mg/kg).  The mean end-of-infusion plasma cladribine injection concentration was 48 ± 19 ng/mL.  For five of these patients, the disappearance of cladribine injection could be described by either a biphasic or triphasic decline.  For these patients with normal renal function, the mean terminal half-life was 5.4 hours.  Mean values for clearance and steady-state volume of distribution were 978 ± 422 mL/h/kg and 4.5 ± 2.8 L/kg, respectively.
                        Cladribine plasma concentration after intravenous administration declines multi-exponentially with an average half-life of 6.7 +/- 2.5 hours.  In general, the apparent volume of distribution of cladribine is approximately 9 L/kg, indicating an extensive distribution in body tissues.
                        Cladribine penetrates into cerebrospinal fluid.  One report indicates that concentrations are approximately 25% of those in plasma.
                        Cladribine injection is bound approximately 20% to plasma proteins.
                        Except for some understanding of the mechanism of cellular toxicity, no other information is available on the metabolism of cladribine injection in humans.  An average of 18% of the administered dose has been reported to be excreted in urine of patients with solid tumors during a five-day continuous intravenous infusion of 3.5 to 8.1 mg/m2/day of cladribine injection.  The effect of renal and hepatic impairment on the elimination of cladribine has not been investigated in humans.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         