
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Meropenem is an antibacterial drug [see Clinical Pharmacology 
                              (12.4)
                           ]. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        
                           
                              Plasma Concentrations
                           
                        
                        At the end of a 30-minute intravenous infusion of a single dose of Meropenem for Injection I.V. in healthy volunteers, mean peak plasma concentrations of meropenem are approximately 23 mcg/mL (range 14 to 26) for the 500 mg dose and 49 mcg/mL (range 39 to 58) for the 1 gram dose. A 5-minute intravenous bolus injection of Meropenem for Injection I.V. in healthy volunteers results in mean peak plasma concentrations of approximately 45 mcg/mL (range 18 to 65) for the 500 mg dose and 112 mcg/mL (range 83 to 140) for the 1 gram dose.
                        Following intravenous doses of 500 mg, mean plasma concentrations of meropenem usually decline to approximately 1 mcg/mL at 6 hours after administration.
                        No accumulation of meropenem in plasma was observed with regimens using 500 mg administered every 8 hours or 1 gram administered every 6 hours in healthy volunteers with normal renal function.
                        
                           
                              Distribution
                           
                        
                        The plasma protein binding of meropenem is approximately 2%.
                        Meropenem penetrates well into most body fluids and tissues including cerebrospinal fluid, achieving concentrations matching or exceeding those required to inhibit most susceptible bacteria. After a single intravenous dose of Meropenem for Injection I.V., the highest mean concentrations of meropenem were found in tissues and fluids at 1 hour (0.5 to 1.5 hours) after the start of infusion, except where indicated in the tissues and fluids listed in the table below.
                        


                        



                           
                              Metabolism
                           
                        
                        There is one metabolite of meropenem that is microbiologically inactive.
                        
                           
                              Excretion
                           
                        
                        In subjects with normal renal function, the elimination half-life of meropenem is approximately 1 hour. 
                        Meropenem is primarily excreted unchanged by the kidneys. Approximately 70% (50% to 75%) of the dose is excreted unchanged within 12 hours. A further 28% is recovered as the microbiologically inactive metabolite. Fecal elimination represents only approximately 2% of the dose. The measured renal clearance and the effect of probenecid show that meropenem undergoes both filtration and tubular secretion.
                        Urinary concentrations of meropenem in excess of 10 mcg/mL are maintained for up to 5 hours after a 500 mg dose.
                        
                           
                              Specific Populations
                           
                        
                        
                           
                              Renal Impairment
                           
                        
                        Pharmacokinetic studies with Meropenem for Injection I.V. in patients with renal impairment have shown that the plasma clearance of meropenem correlates with creatinine clearance. Dosage adjustments are necessary in subjects with renal impairment (creatinine clearance 50 mL/min or less) [see Dosage and Administration 
                              (2.2) and Use In Specific Populations 
                              (8.6)
                           ].
                        Meropenem I.V. is hemodialyzable. However, there is no information on the usefulness of hemodialysis to treat overdosage [see Overdosage 
                              (10)
                           ].
                        
                           
                              Hepatic Impairment
                           
                        
                        A pharmacokinetic study with Meropenem for Injection I.V. in patients with hepatic impairment has shown no effects of liver disease on the pharmacokinetics of meropenem.
                        
                           
                              Geriatric Patients
                           
                        
                        A pharmacokinetic study with Meropenem for Injection I.V. in elderly patients with renal impairment showed a reduction in plasma clearance of meropenem that correlates with age-associated reduction in creatinine clearance.
                        
                           
                              Pediatric Patients
                           
                        
                        The pharmacokinetics of meropenem for injection I.V. in pediatric patients 2 years of age or older are similar to those in adults. The elimination half-life for meropenem was approximately 1.5 hours in pediatric patients of age 3 months to 2 years. The pharmacokinetics of meropenem in patients less than 3 months of age receiving combination antibacterial drug therapy are given below.
                        


                        



                           
                              Drug Interactions
                           
                        
                        Probenecid competes with meropenem for active tubular secretion and thus inhibits the renal excretion of meropenem. Following administration of probenecid with meropenem, the mean systemic exposure increased 56% and the mean elimination half-life increased 38%. Co-administration of probenecid with meropenem is not recommended.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.4 Microbiology
                     
                        
                           Mechanism of Action 
                        
                        The bactericidal activity of meropenem results from the inhibition of cell wall synthesis. Meropenem readily penetrates the cell wall of most Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria to reach penicillin-binding-protein (PBP) targets. Its strongest affinities are toward PBPs 2, 3 and 4 of Escherichia coli and Pseudomonas aeruginosa; and PBPs 1, 2 and 4 of Staphylococcus aureus. Bactericidal concentrations (defined as a 3 log10 reduction in cell counts within 12 hours to 24 hours) are typically 1 to 2 times the bacteriostatic concentrations of meropenem, with the exception of Listeria monocytogenes, against which lethal activity is not observed.
                        Meropenem has significant stability to hydrolysis by β-lactamases, both penicillinases and cephalosporinases produced by Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria.
                        Meropenem should not be used to treat methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus
                            (MRSA) or methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus epidermidis (MRSE).
                        
                           
                              Mechanism of Resistance 
                           
                        
                        There are several mechanisms of resistance to carbapenems: 1) decreased permeability of the outer membrane of Gram-negative bacteria (due to diminished production of porins) causing reduced bacterial uptake, 2) reduced affinity of the target PBPs, 3) increased expression of efflux pump components, and 4) production of antibacterial drug-destroying enzymes (carbapenemases, metallo-β-lactamases). Localized clusters of infections due to carbapenem-resistant bacteria have been reported in some regions.
                        
                           
                              Cross-Resistance 
                           
                        
                        Cross-resistance is sometimes observed with isolates resistant to other carbapenems.
                        
                           
                              Interactions with Other Antibacterial Drugs
                           
                        
                        
                           In vitro tests show meropenem to act synergistically with aminoglycoside antibacterials against some isolates of Pseudomonas aeruginosa.
                        
                        
                           
                              Spectrum of Activity 
                           
                        
                        Meropenem has been shown to be active against most isolates of the following bacteria, both in vitro and in clinical infections as described in the INDICATIONS AND USAGE section (1).
                        
                           
                              Gram-positive bacteria
                           
                           
                              
Enterococcus faecalis (vancomycin-susceptible isolates only)

                           Staphylococcus aureus (methicillin-susceptible isolates only)

                           Streptococcus agalactiae
Streptococcus pneumoniae (penicillin-susceptible isolates only)

                           Streptococcus pyogenes
Viridans group streptococci
                        
                        
                           
                              Gram-negative bacteria  
                           
                           

                           Escherichia coli
Haemophilus influenzae 
Klebsiella pneumoniae
Neisseria meningitidis 
Pseudomonas aeruginosa 
Proteus mirabilis
                        
                        
                           
                              Anaerobic bacteria 
                           
                           

                           Bacteroides fragilis
Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron
Peptostreptococcus species
                        The following in vitro data are available, but their clinical significance is unknown. At least 90% of the following bacteria have exhibited in vitro minimum inhibitory concentrations (MICs) less than or equal to the susceptible breakpoints for meropenem. However, the safety and effectiveness of meropenem in treating clinical infections due to these bacteria have not been established in adequate and well-controlled trials.
                        
                           
                              Gram-positive bacteria
                           
                           

                           Staphylococcus epidermidis (methicillin-susceptible isolates only)
                        
                           
                              Gram-negative bacteria 
                           
                           

                           Aeromonas hydrophila
Campylobacter jejuni
                            
                           

                           Citrobacter koseri (formerly diversus)

                           Citrobacter freundii 
Enterobacter cloacae 
Hafnia alvei
                           

                           Klebsiella oxytoca
Moraxella catarrhalis
Morganella morganii  
Pasteurella multocida
Proteus vulgaris
Serratia marcescens
                        
                        
                           
                              Anaerobic bacteria 
                           
                           
                              
Bacteroides distasonis
Bacteroides ovatus
Bacteroides uniformis
Bacteroides ureolyticus
Bacteroides vulgatus
Clostridium difficile
Clostridium perfringens
Eubacterium lentum
Fusobacterium species
                              
Prevotella bivia
Prevotella intermedia
Prevotella melaninogenica
Porphyromonas asaccharolytica
Propionibacterium acnes
                        
                        
                           
                              Susceptibility Test Methods
                           
                        
                        When available, the clinical microbiology laboratory should provide cumulative results of in vitro susceptibility test results for antimicrobial drugs used in local hospitals and practice areas to the physician as periodic reports that describe the susceptibility profile of nosocomial and community-acquired pathogens. These reports should aid the physician in selecting the most effective antimicrobial.
                        
                           
                              Dilution Techniques:
                           
                        
                        Quantitative methods are used to determine antimicrobial minimum inhibitory concentrations (MICs). These MICs provide estimates of the susceptibility of bacteria to antimicrobial compounds. The MICs should be determined using a standardized test method. Standardized procedures are based on a dilution method1,3 (broth or agar) or equivalent using standardized inoculum concentrations and standardized concentrations of meropenem powder. The MIC values should be interpreted according to the criteria provided in Table 3.
                        
                           
                              Diffusion Techniques: 
                           
                        
                        Quantitative methods that require measurement of zone diameters also provide reproducible estimates of the susceptibility of bacteria to antimicrobial compounds. The zone size provides an estimate of the susceptibility of bacteria to antimicrobial compounds. The zone size should be determined using a standardized test method2,3 and requires the use of standardized inoculum concentrations. This procedure uses paper disks impregnated with 10-mcg of meropenem to test the susceptibility of microorganisms to meropenem. The disk diffusion interpretive criteria are provided in Table 3.
                        
                           
                              Anaerobic Techniques:
                           
                        
                        For anaerobic bacteria, the susceptibility to meropenem as MICs can be determined by a standardized test method.2, 4 The MIC values obtained should be interpreted according to the criteria provided in Table 3.
                        


                        


A report of Susceptible indicates that the antimicrobial is likely to inhibit growth of the pathogen if the antimicrobial compound in the blood reaches the concentrations usually achievable. A report of Intermediate indicates that the result should be considered equivocal, and, if the microorganism is not fully susceptible to alternative, clinically feasible drugs, the test should be repeated. This category implies possible clinical applicability in body sites where the drug is physiologically concentrated or in situations where a high dosage of drug can be used. This category also provides a buffer zone that prevents small uncontrolled technical factors from causing major discrepancies in interpretation. A report of Resistant indicates that the antimicrobial is not likely to inhibit growth of the pathogen if the antimicrobial compound in the blood reaches the concentrations usually achievable; other therapy should be selected.
                        
                           
                              Quality Control 
                           
                        
                        Standardized susceptibility test procedures require the use of quality controls to monitor and ensure the accuracy and precision of supplies and reagents used in the assay, and the techniques of the individuals performing the test. Standard meropenem powder should provide the following range of values noted in Table 4.
                        


