
               
               
               
                  CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY

                  PharmacodynamicsKetorolac tromethamine is a non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug 
(NSAID) that exhibits analgesic activity in animal models. The mechanism of 
action of ketorolac, like that of other NSAIDs, is not completely understood but 
may be related to prostaglandin synthetase inhibition. The biological activity 
of ketorolac tromethamine is associated with the S-form. Ketorolac tromethamine 
possesses no sedative or anxiolytic properties.
                  The peak analgesic effect of ketorolac tromethamine occurs within 2 to 3 
hours and is not statistically significantly different over the recommended 
dosage range of ketorolac tromethamine. The greatest difference between large 
and small doses of ketorolac tromethamine is in the duration of analgesia.
                  

                  PharmacokineticsKetorolac tromethamine is a racemic mixture of [-]S- and 
[+]R-enantiomeric forms, with the S-form having analgesic activity.
                  
                  
                  Comparison of IV, IM and Oral PharmacokineticsThe pharmacokinetics of ketorolac tromethamine, following IV, IM 
and oral doses of ketorolac tromethamine tablets, are compared in Table 1. In adults, the 
extent of bioavailability following administration of the oral and IM forms of 
ketorolac tromethamine was equal to that following an IV bolus.
                  
                  
                  Linear KineticsIn adults, following administration of single oral, IM or IV 
doses of ketorolac tromethamine in the recommended dosage ranges, the clearance 
of the racemate does not change. This implies that the pharmacokinetics of 
ketorolac tromethamine in adults, following single or multiple IM, IV or 
recommended oral doses of ketorolac tromethamine, are linear. At the higher 
recommended doses, there is a proportional increase in the concentrations of 
free and bound racemate.
                  AbsorptionKetorolac tromethamine is 100% absorbed after oral administration 
(see Table 1). Oral 
administration of ketorolac tromethamine after a high-fat meal resulted in 
decreased peak and delayed time-to-peak concentrations of ketorolac tromethamine 
by about one hour. Antacids did not affect the extent of absorption.
                  
                  
                  DistributionThe mean apparent volume (Vβ) of ketorolac 
tromethamine following complete distribution was approximately 13 liters. This 
parameter was determined from single-dose data. The ketorolac tromethamine 
racemate has been shown to be highly protein bound (99%). Nevertheless, plasma 
concentrations as high as 10 mcg/mL will only occupy approximately 5% of the 
albumin binding sites. Thus, the unbound fraction for each enantiomer will be 
constant over the therapeutic range. A decrease in serum albumin, however, will 
result in increased free drug concentrations.
                  Ketorolac tromethamine is excreted in human milk (see PRECAUTIONS: Nursing 
Mothers).
                  
                  
                  MetabolismKetorolac tromethamine is largely metabolized in the liver. The 
metabolic products are hydroxylated and conjugated forms of the parent drug. The 
products of metabolism, and some unchanged drug, are excreted in the urine.
                  ExcretionThe principal route of elimination of ketorolac and its 
metabolites is renal. About 92% of a given dose is found in the urine, 
approximately 40% as metabolites and 60% as unchanged ketorolac. Approximately 
6% of a dose is excreted in the feces. A single-dose study with 10 mg ketorolac 
tromethamine (n = 9) demonstrated that the S-enantiomer is cleared approximately 
2 times faster than the R-enantiomer and that the clearance was independent of 
the route of administration. This means that the ratio of S/R plasma 
concentrations decreases with time after each dose. There is little or no 
inversion of the R- to S- form in humans. The clearance of the racemate in 
normal subjects, elderly individuals and in hepatically and renally impaired 
patients is outlined in Table 
2 (see CLINICAL 
PHARMACOLOGY: Kinetics in Special Populations).
                  The half-life of the ketorolac tromethamine S-enantiomer was approximately 
2.5 hours (SD ± 0.4) compared with 5 hours (SD ± 1.7) for the R-enantiomer. In 
other studies, the half-life for the racemate has been reported to lie within 
the range of 5 to 6 hours.
                  
                  
                  AccumulationKetorolac tromethamine administered as an IV bolus every 6 hours 
for 5 days to healthy subjects (n = 13), showed no significant difference in 
Cmax on Day 1 and Day 5. Trough levels averaged 0.29 
mcg/mL (SD ± 0.13) on Day 1 and 0.55 mcg/mL (SD ± 0.23) on Day 6. Steady-state 
was approached after the fourth dose.
                  Accumulation of ketorolac tromethamine has not been studied in special 
populations (geriatric, pediatric, renal failure or hepatic disease 
patients).
                  
                     

                  
               
               
            
         