
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Absorption
                     
                        Disposition of metronidazole in the body is similar for both oral and intravenous dosage forms.
                        FLAGYL 375 capsules have been shown to have a rate and extent of absorption similar to metronidazole tablets (FLAGYL) and were bioequivalent at an equal single dose of 750 mg. In a study conducted with 23 adult, healthy, female volunteers, oral administration of two 375 mg FLAGYL capsules under fasted conditions produced a mean (±1 SD) peak plasma concentration (Cmax) of 21.4 (±2.8) mcg/mL with a mean Tmax of 1.6 (± 0.7) hours and a mean area under the plasma concentration-time curve (AUC) of 223 (±44) mcg∙hr/mL. In the same study, three 250 mg FLAGYL tablets produced a mean Cmax of 20.4 (± 3.8) mcg/mL with a mean Tmax of 1.4 (± 0.4) hours and a mean AUC of 218 (± 50) mcg∙hr/mL.
                        Administration of FLAGYL 375 capsules with food does not affect the extent of absorption of metronidazole; however, the presence of food results in a lower Cmax and a delayed Tmax compared to fasted conditions. In a study of 14 healthy, adult, female volunteers, administration of FLAGYL 375 capsules under fasting conditions produced a mean Cmax of 10.9 (± 1.5) mcg/mL, a mean Tmax of 1.5 (± 1.4) hours, and a mean AUC of 110 (± 34) mcg∙hr/mL compared to a mean Cmax of 8.6 (± 1.6) mcg/mL, a mean Tmax of 4.2 (± 1.7) hours, and a mean AUC of 99 (± 14) mcg∙hr/mL under fed conditions.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Distribution
                     
                        Metronidazole is the major component appearing in the plasma, with lesser quantities of metabolites also being present. Less than 20% of the circulating metronidazole is bound to plasma proteins. Metronidazole appears in cerebrospinal fluid, saliva, and breast milk in concentrations similar to those found in plasma. Bactericidal concentrations of metronidazole have also been detected in pus from hepatic abscesses.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Metabolism/Excretion
                     
                        The major route of elimination of metronidazole and its metabolites is via the urine (60% to 80% of the dose), with fecal excretion accounting for 6% to 15% of the dose. The metabolites that appear in the urine result primarily from side-chain oxidation [1-(ß-hydroxyethyl)-2-hydroxymethyl-5-nitroimidazole and 2-methyl-5-nitroimidazole-1-yl-acetic acid] and glucuronide conjugation, with unchanged metronidazole accounting for approximately 20% of the total. Both the parent compound and the hydroxyl metabolite possess in vitro antimicrobial activity against most strains of anaerobic bacteria and in vitro trichomonacidal activity.
                        Renal clearance of metronidazole is approximately 10 mL/min/1.73 m2. The average elimination half-life of metronidazole in healthy subjects is eight hours.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Renal Impairment
                     
                        Decreased renal function does not alter the single-dose pharmacokinetics of metronidazole.
                        Subjects with end-stage renal disease (ESRD; CLCR=8.1±9.1 mL/min) and who received a single intravenous infusion of metronidazole 500 mg had no significant change in metronidazole pharmacokinetics but had 2-fold higher Cmax of hydroxy-metronidazole and 5-fold higher Cmax of metronidazole acetate, compared to healthy subjects with normal renal function (CLCR=126±16 mL/min). Thus, on account of the potential accumulation of metronidazole metabolites in ESRD patients, monitoring for metronidazole associated adverse events is recommended (see 
                              PRECAUTIONS
                           ).
                        
                           Effect of Dialysis
                        
                        Following a single intravenous infusion or oral dose of metronidazole 500 mg, the clearance of metronidazole was investigated in ESRD subjects undergoing hemodialysis or continuous ambulatory peritoneal dialysis (CAPD). A hemodialysis session lasting for 4 to 8 hours removed 40% to 65% of the administered metronidazole dose, depending on the type of dialyzer membrane used and the duration of the dialysis session. If the administration of metronidazole cannot be separated from the dialysis session, supplementation of metronidazole dose following hemodialysis should be considered (see 
                              DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION
                           ). A peritoneal dialysis session lasting for 7.5 hours removed approximately 10% of the administered metronidazole dose. No adjustment in metronidazole dose is needed in ESRD patients undergoing CAPD.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Hepatic Impairment
                     
                        Following a single intravenous infusion of 500 mg metronidazole, the mean AUC24 of metronidazole was higher by 114% in patients with severe (Child-Pugh C) hepatic impairment, and by 54% and 53% in patients with mild (Child-Pugh A) and moderate (Child-Pugh B) hepatic impairment, respectively, compared to healthy control subjects. There were no significant changes in the AUC24 of hydroxy-metronidazole in these hepatically impaired patients. Pharmacokinetic modeling and simulation indicates the metronidazole dosage in amebiasis should be reduced by 50% and the dosage interval for trichomoniasis should be increased from every 12 hours to every 24 hours in patients with severe (Child-Pugh C) hepatic impairment. No dosage adjustment is needed for patients with mild to moderate hepatic impairment. Patients with hepatic impairment should be monitored for metronidazole associated adverse events (See 
                              PRECAUTIONS
                            and 
                              DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION
                           ).
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Geriatric Patients
                     
                        Following a single 500 mg oral or IV dose of metronidazole, subjects >70 years old with no apparent renal or hepatic dysfunction had a 40% to 80% higher mean AUC of hydroxy-metronidazole (active metabolite), with no apparent increase in the mean AUC of metronidazole (parent compound), compared to young healthy controls <40 years old. In geriatric patients, monitoring for metronidazole associated adverse events is recommended (see 
                              PRECAUTIONS
                           ).
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Pediatric Patients
                     
                        In one study, newborn infants appeared to demonstrate diminished capacity to eliminate metronidazole. The elimination half-life, measured during the first 3 days of life, was inversely related to gestational age. In infants whose gestational ages were between 28 and 40 weeks, the corresponding elimination half-lives ranged from 109 to 22.5 hours.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Microbiology
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Mechanism of Action
                           
                              Metronidazole, a nitroimidazole, exerts antibacterial effects in an anaerobic environment against most obligate anaerobes. Once metronidazole enters the organism by passive diffusion and activated in the cytoplasm of susceptible anaerobic bacteria, it is reduced; this process includes intra-cellular electron transport proteins such as ferredoxin, transfer of an electron to the nitro group of the metronidazole, and formation of a short-lived nitroso free radical. Because of this alteration of the metronidazole molecule, a concentration gradient is created and maintained which promotes the drug's intracellular transport. The reduced form of metronidazole and free radicals can interact with DNA leading to inhibition of DNA synthesis and DNA degradation leading to death of the bacteria. The precise mechanism of action of metronidazole is unclear.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Drug Resistance
                           
                              A potential for development of resistance exists against metronidazole.
                              Resistance may be due to multiple mechanisms that include decreased uptake of the drug, altered reduction efficiency, overexpression of the efflux pumps, inactivation of the drug, and/or increased DNA damage repair.
                              Metronidazole does not possess any clinically relevant activity against facultative anaerobes or obligate aerobes.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Activity In Vitro and in Clinical Infections
                           
                              Metronidazole has been shown to be active against most isolates of the following bacteria both in vitro and in clinical infections as described in the 
                                    INDICATIONS AND USAGE
                                  section.
                              
                                 Gram-positive anaerobes:
                                 
  Clostridium species
  Eubacterium species
  Peptococcus species
  Peptostreptococcus species
                              
                                 Gram-negative anaerobes:
                                 
  Bacteroides fragilis group (B. fragilis, B. distasonis, B. ovatus, B. thetaiotaomicron, B.vulgatus)
                                 
  Fusobacterium species
                              
                                 Protozoal parasites:
                                 
  Entamoeba histolytica
                                 
  Trichomonas vaginalis
                              
                              The following in vitro data are available, 												but their clinical significance is unknown.
                              
                              Metronidazole exhibits in vitro minimal inhibitory concentrations (MICs) of 8 mcg/mL or less against most (≥ 90%) isolates of the following bacteria; however, the safety and effectiveness of metronidazole in treating clinical infections due to these bacteria have not been established in adequate and well-controlled clinical trials.
                              
                                 Gram-negative anaerobes
                                 
  Bacteroides fragilis group (B. caccae, B. uniformis)
  Prevotella species (P. bivia, P. buccae, P. disiens)
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Susceptibility Tests
                           
                              When available, the clinical microbiology laboratory should provide results of in vitro susceptibility test results for antimicrobial drug products used in resident hospitals to the physician as periodic reports that describe the susceptibility profile of nosocomial or community-acquired pathogens. These reports should aid the physician in selecting an antibacterial drug product for treatment.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           For Anaerobes
                           
                              Quantitative methods are used to determine antimicrobial inhibitory concentrations (MICs). These MICs provide estimates of the susceptibility of bacteria to antimicrobial compounds. For anaerobic bacteria, the susceptibility to metronidazole can be determined by the reference broth and/or agar method1,2.
                              The MIC values obtained should be interpreted according to the criteria provided in the following Table:
                              


                              


A report of "Susceptible" (S) indicates that the antimicrobial is likely to inhibit growth of the pathogen if the antimicrobial compound reaches the concentrations at the infection site necessary to inhibit growth of the pathogen.
                              A report of "Intermediate" (I) implies that an infection due to the isolate may be appropriately treated in the body sites where the drugs are physiologically concentrated or when a high dosage of drug is used.
                              A report of "Resistant" (R) indicates that the antimicrobial is not likely to inhibit growth of the pathogen if the antimicrobial compound reaches the concentration usually achievable at the infection site; other therapy should be selected.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Quality Control
                           
                              Standardized susceptibility test procedures require the use of laboratory controls to monitor and ensure the accuracy and precision of supplies and reagents used in the assay, and the techniques of the individuals performing the test.1,2 Standard metronidazole powder should provide a value within the MIC ranges noted in the following table:
                              


                           



                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           For protozoal parasites
                           
                              Standardized tests do not exist for use in clinical microbiology laboratories.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         