
                     
                     
                     Drug interactions
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Disulfiram
                           
                              Psychotic reactions have been reported in alcoholic patients who are using metronidazole and disulfiram concurrently. Metronidazole should not be given to patients who have taken disulfiram within the last 2 weeks (see 
                                    CONTRAINDICATIONS
                                 ).
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Alcoholic Beverages
                           
                              Abdominal cramps, nausea, vomiting, headaches, and flushing may occur if alcoholic beverages or products containing propylene glycol are consumed during or following metronidazole therapy (see 
                                    CONTRAINDICATIONS
                                 ).
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Warfarin and other Oral Anticoagulants
                           
                              Metronidazole has been reported to potentiate the anticoagulant effect of warfarin and other oral coumarin anticoagulants, resulting in a prolongation of prothrombin time. When FLAGYL 375 capsules is prescribed for patients on this type of anticoagulant therapy prothrombin time and INR should be carefully monitored.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Lithium
                           
                              In patients stabilized on relatively high doses of lithium, short-term metronidazole therapy has been associated with elevation of serum lithium and, in a few cases, signs of lithium toxicity. Serum lithium and serum creatinine levels should be obtained several days after beginning metronidazole to detect any increase that may precede clinical symptoms of lithium intoxication.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Busulfan
                           
                              Metronidazole has been reported to increase plasma concentrations of busulfan, which can result in an increased risk for serious busulfan toxicity. Metronidazole should not be administered concomitantly with busulfan unless the benefit outweighs the risk. If no therapeutic alternatives to metronidazole are available, and concomitant administration with busulfan is medically needed, frequent monitoring of busulfan plasma concentration should be performed and the busulfan dose should be adjusted accordingly.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Drugs that Inhibit CYP450 Enzymes
                           
                              The simultaneous administration of drugs that decrease microsomal liver enzyme activity, such as cimetidine, may prolong the half-life and decrease plasma clearance of metronidazole.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Drugs that Induce CYP450 Enzymes
                           
                              The simultaneous administration of drugs that induce microsomal liver enzymes, such as phenytoin or phenobarbital, may accelerate the elimination of metronidazole, resulting in reduced plasma levels; impaired clearance of phenytoin has also been reported.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               