
               
               
               12  CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        12.1  Mechanism of Action

                     
                     
                        Oxybutynin acts as a competitive antagonist of acetylcholine at postganglionic muscarinic receptors, resulting in relaxation of bladder smooth muscle. In patients with conditions characterized by involuntary detrusor contractions, cystometric studies have demonstrated that oxybutynin increases maximum urinary bladder capacity and increases the volume to first detrusor contraction.
                        Oxybutynin is a racemic (50:50) mixture of R- and S- isomers. Antimuscarinic activity resides predominantly with the R-isomer. The active metabolite, N-desethyloxybutynin, has pharmacological activity on the human detrusor muscle that is similar to that of oxybutynin in in vitro studies.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        12.3  Pharmacokinetics

                     
                     
                        
                           Absorption
                        
                        Oxybutynin is transported across intact skin and into the systemic circulation by passive diffusion across the stratum corneum. Steady-state concentrations are achieved within 7 days of continuous dosing. Absorption of oxybutynin is similar when GELNIQUE is applied to the abdomen, upper arm/shoulders or thighs. Mean plasma concentrations during a randomized, crossover study of the three recommended application sites in 39 healthy men and women are shown in Figure 1.
                        
                        Average steady-state plasma oxybutynin concentrations were 4.7, 5.2, and 5.5 ng/mL for the abdomen, upper arm/shoulder and thigh application sites, respectively (Table 2).
                        


                        



                           Distribution
                        
                        Oxybutynin is widely distributed in body tissues following systemic absorption. The volume of distribution was estimated to be 193 L after intravenous administration of 5 mg oxybutynin chloride.
                        
                           Metabolism
                        
                        Oxybutynin is metabolized primarily by the cytochrome P450 enzyme systems, particularly CYP3A4, found mostly in the liver and gut wall. Metabolites include phenylcyclohexylglycolic acid, which is pharmacologically inactive, and N-desethyloxybutynin (DEO), which is pharmacologically active.
                        Transdermal administration of oxybutynin bypasses the first-pass gastrointestinal and hepatic metabolism, reducing the formation of the N-desethyloxybutynin metabolite. Only small amounts of CYP3A4 are found in skin, limiting pre-systemic metabolism during transdermal absorption. The AUC ratio of N-desethyloxybutynin metabolite to parent compound following multiple transdermal applications is approximately 1:1 for GELNIQUE.
                        Following intravenous administration, the elimination half-life of oxybutynin is approximately 2 hours. After the final steady-state dose of GELNIQUE, oxybutynin and N-desethyloxybutynin demonstrated biphasic elimination with plasma concentrations beginning to decrease 24 hours after dosing. Elimination was more rapid between 24 and 48 hours after dosing, during which time plasma concentrations of oxybutynin and N-desethyloxybutynin declined by about one-half. This rapid elimination phase was followed by a more prolonged terminal elimination phase. The apparent elimination half-lives including the terminal elimination phase were 64 hours and 82 hours for oxybutynin and DEO, respectively.
                        
                           Excretion
                        
                        Oxybutynin is extensively metabolized by the liver, with less than 0.1% of the administered dose excreted unchanged in the urine. Less than 0.1% of the administered dose is excreted as the metabolite N-desethyloxybutynin.
                        
                           Person-to-Person Transference
                        
                        The potential for dermal transfer of oxybutynin from a treated person to an untreated person was evaluated in a single-dose study where subjects dosed with GELNIQUE engaged in vigorous contact with an untreated partner for 15 minutes, either with (N=14 couples) or without (N=12 couples) clothing covering the application area. The untreated partners not protected by clothing demonstrated detectable plasma concentrations of oxybutynin (mean Cmax = 0.94 ng/mL). Two of the 14 untreated subjects participating in the clothing-to-skin contact regimen had measurable oxybutynin plasma concentrations (Cmax ≤ 0.1 ng/mL) during the 48 hours following contact with treated subjects; oxybutynin was not detectable with the remaining 12 untreated subjects.
                        
                           Use of Sunscreen
                        
                        The effect of sunscreen on the absorption of oxybutynin when applied 30 minutes before or 30 minutes after GELNIQUE application was evaluated in a single-dose randomized crossover study (N=16). Concomitant application of sunscreen, either before or after GELNIQUE application, had no effect on the systemic exposure of oxybutynin.
                        
                           Showering
                        
                        The effect of showering on the absorption of oxybutynin was evaluated in a randomized, steady-state crossover study under conditions of no shower, or showering 1, 2 or 6 hours after GELNIQUE application (N=20). The results of the study indicate that showering after one hour does not affect the overall systemic exposure to oxybutynin.
                        
                           Race
                        
                        The effect of race on the pharmacokinetics of GELNIQUE has not been studied.
                        
                           Geriatric Patients
                        
                        Available data suggest that there are no significant differences in the pharmacokinetics of oxybutynin based on geriatric status in patients following administration of GELNIQUE [see 
                           
                              Use in Specific Populations (8.5)
                           
                           ].
                        
                        
                           Pediatric Patients
                        
                        The pharmacokinetics of oxybutynin and N-desethyloxybutynin have not been evaluated in individuals younger than 18 years of age [see 
                           
                              Use in Specific Populations (8.4)
                           
                           ].
                        
                           Gender
                        
                        Available data suggest that there are no significant differences in the pharmacokinetics of oxybutynin based on gender in healthy volunteers following administration of GELNIQUE.
                        
                           Renal Impairment
                        
                        There is no experience with the use of GELNIQUE in patients with renal insufficiency.
                        
                           Hepatic Impairment
                        
                        There is no experience with the use of GELNIQUE in patients with hepatic insufficiency.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         