
               
               
               
                  DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  Caution must be exercised in the administration of parenteral fluids, especially those containing sodium ions to patients receiving corticosteroids or corticotropin.
                  
                     Carcinogenesis, Mutagenesis, Impairment of Fertility: Studies with Sodium Chloride Injection, USP have not been performed to evaluate carcinogenic potential, mutagenic potential or effects on fertility.
                  
                     Pregnancy: Teratogenic effects
                  
                  
                     Pregnancy Category C. Animal reproduction studies have not been conducted with Sodium Chloride Injection, USP. It is not known whether sodium chloride injection can cause fetal harm when administered to a pregnant woman or can affect reproduction capacity. Sodium Chloride Injection, USP should be given to a pregnant woman only if clearly needed.
                  
                     Labor and Delivery: Studies have not been conducted to evaluate the effects of Sodium Chloride Injection, USP on labor and delivery. Caution should be exercised when administering this drug during labor and delivery.
                  
                     Nursing Mothers: It is not known whether this drug is excreted in human milk. Because many drugs are excreted in human milk, caution should be exercised when Sodium Chloride Injection, USP is administered to a nursing mother.
                  
                     Pediatric Use: Safety and effectiveness in children have not been established.
                  
                     Geriatric Use: Clinical studies of Sodium Chloride Injection, USP did not include sufficient numbers of subjects aged 65 and over to determine whether they respond differently from younger subjects. Other reported clinical experience has not identified differences in responses between elderly and younger patients. In general, dose selection for an elderly patient should be cautious, usually starting at the low end of the dosing range, reflecting the greater frequency of decreased hepatic, renal, or cardiac function, and of concomitant disease or drug therapy.
                  This drug is known to be substantially excreted by the kidney, and the risk of toxic reactions to this drug may be greater in patients with impaired renal function. Because elderly patients are more likely to have decreased renal function, care should be taken in dose selection, and it may be useful to monitor renal function.
                  Do not administer unless solution is clear and container is undamaged. Discard unused portion.
               
               
            
         