
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Triptorelin is a synthetic decapeptide agonist analog of gonadotropin releasing hormone (GnRH).  Comparative in vitro studies showed that triptorelin was 100-fold more active than native GnRH in stimulating luteinizing hormone release from monolayers of dispersed rat pituitary cells in culture and 20-fold more active than native GnRH in displacing 125I-GnRH from pituitary receptor sites.  In animal studies, triptorelin pamoate was found to have 13‑fold higher luteinizing hormone-releasing activity and 21-fold higher follicle-stimulating hormone-releasing activity compared to the native GnRH.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        Following the first administration, there is a transient surge in circulating levels of luteinizing hormone (LH), follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH), testosterone, and estradiol [see Adverse Reactions (6)].  After chronic and continuous administration, usually 2 to 4 weeks after initiation of therapy, a sustained decrease in LH and FSH secretion and marked reduction of testicular steroidogenesis are observed.  A reduction of serum testosterone concentration to a level typically seen in surgically castrated men is obtained.  Consequently, the result is that tissues and functions that depend on these hormones for maintenance become quiescent.  These effects are usually reversible after cessation of therapy.
                        Following a single intramuscular injection of TRELSTAR:
                        
                           TRELSTAR 3.75 mg: serum testosterone levels first increased, peaking on Day 4, and declined thereafter to low levels by Week 4 in healthy male volunteers.
                        
                           TRELSTAR 11.25 mg: serum testosterone levels first increased, peaking on Days 2 – 3, and declined thereafter to low levels by Weeks 3 – 4 in men with advanced prostate cancer. 
                        
                           TRELSTAR 22.5 mg: serum testosterone levels first increased, peaking on Day 3, and declined thereafter to low levels by Weeks 3 – 4 in men with advanced prostate cancer.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        Results of pharmacokinetic investigations conducted in healthy men indicate that after intravenous bolus administration, triptorelin is distributed and eliminated according to a 3-compartment model and corresponding half-lives are approximately 6 minutes, 45 minutes, and 3 hours.  
                        
                           Absorption
                        
                        Following a single intramuscular injection of TRELSTAR to patients with prostate cancer, mean peak serum concentrations of 28.4 ng/mL, 38.5 ng/mL, and 44.1 ng/mL occurred in 1 to 3 hours after the 3.75 mg, 11.25 mg, and 22.5 mg formulations, respectively.  
                        Triptorelin did not accumulate over 9 months (3.75 mg and 11.25 mg) or 12 months (22.5 mg) of treatment.
                        
                           Distribution
                        
                        The volume of distribution following a single intravenous bolus dose of 0.5 mg of triptorelin peptide was 30 – 33 L in healthy male volunteers.  There is no evidence that triptorelin, at clinically relevant concentrations, binds to plasma proteins.
                        
                           Metabolism
                        
                        The metabolism of triptorelin in humans is unknown, but is unlikely to involve hepatic microsomal enzymes (cytochrome P-450). The effect of triptorelin on the activity of other drug metabolizing enzymes is also unknown.  Thus far, no metabolites of triptorelin have been identified.  Pharmacokinetic data suggest that C-terminal fragments produced by tissue degradation are either completely degraded in the tissues, or rapidly degraded in plasma, or cleared by the kidneys.
                        
                           Excretion
                        
                        Triptorelin is eliminated by both the liver and the kidneys.  Following intravenous administration of 0.5 mg triptorelin peptide to six healthy male volunteers with a creatinine clearance of 149.9 mL/min, 41.7% of the dose was excreted in urine as intact peptide with a total triptorelin clearance of 211.9 mL/min.  This percentage increased to 62.3% in patients with liver disease who have a lower creatinine clearance (89.9 mL/min).  It has also been observed that the nonrenal clearance of triptorelin (patient anuric, CIcreat = 0) was 76.2 mL/min, thus indicating that the nonrenal elimination of triptorelin is mainly dependent on the liver.
                        
                           Special Populations
                        
                        
                           Age and Race
                        
                        The effects of age and race on triptorelin pharmacokinetics have not been systematically studied.  However, pharmacokinetic data obtained in young healthy male volunteers aged 20 to 22 years with an elevated creatinine clearance (approximately 150 mL/min) indicate that triptorelin was eliminated twice as fast in this young population as compared with patients with moderate renal insufficiency.  This is related to the fact that triptorelin clearance is partly correlated to total creatinine clearance, which is well known to decrease with age [see Use in Specific Populations (8.6) and (8.7)].
                        
                           Pediatric
                        
                        TRELSTAR has not been evaluated in patients less than 18 years of age [see Use in Specific Populations (8.4)].
                        
                           Hepatic and Renal Impairment
                        
                        After an intravenous bolus injection of 0.5 mg triptorelin, the two distribution half-lives were unaffected by renal and hepatic impairment.  However, renal insufficiency led to a decrease in total triptorelin clearance proportional to the decrease in creatinine clearance as well as increases in volume of distribution and consequently, an increase in elimination half-life (see Table 6).  In subjects with hepatic insufficiency, a decrease in triptorelin clearance was more pronounced than that observed with renal insufficiency.  Due to minimal increases in the volume of distribution, the elimination half-life in subjects with hepatic insufficiency was similar to subjects with renal insufficiency.  Subjects with renal or hepatic impairment had 2‑ to 4-fold higher exposure (AUC values) than young healthy males [see Use in Specific Populations (8.6) and (8.7)].
                        


