
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                        Cordran is primarily effective because of its anti-inflammatory, antipruritic, and vasoconstrictive actions.
                        The mechanism of the anti-inflammatory effect of topical corticosteroids is not completely understood.
                        Various laboratory methods, including vasoconstrictor assays, are used to compare and predict potencies and/or clinical efficacies of the topical corticosteroids. There is some evidence to suggest that a recognizable correlation exists between vasoconstrictor potency and therapeutic efficacy in man. Corticosteroids with anti-inflammatory activity may stabilize cellular and lysosomal membranes. There is also the suggestion that the effect on the membranes of lysosomes prevents the release of proteolytic enzymes and, thus, plays a part in reducing inflammation.
                        Evaporation of water from the lotion vehicle produces a cooling effect, which is often desirable in the treatment of acutely inflamed or weeping lesions.
                        
                           Pharmacokinetics—The extent of percutaneous absorption of topical corticosteroids is determined by many factors, including the vehicle, the integrity of the epidermal barrier, and the use of occlusive dressings.
                        Topical corticosteroids can be absorbed from normal intact skin. Inflammation and/or other disease processes in the skin increase percutaneous absorption.
                        Once absorbed through the skin, topical corticosteroids are handled through pharmacokinetic pathways similar to those of systemically administered corticosteroids. Corticosteroids are bound to plasma proteins in varying degrees. They are metabolized primarily in the liver and then excreted in the kidneys. Some of the topical corticosteroids and their metabolites are also excreted into the bile.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         