
               
               
               
7	DRUG INTERACTIONS

               
                  
               
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           Urinary acidifying agents may reduce blood levels of amphetamine. (
                                 7.2
                              )
                           Urinary alkalinizing agents may increase blood levels of amphetamine. (
                                 7.3
                              )
                           MAOI antidepressants are contraindicated. (
                                 4
                              ; 
                                 7.3
                              )
                           The effects of adrenergic blockers, antihistamines, antihypertensives, phenobarbital, and phenytoin may be reduced by amphetamines. (
                                 7.4
                              )
                           The effects of tricyclic antidepressants, meperidine, phenobarbital and phenytoin may be potentiated by amphetamines. (
                                 7.5
                              )
                           Norepinephrine may potentiate the effects of amphetamines. (
                                 7.7
                              )
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
7.1	Agents Whose Blood Levels May be Impacted by Vyvanse

                     
                        Extended release guanfacine: In a drug interaction study (N=40), administration of an extended release guanfacine (4 mg) in combination with Vyvanse (50 mg) increased guanfacine maximum plasma concentration by 19%, whereas, exposure (area under the curve; AUC) was increased by 7%.  These small changes are not expected to be clinically meaningful.  In this study, no effect on d-amphetamine exposure was observed following co-administration of extended release guanfacine and Vyvanse.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
7.2	Agents that Lower Blood Levels of Amphetamines

                     
                        
                           Urinary Acidifying Agents
                        
                        These agents (ammonium chloride, sodium acid phosphate, etc.) increase the concentration of the ionized species of the amphetamine molecule, thereby increasing urinary excretion.
                        
                        
                           Methenamine Therapy
                        
                        Urinary excretion of amphetamines is increased, and efficacy is reduced, by acidifying agents used in methenamine therapy.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
7.3	Agents that Increase Blood Levels of Amphetamines

                     
                        
                           Urinary Alkalinizing Agents
                        
                        These agents (acetazolamide, some thiazides) increase the concentration of the non-ionized species of the amphetamine molecule, thereby decreasing urinary excretion.  
                        
                           Monoamine Oxidase Inhibitors
                        
                        MAOI antidepressants, as well as a metabolite of furazolidone, slow amphetamine metabolism. This slowing potentiates amphetamines, increasing their effect on the release of norepinephrine and other monoamines from adrenergic nerve endings; this can cause headaches and other signs of hypertensive crisis. A variety of toxic neurological effects and malignant hyperpyrexia can occur, sometimes with fatal results.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
7.4	Agents Whose Effects May be Reduced by Amphetamines

                     
                        
                           Adrenergic Blockers
                           
                        
                        Adrenergic blockers are inhibited by amphetamines. 
                        
                           Antihistamines
                        
                        Amphetamines may counteract the sedative effect of antihistamines.
                        
                           Antihypertensives
                        
                        Amphetamines may antagonize the hypotensive effects of antihypertensives.
                        
                           Veratrum Alkaloids
                        
                        Amphetamines inhibit the hypotensive effect of veratrum alkaloids.
                        
                           Ethosuximide
                        
                        Amphetamines may delay intestinal absorption of ethosuximide.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
7.5	Agents Whose Effects May be Potentiated by Amphetamines

                     
                        
                           Antidepressants, Tricyclic
                        
                        Amphetamines may enhance the activity of tricyclic antidepressants or sympathomimetic agents; d-amphetamine with desipramine or protriptyline and possibly other tricyclics cause striking and sustained increases in the concentration of d-amphetamine in the brain; cardiovascular effects can be potentiated.
                        
                           Meperidine 
                        
                        Amphetamines potentiate the analgesic effect of meperidine.
                        
                           Phenobarbital
                        
                        Amphetamines may delay intestinal absorption of phenobarbital; co-administration of phenobarbital may produce a synergistic anticonvulsant action.
                        
                           Phenytoin
                        
                        Amphetamines may delay intestinal absorption of phenytoin; co-administration of phenytoin may produce a synergistic anticonvulsant action.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
7.6	Agents that May Reduce the Effects of Amphetamines

                     
                        
                           Chlorpromazine
                        
                        Chlorpromazine blocks dopamine and norepinephrine receptors, thus inhibiting the central stimulant effects of amphetamines, and can be used to treat amphetamine poisoning.
                        
                           Haloperidol
                        
                        Haloperidol blocks dopamine receptors, thus inhibiting the central stimulant effects of amphetamines.
                        
                           Lithium Carbonate
                        
                        The anorectic and stimulatory effects of amphetamines may be inhibited by lithium carbonate.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
7.7	Agents that May Potentiate the Effects of Amphetamines

                     
                        
                           Norepinephrine
                        
                        Amphetamines enhance the adrenergic effect of norepinephrine.
                        
                           Propoxyphene Overdosage
                        
                        In cases of propoxyphene overdosage, amphetamine CNS stimulation is potentiated and fatal convulsions can occur.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
7.8	 Drug/Laboratory Test Interactions

                     
                        Amphetamines can cause a significant elevation in plasma corticosteroid levels. This increase is greatest in the evening.  Amphetamine may interfere with urinary steroid determinations.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         