
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS 
               
                  

               
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 In Vitro Data 
                     
                        In vitro data indicate that amlodipine besylate has no effect on the human plasma protein binding of digoxin, phenytoin, warfarin, and indomethacin. 

                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 Cimetidine 
                     Co-administration of amlodipine besylate  with cimetidine did not alter the pharmacokinetics of amlodipine besylate.

                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3 Grapefruit Juice
                     Co-administration of 240 mL of grapefruit juice with a single oral dose of amlodipine 10 mg in 20 healthy volunteers had no significant effect on the pharmacokinetics of amlodipine. 

                        

                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4 Magnesium and Aluminum Hydroxide Antacid 
                     Co-administration of a magnesium and aluminum hydroxide antacid with a single dose of amlodipine besylate had no significant effect on the pharmacokinetics of amlodipine.

                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.5 Sildenafil
                     A single 100 mg dose of sildenafil in subjects with essential hypertension had no effect on the pharmacokinetic parameters of amlodipine. When amlodipine besylate and sildenafil were used in combination, each agent independently exerted its own blood pressure lowering effect. 
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.6 Atorvastatin
                     Co-administration of multiple 10 mg doses of amlodipine besylate with 80 mg of atorvastatin resulted in no significant change in the steady-state pharmacokinetic parameters of atorvastatin. 

                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.7 Digoxin
                     Co-administration of amlodipine besylate with digoxin did not change serum digoxin levels or digoxin renal clearance in normal volunteers.
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.8 Ethanol (Alcohol)
                     Single and multiple 10 mg doses of amlodipine besylate had no significant effect on the pharmacokinetics of ethanol.

                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.9 Warfarin
                     Co-administration of amlodipine besylate with warfarin did not change the warfarin prothrombin response time. 

                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.10 Drug/Laboratory Test Interactions 
                     None known. 

                     
                  
               
            
         