
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Protein C is the precursor of a vitamin K-dependent anticoagulant glycoprotein (serine protease) that is synthesized in the liver. See 
                              DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION: Initiation of Vitamin K Antagonists (2.3)
                           . It is converted by the thrombin/thrombomodulin-complex on the endothelial cell surface to activated Protein C (APC). APC is a serine protease with potent anticoagulant effects, especially in the presence of its cofactor protein S. APC exerts its effect by the inactivation of the activated forms of factors V and VIII, which leads to a decrease in thrombin formation. APC has also been shown to have profibrinolytic effects. 
                        The Protein C pathway provides a natural mechanism for control of the coagulation system and prevention of excessive procoagulant responses to activating stimuli. A complete absence of protein C is not compatible with life. A severe deficiency of this anticoagulant protein causes a defect in the control mechanism and leads to unchecked coagulation activation, resulting in thrombin generation and intravascular clot formation with thrombosis. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        In clinical studies, the intravenous administration of CEPROTIN demonstrated a temporary increase, within approximately half an hour of administration, in plasma levels of protein C. Replacement of protein C in protein C-deficient patients is expected to control or, if given prophylactically, to prevent thrombotic complications. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        
                           Table 3 provides pharmacokinetic results for asymptomatic and symptomatic subjects with protein C deficiency.
                        


                        


The protein C plasma activity was measured by chromogenic and/or clotting assay. The maximum plasma concentrations (Cmax) and area under the plasma concentration-time curve (AUC) appeared to increase dose-linearly between 40 and 80 IU/kg. The median incremental recovery was 1.42 [(IU/dL)/(IU/kg)] after intravenous administration of CEPROTIN. The median half-lives, based on non-compartmental method, ranged from 4.9 to 14.7 hours, with a median of 9.8 hours. In patients with acute thrombosis, both the increase in protein C plasma levels as well as half-life may be considerably reduced. No formal study or analysis has been performed to evaluate the effect of covariates such as race and gender on the pharmacokinetics of CEPROTIN. 
                        The pharmacokinetic profile in pediatric patients has not been formally assessed. Limited data suggest that the pharmacokinetics of CEPROTIN may be different between very young children and adults. The systemic exposure (Cmax and AUC) may be considerably reduced due to a faster clearance, a larger volume of distribution, and/or a shorter half-life of protein C in very young children than in older subjects. This fact must be considered when a dosing regimen for children is determined. Doses should be individualized based upon protein C activity levels. See 
                              
                                 DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION: Protein C Activity Monitoring (2.2)
                              . 
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         