
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  Cefadroxil is rapidly absorbed after oral administration. 
Following single doses of 500 and 1000 mg, average peak serum concentrations 
were approximately 16 and 28 mcg/mL, respectively. Measurable levels were 
present 12 hours after administration. Over 90% of the drug is excreted 
unchanged in the urine within 24 hours. Peak urine concentrations are 
approximately 1800 mcg/mL during the period following a single 500 mg oral dose. 
Increases in dosage generally produce a proportionate increase in cefadroxil 
urinary concentration. The urine antibiotic concentration, following a 1-g dose, 
was maintained well above the MIC of susceptible urinary pathogens for 20 to 22 
hours.
                  
                  Microbiology
                     In vitro tests demonstrate that the 
cephalosporins are bactericidal because of their inhibition of cell-wall 
synthesis. Cefadroxil has been shown to be active against the following 
organisms both in vitro and in clinical infections 
(see INDICATIONS 
                     AND
                      USAGE):
                  
                     Beta-hemolytic streptococci
                  
                  
                     Staphylococci, including penicillinase-producing 
strains
                  
                     Streptococcus (Diplococcus) pneumoniae
                  
                  
                     Escherichia coli
                  
                  
                     Proteus mirabilis
                  
                  
                     Klebsiella species
                  
                     Moraxella (Branhamella) catarrhalis
                  
                  
                     Note: Most strains of Enterococcus faecalis (formerly Streptococcus faecalis) and Enterococcus faecium (formerly Streptococcus faecium) are resistant to cefadroxil. It is 
not active against most strains of Enterobacter 
species, Morganella morganii (formerly Proteus morganii), and P. 
vulgaris. It has no activity against Pseudomonas 
species and Acinetobacter calcoaceticus 
(formerly Mima and Herella 
species).
                  
                  Susceptibility tests: Diffusion techniquesThe use of antibiotic disk susceptibility test methods which 
measure zone diameter give an accurate estimation of antibiotic susceptibility. 
One such standard procedure1 which has been recommended 
for use with disks to test susceptibility of organisms to cefadroxil uses the 
cephalosporin class (cephalothin) disk. Interpretation involves the correlation 
of the diameters obtained in the disk test with the minimum inhibitory 
concentration (MIC) for cefadroxil.
                  Reports from the laboratory giving results of the standard single-disk 
susceptibility test with a 30 mcg cephalothin disk should be interpreted 
according to the following criteria:
                  


                  


A report of “Susceptible” indicates that the pathogen is likely to be 
inhibited by generally achievable blood levels. A report of “intermediate 
susceptibility” suggests that the organism would be susceptible if high dosage 
is used or if the infection is confined to tissue and fluids (e.g., urine) in 
which high antibiotic levels are attained. A report of “Resistant” indicates 
that achievable concentrations of the antibiotic are unlikely to be inhibitory 
and other therapy should be selected.
                  Standardized procedures require the use of laboratory control organisms. The 
30 mcg cephalothin disk should give the following zone diameters:
                  


                  



                  Dilution TechniquesWhen using the NCCLS agar dilution or broth dilution (including 
microdilution) method2 or equivalent, a bacterial isolate 
may be considered susceptible if the MIC (minimum inhibitory concentration) 
value for cephalothin is 8 mcg/mL or less. Organisms are considered resistant if 
the MIC is 32 mcg/mL or greater. Organisms with an MIC value of less than 32 
mcg/mL but greater than 8 mcg/mL are intermediate.
                  As with standard diffusion methods, dilution procedures require the use of 
laboratory control organisms. Standard cephalothin powder should give MIC values 
in the range of 0.12 mcg/mL and 0.5 mcg/mL for Staphylococcus aureus ATCC 29213. For Escherichia coli ATCC 25922, the MIC range should be 
between 4 mcg/mL and 16 mcg/mL. For Streptococcus faecalis 
ATCC 29212, the MIC range should be between 8 and 32 mcg/mL.
               
               
            
         