
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              •Meperidine: Risk of serotonin syndrome (4, 7.1)
                           
                              •Dextromethorphan: Risk of psychosis or bizarre behavior (4, 7.2)
                           
                              •MAO inhibitors: Risk of non-selective MAO inhibition and hypertensive crisis (4, 7.3)
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 Meperidine
                     
                        Serious, sometimes fatal reactions have been precipitated with concomitant use of meperidine (e.g., Demerol and other tradenames) and MAO inhibitors including selective MAO-B inhibitors [see Contraindications (4)].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 Dextromethorphan
                     
                        The concomitant use of AZILECT and dextromethorphan was not allowed in clinical studies. The combination of MAO inhibitors and dextromethorphan has been reported to cause brief episodes of psychosis or bizarre behavior. Therefore, in view of AZILECT’s MAO inhibitory activity, dextromethorphan is contraindicated for use with AZILECT [see Contraindications (4)].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3 MAO Inhibitors
                     
                        AZILECT is contraindicated for use with other MAO inhibitors because of the increased risk of nonselective MAO inhibition that may lead to a hypertensive crisis [see Contraindications (4)].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4 Sympathomimetic Medications
                     
                        The concomitant use of AZILECT and sympathomimetic medications was not allowed in clinical studies. Severe hypertensive reactions have followed the administration of sympathomimetics and nonselective MAO inhibitors. Hypertensive crisis has been reported in patients taking the recommended dose of AZILECT and sympathomimetic medications. Severe hypertension has been reported in patients taking the recommended dose of AZILECT and ophthalmic drops containing sympathomimetic medications. 
                        Because AZILECT is a selective MAOI, hypertensive reactions are not ordinarily expected with the concomitant use of sympathomimetic medications. Nevertheless, caution should be exercised when concomitantly using recommended doses of AZILECT with any sympathomimetic medications including nasal, oral, and ophthalmic decongestants and cold remedies.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.5 Antidepressants
                     
                        Concomitant use of AZILECT with one of many classes of antidepressants (e.g., SSRIs, SNRIs, triazolopyridine, tricyclic or tetracyclic antidepressants) is not recommended [see Warnings and Precautions (5.2) and Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)]. Concomitant use of AZILECT and MAO inhibitors is contraindicated [see Contraindications (4)].
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.6 Ciprofloxacin or Other CYP1A2 Inhibitors
                     
                        Rasagiline plasma concentrations may increase up to 2 fold in patients using concomitant ciprofloxacin and other CYP1A2 inhibitors. This could result in increased adverse events. Patients taking concomitant ciprofloxacin or other CYP1A2 inhibitors should not exceed a dose of AZILECT 0.5 mg once daily [see Warnings and Precautions (5.4) and Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.7 Tyramine/Rasagiline Interaction
                     
                        MAO in the gastrointestinal tract and liver (primarily type A) provides protection from exogenous amines (e.g., tyramine) that have the capacity, if absorbed intact, to cause a tyramine reaction with hypertension including clinical syndromes referred to as hypertensive urgency, crisis, or emergency. Foods and medications containing large amounts of exogenous amines (e.g., from fermented cheese, herring, over-the-counter cough/cold medications) may cause release of norepinephrine resulting in a rise in systemic blood pressure. 
                        Results of a special tyramine challenge study indicate that rasagiline is selective for MAO-B at recommended doses and can be used without dietary tyramine restriction. However, certain foods may contain very high amounts (i.e., 150 mg or greater) of tyramine and could potentially cause a hypertensive reaction in individual patients taking AZILECT due to increased sensitivity to tyramine. Selectivity for inhibiting MAO-B diminishes in a dose-related manner as the dose is progressively increased above the recommended daily doses.
                        There were no cases of hypertensive crisis in the clinical development program associated with 1 mg daily AZILECT treatment, in which most patients did not follow dietary tyramine restriction.
                        There have been postmarketing reports of patients who experienced significantly elevated blood pressure (including rare cases of hypertensive crisis) after ingestion of unknown amounts of tyramine-rich foods while taking recommended doses of AZILECT. Patients should be advised to avoid foods containing a very large amount of tyramine while taking recommended doses of AZILECT [see Warnings and Precautions (5.1)].
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.8 Dopaminergic Antagonists
                     
                        It is possible that dopamine antagonists, such as antipsychotics or metoclopramide, could diminish the effectiveness of AZILECT.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         