
                     
                     
                     Drug Interactions
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Hypotension
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    Patients on Diuretic Therapy
                                 
                                 
                                    Patients on diuretics, and especially those in whom diuretic therapy was recently instituted, may occasionally experience an excessive reduction of blood pressure after initiation of therapy with  lisinopril. The possibility of hypotensive effects with lisinopril can be minimized by either discontinuing the diuretic or increasing the salt intake prior to initiation of treatment with lisinopril. If it is necessary to continue the diuretic, initiate therapy with lisinopril at a dose of 5 mg daily, and provide close medical supervision after the initial dose until blood pressure has stabilized. (See WARNINGS and DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION.) When a diuretic  is added to the therapy of a patient receiving lisinopril, an additional antihypertensive effect is usually observed. Studies with ACE inhibitors in combination with diuretics indicate that the dose of the ACE inhibitor can be reduced when it is given with a diuretic. (See DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION.)
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Antidiabetics
                           
                           
                              Epidemiological studies have suggested that concomitant administration of ACE inhibitors and antidiabetic medicines (insulins, oral hypoglycemic agents) may cause an increased blood-glucose-lowering effect with risk of hypoglycemia. This phenomenon appeared to be more likely to occur during the first weeks of combined treatment and in patients with renal impairment. In diabetic patients treated with oral antidiabetic agents or insulin, glycemic control should be closely monitored for hypoglycemia, especially during the first month of treatment with an ACE inhibitor.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Non-Steroidal Anti-Inflammatory Agents including Selective Cyclooxygenase-2 Inhibitors (COX-2 Inhibitors)
                           
                           
                              In patients who are elderly, volume-depleted (including those on diuretic therapy), or with compromised renal function, coadministration of NSAIDs, including selective COX-2 inhibitors, with ACE inhibitors, including lisinopril, may result in deterioration of renal function, including possible acute renal failure. These effects are usually reversible. Monitor renal function periodically in patients receiving lisinopril and NSAID therapy. 
                              The antihypertensive effect of ACE inhibitors, including lisinopril, may be attenuated by NSAIDs.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Dual Blockade of the Renin-Angiotensin System (RAS)
                           
                           
                              Dual blockade of the RAS with angiotensin receptor blockers, ACE inhibitors or aliskiren is associated with increased risks of hypotension, hyperkalemia and changes in renal function (including acute renal failure) compared to monotherapy. Closely monitor blood pressure, renal function and electrolytes in patients on lisinopril and other agents that affect the RAS.
                              Do not coadminister aliskiren with lisinopril in patients with diabetes. Avoid use of aliskiren with lisinopril in patients with renal impairment (GFR < 60 ml/min).
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Other Agents
                           
                           
                              Lisinopril has been used concomitantly with nitrates and/or digoxin without evidence of clinically significant adverse interactions. This included post myocardial infarction patients who were receiving intravenous or transdermal nitroglycerin. No clinically important pharmacokinetic interactions occurred when lisinopril was used concomitantly with propranolol or hydrochlorothiazide. The presence of food in the stomach does not alter the bioavailability of lisinopril.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Agents Increasing Serum Potassium
                           
                           
                              Lisinopril attenuates potassium loss caused by thiazide-type diuretics. Use of lisinopril with potassium-sparing diuretics (e.g., spironolactone, eplerenone, triamterene or amiloride), potassium supplements, or potassium-containing salt substitutes may lead to significant increases in serum potassium. Therefore, if concomitant use of these agents is indicated because of demonstrated hypokalemia, they should be used with caution and with frequent monitoring of serum potassium. Potassium sparing agents should generally not be used in patients with heart failure who are receiving lisinopril.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Lithium
                           
                           
                              Lithium toxicity has been reported in patients receiving lithium concomitantly with drugs which cause elimination of sodium, including ACE inhibitors. Lithium toxicity was usually reversible upon discontinuation of lithium and the ACE inhibitor. It is recommended that serum lithium levels be monitored frequently if lisinopril is administered concomitantly with lithium.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Gold
                           
                           
                              Nitritoid reactions (symptoms include facial flushing, nausea, vomiting and hypotension) have been reported rarely in patients on therapy with injectable gold (sodium aurothiomalate) and concomitant ACE inhibitor therapy including lisinopril.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               