
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Apixaban is a selective inhibitor of FXa. It does not require antithrombin III for antithrombotic activity. Apixaban inhibits free and clot-bound FXa, and prothrombinase activity. Apixaban has no direct effect on platelet aggregation, but indirectly inhibits platelet aggregation induced by thrombin. By inhibiting FXa, apixaban decreases thrombin generation and thrombus development.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        As a result of FXa inhibition, apixaban prolongs clotting tests such as prothrombin time (PT), INR, and activated partial thromboplastin time (aPTT). Changes observed in these clotting tests at the expected therapeutic dose, however, are small, subject to a high degree of variability, and not useful in monitoring the anticoagulation effect of apixaban.
                        The Rotachrom® Heparin chromogenic assay was used to measure the effect of apixaban on FXa activity in humans during the apixaban development program. A concentration-dependent increase in anti-FXa activity was observed in the dose range tested and was similar in healthy subjects and patients with AF.
                        This test is not recommended for assessing the anticoagulant effect of apixaban.
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Pharmacodynamic Drug Interaction Studies
                           
                           
                              Pharmacodynamic drug interaction studies with aspirin, clopidogrel, aspirin and clopidogrel, prasugrel, enoxaparin, and naproxen were conducted. No pharmacodynamic interactions were observed with aspirin, clopidogrel, or prasugrel [see Warnings and Precautions (5.2)]. A 50% to 60% increase in anti-FXa activity was observed when apixaban was coadministered with enoxaparin or naproxen.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Specific Populations
                           
                           
                              
                                 Renal impairment: Anti-FXa activity adjusted for exposure to apixaban was similar across renal function categories.
                              
                                 Hepatic impairment: Changes in anti-FXa activity were similar in patients with mild-to-moderate hepatic impairment and healthy subjects. However, in patients with moderate hepatic impairment, there is no clear understanding of the impact of this degree of hepatic function impairment on the coagulation cascade and its relationship to efficacy and bleeding. Patients with severe hepatic impairment were not studied.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Cardiac Electrophysiology
                           
                           
                              Apixaban has no effect on the QTc interval in humans at doses up to 50 mg.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        Apixaban demonstrates linear pharmacokinetics with dose-proportional increases in exposure for oral doses up to 10 mg.
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Absorption
                           
                           
                              The absolute bioavailability of apixaban is approximately 50% for doses up to 10 mg of ELIQUIS. Food does not affect the bioavailability of apixaban. Maximum concentrations (Cmax) of apixaban appear 3 to 4 hours after oral administration of ELIQUIS. At doses ≥25 mg, apixaban displays dissolution-limited absorption with decreased bioavailability. Following administration of a crushed 5 mg ELIQUIS tablet that was suspended in 60 mL D5W and delivered through a nasogastric tube (NGT), exposure was similar to that seen in other clinical trials involving healthy volunteers receiving a single oral 5 mg tablet dose.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Distribution
                           
                           
                              Plasma protein binding in humans is approximately 87%. The volume of distribution (Vss) is approximately 21 liters.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Metabolism
                           
                           
                              Approximately 25% of an orally administered apixaban dose is recovered in urine and feces as metabolites. Apixaban is metabolized mainly via CYP3A4 with minor contributions from CYP1A2, 2C8, 2C9, 2C19, and 2J2. O-demethylation and hydroxylation at the 3-oxopiperidinyl moiety are the major sites of biotransformation.
                              Unchanged apixaban is the major drug-related component in human plasma; there are no active circulating metabolites.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Elimination
                           
                           
                              Apixaban is eliminated in both urine and feces. Renal excretion accounts for about 27% of total clearance. Biliary and direct intestinal excretion contributes to elimination of apixaban in the feces.
                              Apixaban has a total clearance of approximately 3.3 L/hour and an apparent half-life of approximately 12 hours following oral administration.
                              Apixaban is a substrate of transport proteins: P-gp and breast cancer resistance protein.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Drug Interaction Studies
                           
                           
                              
                                 In vitro apixaban studies at concentrations significantly greater than therapeutic exposures, no inhibitory effect on the activity of CYP1A2, CYP2A6, CYP2B6, CYP2C8, CYP2C9, CYP2D6, CYP3A4/5, or CYP2C19, nor induction effect on the activity of CYP1A2, CYP2B6, or CYP3A4/5 were observed. Therefore, apixaban is not expected to alter the metabolic clearance of coadministered drugs that are metabolized by these enzymes. Apixaban is not a significant inhibitor of P-gp.
                              The effects of coadministered drugs on the pharmacokinetics of apixaban and associated dose recommendations are summarized in Figure 2 [see also Warnings and Precautions (5.2) and Drug Interactions (7)].
                              Figure 2:      Effect of Coadministered Drugs on the Pharmacokinetics of Apixaban
                              
                                      *  Dashed vertical lines illustrate pharmacokinetic changes that were used to inform
            dosing recommendations. Dosing recommendations were also informed by
            clinical considerations [see Warnings and Precautions (5.2) and Drug Interactions (7)].
                              In dedicated studies conducted in healthy subjects, famotidine, atenolol, prasugrel, and enoxaparin did not meaningfully alter the pharmacokinetics of apixaban.
                              In studies conducted in healthy subjects, apixaban did not meaningfully alter the pharmacokinetics of digoxin, naproxen, atenolol, prasugrel, or acetylsalicylic acid.
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Effect of drugs on PK
                                 
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Specific Populations
                           
                           
                              The effects of level of renal impairment, age, body weight, and level of hepatic impairment on the pharmacokinetics of apixaban are summarized in Figure 3.
                              Figure 3:      Effect of Specific Populations on the Pharmacokinetics of Apixaban
                              
                                      *  ESRD subjects maintained with chronic and stable hemodialysis; reported PK findings 
            are following single dose of apixaban post hemodialysis.
        †  Creatinine clearance 15 to 29 mL/min.
        ‡  Dashed vertical lines illustrate pharmacokinetic changes that were used to inform 
            dosing recommendations.
                              A study in healthy subjects comparing the pharmacokinetics in males and females showed no meaningful difference.
                              The results across pharmacokinetic studies in normal subjects showed no differences in apixaban pharmacokinetics among White/Caucasian, Asian, and Black/African American subjects. No dose adjustment is required based on race/ethnicity.
                              In subjects with ESRD, a 4-hour hemodialysis session with a dialysate flow rate of 500 mL/min and a blood flow rate in the range of 350 to 500 mL/min started 2 hours after administration of a single 5 mg dose of apixaban, the AUC of apixaban was 17% greater compared to those with normal renal function. The dialysis clearance of apixaban is approximately 18 mL/min resulting in a 14% decrease in exposure due to hemodialysis compared to off-dialysis period.
                              Protein binding was similar (92%-94%) between healthy controls and the on-dialysis and off-dialysis periods.
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Effect of Populations on PK
                                 
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         