
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Topical corticosteroids share anti-inflammatory, antipruritic, and vasoconstrictive properties.  The mechanism of the anti-inflammatory activity of the topical corticosteroids is unclear.  However, corticosteroids are thought to act by the induction of phospholipase A2 inhibitory proteins, collectively called lipocortins.  It is postulated that these proteins control the biosynthesis of  potent mediators of inflammation such as prostaglandins and leukotrienes by inhibiting the release of their common precursor, arachidonic acid.  Arachidonic acid is released from membrane phospholipids by phospholipase A2.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        The extent of percutaneous absorption of topical corticosteroids is determined by many factors, including the vehicle, the integrity of the epidermal barrier, and the use of occlusive dressings.
                        Topical corticosteroids can be absorbed through normal intact skin.  Inflammation and/or other disease processes in the     skin, occlusive dressings, or widespread application may increase percutaneous absorption and increase the risk of HPA    Axis suppression.
                        The vasoconstrictor assay showed that Hydrocortisone Butyrate Cream (lipid) 0.1% had a more pronounced skin blanching effect than Hydrocortisone Butyrate Cream 0.1%, suggesting greater percutaneous absorption from the former.
                        Once absorbed through the skin, topical corticosteroids are handled through pharmacokinetic pathways similar to systemically administered corticosteroids.
                        Corticosteroids are bound to plasma proteins in varying degrees.
                        Corticosteroids are metabolized primarily in the liver and are then excreted by the kidneys.
                        Some of the topical corticosteroids and their metabolites are also excreted into the bile.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         