
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS SECTION
               
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           Oral Carbonic Anhydrase Inhibitors (7.1)
                           
                           High-dose Salicylate Therapy (7.2)
                           
                           CNS Depressants (7.3)
                           
                           Antihypertensives/Cardiac Glycosides (7.4)
                           
                           Tricyclic Antidepressants (7.5)
                           
                           Monoamine Oxidase Inhibitors (7.6)
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 Oral Carbonic Anhydrase Inhibitors
                     
                        There is a potential for an additive effect on the known systemic effects of carbonic anhydrase inhibition in patients receiving an oral carbonic anhydrase inhibitor and brinzolamide ophthalmic suspension 1%, a component of SIMBRINZA ophthalmic suspension. The concomitant administration of SIMBRINZA and oral carbonic anhydrase inhibitors is not recommended.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 High-Dose Salicylate Therapy
                     
                        Carbonic anhydrase inhibitors may produce acid-base and electrolyte alterations. These alterations were not reported in the clinical trials with brinzolamide ophthalmic suspension 1%. However, in patients treated with oral carbonic anhydrase inhibitors, rare instances of acid-base alterations have occurred with high-dose salicylate therapy. Therefore, the potential for such drug interactions should be considered in patients receiving SIMBRINZA.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3 CNS Depressants
                     
                        Although specific drug interaction studies have not been conducted with SIMBRINZA, the possibility of an additive or potentiating effect with CNS depressants (alcohol, opiates, barbiturates, sedatives, or anesthetics) should be considered.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4 Antihypertensives/Cardiac Glycosides
                     
                        Because brimonidine tartrate, a component of SIMBRINZA, may reduce blood pressure, caution in using drugs such as antihypertensives and/or cardiac glycosides with SIMBRINZA is advised.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.5 Tricyclic Antidepressants
                     
                        Tricyclic antidepressants have been reported to blunt the hypotensive effect of systemic clonidine. It is not known whether the concurrent use of these agents with SIMBRINZA in humans can lead to resulting interference with the IOP lowering effect. Caution is advised in patients taking tricyclic antidepressants which can affect the metabolism and uptake of circulating amines.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.6 Monoamine Oxidase Inhibitors
                     
                        Monoamine oxidase (MAO) inhibitors may theoretically interfere with the metabolism of brimonidine tartrate and potentially result in an increased systemic side-effect such as hypotension. Caution is advised in patients taking MAO inhibitors which can affect the metabolism and uptake of circulating amines.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         