
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  

               
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Like other topical corticosteroids, Clobetasol Propionate Shampoo, 0.05%, has anti-inflammatory, antipruritic, and vasoconstrictive properties. The mechanism of the anti-inflammatory activity of the topical steroids, in general, is unclear. However, corticosteroids are thought to act by the induction of phospholipase A2 inhibitory proteins, collectively called lipocortins. It is postulated that these proteins control the biosynthesis of potent mediators of inflammation such as prostaglandins and leukotrienes by inhibiting the release of their common precursor, arachidonic acid. Arachidonic acid is released from membrane phospholipids by phospholipase A2.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics

                     
                     
                        
                            Vasoconstrictor Assay
                           
Clobetasol Propionate Shampoo, 0.05%, is in the super-high range of potency as demonstrated in vasoconstrictor studies in healthy subjects when compared with other topical corticosteroids. However, similar blanching scores do not necessarily imply therapeutic equivalence.

                           

                           Hypothalamic-Pituitary-Adrenal (HPA) Axis Suppression
                           
In studies evaluating the potential for hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis suppression, use of Clobetasol Propionate Shampoo, 0.05%, resulted in demonstrable HPA axis suppression in 5 out of 12 (42%) adolescent subjects [see Warnings and Precautions (5.1) and Use in Specific Populations (8.4)].
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        The extent of percutaneous absorption of topical corticosteroids is determined by many factors, including the vehicle, the integrity of the epidermal barrier and occlusion. 

                           
Topical corticosteroids can be absorbed from normal intact skin. Inflammation and other disease processes in the skin may increase percutaneous absorption.

                           
There are no human data regarding the distribution of corticosteroids to body organs following topical application. Nevertheless, once absorbed through the skin, topical corticosteroids are handled through metabolic pathways similar to systemically administered corticosteroids.  They are metabolized, primarily in the liver, and are then excreted by the kidneys.  In addition, some corticosteroids and their metabolites are also excreted in the bile.
                     
                  
               
            
         