
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Ropinirole is a non-ergoline dopamine agonist. The precise mechanism of action of ropinirole as a treatment for Parkinson’s disease is unknown, although it is thought to be related to its ability to stimulate dopamine D2 receptors within the caudate-putamen in the brain.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        Clinical experience with dopamine agonists, including ropinirole, suggests an association with impaired ability to regulate blood pressure with resulting orthostatic hypotension, especially during dose escalation. In some subjects in clinical trials, blood pressure changes were associated with the emergence of orthostatic symptoms, bradycardia, and, in one case in a healthy volunteer, transient sinus arrest with syncope [see Warnings and Precautions (5.2, 5.3)]. 
                        The mechanism of orthostatic hypotension induced by ropinirole is presumed to be due to a D2-mediated blunting of the noradrenergic response to standing and subsequent decrease in peripheral vascular resistance. Nausea is a common concomitant symptom of orthostatic signs and symptoms. 
                        At oral doses as low as 0.2 mg, ropinirole suppressed serum prolactin concentrations in healthy male volunteers. 
                        Immediate-release ropinirole had no dose-related effect on ECG wave form and rhythm in young, healthy, male volunteers in the range of 0.01 mg to 2.5 mg. 
                        Immediate-release ropinirole had no dose- or exposure related effect on mean QT intervals in healthy male and female volunteers titrated to doses up to 4 mg/day. The effect of ropinirole on QTc intervals at higher exposures achieved either due to drug interactions, hepatic impairment, or at higher doses has not been systematically evaluated. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        Increase in systemic exposure of ropinirole following oral administration of 2 mg to 12 mg of ropinirole extended-release was approximately dose-proportional. For ropinirole extended-release, steady-state concentrations of ropinirole are expected to be achieved within 4 days of dosing.
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Absorption
                              
                           
                           
                              In clinical trials with immediate-release ropinirole, more than 88% of a radiolabeled dose was recovered in urine, and the absolute bioavailability was 45% to 55%, indicating approximately 50% first-pass effect. 
                              Relative bioavailability of ropinirole extended-release tablets compared with immediate-release tablets was approximately 100%. In a repeat-dose trial in subjects with Parkinson’s disease using ropinirole extended-release 8 mg, the dose-normalized AUC(0-24) and Cmin for ropinirole extended-release and immediate-release ropinirole were similar. Dose-normalized Cmax was, on average, 12% lower for ropinirole extended-release than for the immediate-release formulation and the median time-to-peak concentration was 6 to 10 hours. In a single-dose trial, administration of ropinirole extended-release to healthy volunteers with food (i.e., high-fat meal) increased AUC by approximately 30% and Cmax by approximately 44%, compared with dosing under fasted conditions. In a repeat-dose trial in patients with Parkinson’s disease, food (i.e., high-fat meal) increased AUC by approximately 20% and Cmax by approximately 44%; Tmax  was prolonged by 3 hours (median prolongation) compared with dosing under fasted conditions [see Dosage and Administration (2)]. 
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Distribution
                              
                           
                           
                              Ropinirole is widely distributed throughout the body, with an apparent volume of distribution of 7.5 L/kg. It is up to 40% bound to plasma proteins and has a blood-to-plasma ratio of 1:1. 
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Metabolism
                              
                           
                           
                              Ropinirole is extensively metabolized by the liver. The major metabolic pathways are N-despropylation and hydroxylation to form the inactive N-despropyl metabolite and hydroxy metabolites. The N-despropyl metabolite is converted to carbamyl glucuronide, carboxylic acid, and N-despropyl hydroxy metabolites. The hydroxy metabolite of ropinirole is rapidly glucuronidated. 
                              
                                 In vitro studies indicate that the major cytochrome P450 enzyme involved in the metabolism of ropinirole is CYP1A2, an enzyme known to be induced by smoking and omeprazole, and inhibited by, for example, fluvoxamine, mexiletine, and the older fluoroquinolones such as ciprofloxacin and norfloxacin. 
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Elimination
                              
                           
                           
                              The clearance of ropinirole after oral administration is 47 L/hr and its elimination half-life is approximately 6 hours. Less than 10% of the administered dose is excreted as unchanged drug in urine. N-despropyl ropinirole is the predominant metabolite found in urine (40%), followed by the carboxylic acid metabolite (10%), and the glucuronide of the hydroxy metabolite (10%). 
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Drug Interactions
                              
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Digoxin
                                 
                                    Coadministration of immediate-release ropinirole (2 mg 3 times daily) with digoxin (0.125 mg to 0.25 mg once daily) did not alter the steady-state pharmacokinetics of digoxin in ten patients.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Theophylline
                                 
                                    Administration of theophylline (300 mg twice daily, a substrate of CYP1A2) did not alter the steady-state pharmacokinetics of immediate-release ropinirole (2 mg 3 times daily) in 12 patients with Parkinson’s disease. Immediate-release ropinirole (2 mg 3 times daily) did not alter the pharmacokinetics of theophylline (5 mg/kg IV) in 12 patients with Parkinson’s disease. 
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Ciprofloxacin
                                 
                                    Coadministration of ciprofloxacin (500 mg twice daily), an inhibitor of CYP1A2, with immediate-release ropinirole (2 mg 3 times daily) increased ropinirole AUC by 84% on average and Cmax by 60% (n = 12 patients). 
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Estrogens
                                 
                                    Population pharmacokinetic analysis revealed that estrogens (mainly ethinylestradiol: intake 0.6 mg to 3 mg over 4-month to 23-year period) reduced the oral clearance of ropinirole by 36% in 16 patients.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 L-dopa
                                 
                                    Coadministration of carbidopa + L-dopa (10/100 mg twice daily) with immediate-release ropinirole (2 mg 3 times daily) had no effect on the steady-state pharmacokinetics of ropinirole (n = 28 patients). Oral administration of immediate-release ropinirole 2 mg 3 times daily increased mean steady-state Cmax of L-dopa by 20%, but its AUC was unaffected (n = 23 patients).
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Commonly Administered Drugs
                                 
                                    Population analysis showed that commonly administered drugs, e.g., selegiline, amantadine, tricyclic antidepressants, benzodiazepines, ibuprofen, thiazides, antihistamines, and anticholinergics, did not affect the clearance of ropinirole. An in vitro study indicates that ropinirole is not a substrate for P-gp. Ropinirole and its circulating metabolites do not inhibit or induce P450 enzymes; therefore, ropinirole is unlikely to affect the pharmacokinetics of other drugs by a P450 mechanism.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Specific Populations
                              
                           
                           
                              Because therapy with ropinirole extended-release is initiated at a low dose and gradually titrated upward according to clinical tolerability to obtain the optimum therapeutic effect, adjustment of the initial dose based on gender, weight, or age is not necessary. 
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Age
                                 
                                    Oral clearance of ropinirole is reduced by 15% in patients older than 65 years compared with younger patients. Dosage adjustment is not necessary in the elderly (older than 65 years), as the dose of ropinirole is to be individually titrated to clinical response. 
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Gender
                                 
                                    Female and male patients showed similar clearance. 
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Race
                                 
                                    The influence of race on the pharmacokinetics of ropinirole has not been evaluated. 
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Cigarette Smoking
                                 
                                    Smoking is expected to increase the clearance of ropinirole since CYP1A2 is known to be induced by smoking. In a trial in patients with Restless Legs Syndrome, smokers (n = 7) had an approximately 30% lower Cmax and a 38% lower AUC than did nonsmokers (n = 11) when those parameters were normalized for dose.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Renal Impairment
                                 
                                    Based on population pharmacokinetic analysis, no difference was observed in the pharmacokinetics of ropinirole in subjects with moderate renal impairment (creatinine clearance between 30 to 50 mL/min) compared with an age-matched population with creatinine clearance above 50 mL/min. Therefore, no dosage adjustment is necessary in patients with moderate renal impairment. 
                                    A trial of immediate-release ropinirole in subjects with end-stage renal disease on hemodialysis has shown that clearance of ropinirole was reduced by approximately 30%. The recommended maximum dose should be lower in these patients [see Dosage and Administration (2.2)].
                                    The use of ropinirole in subjects with severe renal impairment (creatinine clearance less than 30 mL/min) without regular dialysis has not been studied.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Hepatic Impairment
                                 
                                    The pharmacokinetics of ropinirole have not been studied in patients with hepatic impairment. Because ropinirole is extensively metabolized by the liver, these patients may have higher plasma levels and lower clearance of ropinirole than patients with normal hepatic function. 
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Other Diseases
                                 
                                    Population pharmacokinetic analysis revealed no change in the clearance of ropinirole in patients with concomitant diseases such as hypertension, depression, osteoporosis/arthritis, and insomnia compared with patients with Parkinson’s disease only. 
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         