
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY 
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action 
                     
                        Cilostazol and several of its metabolites inhibit phosphodiesterase III activity and suppress cAMP degradation with a
                        resultant increase in cAMP in platelets and blood vessels, leading to inhibition of platelet aggregation and vasodilation,
                        respectively.
                        Cilostazol reversibly inhibits platelet aggregation induced by a variety of stimuli, including thrombin, ADP, collagen,
                        arachidonic acid, epinephrine, and shear stress.
                        
                           Cardiovascular effects:
                        
                        Cilostazol affects both vascular beds and cardiovascular function. It produces heterogeneous dilation of vascular beds,
                        with greater dilation in femoral beds than in vertebral, carotid or superior mesenteric arteries. Renal arteries were not
                        responsive to the effects of cilostazol.
                        In dogs or cynomolgus monkeys, cilostazol increased heart rate, myocardial contractile force, and coronary blood flow as
                        well as ventricular automaticity, as would be expected for a PDE III inhibitor. Left ventricular contractility was increased
                        at doses required to inhibit platelet aggregation. A-V conduction was accelerated. In humans, heart rate increased in a
                        dose-proportional manner by a mean of 5.1 and 7.4 beats per minute in patients treated with 50 and 100 mg twice daily,
                        respectively.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics 
                     
                        Cilostazol's effects on platelet aggregation were evaluated in both healthy subjects and in patients with stable symptoms of
                        cerebral thrombosis, cerebral embolism, transient ischemic attack, or cerebral arteriosclerosis over a range of doses from
                        50 mg every day to 100 mg three times a day. Cilostazol significantly inhibited platelet aggregation in a dose-dependent
                        manner. The effects were observed as early as 3 hours post-dose and lasted up to 12 hours following a single dose.
                        Following chronic administration and withdrawal of cilostazol, the effects on platelet aggregation began to subside 48
                        hours after withdrawal and returned to baseline by 96 hours with no rebound effect. A cilostazol dosage of 100 mg twice
                        daily consistently inhibited platelet aggregation induced with arachidonic acid, collagen and adenosine diphosphate
                        (ADP). Bleeding time was not affected by cilostazol administration.
                        Effects on circulating plasma lipids have been examined in patients taking cilostazol. After 12 weeks, as compared to
                        placebo, cilostazol 100 mg twice daily produced a reduction in triglycerides of 29.3 mg/dL (15%) and an increase in HDL-cholesterol of 4.0 mg/dL (≅ 10%).
                        
                           Drug Interactions
                        
                        
                           Aspirin
                        
                        Short-term (less than or equal to 4 days) coadministration of aspirin with cilostazol increased the inhibition of ADP- induced ex vivo platelet aggregation by 22% to 37% when compared to either aspirin or cilostazol alone. Short-term (less than or equal to 4 days) coadministration of aspirin with cilostazol increased the inhibition of arachidonic acid-induced ex
                           vivo platelet aggregation by 20% compared to cilostazol alone and by 48% compared to aspirin alone. However, short- term coadministration of aspirin with cilostazol had no clinically significant impact on PT, aPTT, or bleeding time
                        compared to aspirin alone. Effects of long-term coadministration in the general population are unknown.
                        In eight randomized, placebo-controlled, double-blind clinical trials, aspirin was coadministered with cilostazol to 201
                        patients. The most frequent doses and mean durations of aspirin therapy were 75 to 81 mg daily for 137 days (107 patients) and 325 mg daily for 54 days (85 patients). There was no apparent increase in frequency of hemorrhagic adverse effects in patients taking cilostazol and aspirin compared to patients taking placebo and equivalent doses of aspirin.
                        
                           Warfarin
                        
                        Cilostazol did not inhibit the pharmacologic effects (PT, aPTT, bleeding time, or platelet aggregation) of R- and S-warfarin after a single 25-mg dose of warfarin. The effect of concomitant multiple dosing of warfarin and cilostazol on the
                        pharmacodynamics of both drugs is unknown.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics 
                     
                        Cilostazol is absorbed after oral administration. A high fat meal increases absorption, with an approximately 90% increase
                        in Cmax and a 25% increase in AUC. Absolute bioavailability is not known. Cilostazol is extensively metabolized by
                        hepatic cytochrome P-450 enzymes, mainly 3A4, and, to a lesser extent, 2C19, with metabolites largely excreted in urine.
                        Two metabolites are active, with one metabolite appearing to account for at least 50% of the pharmacologic (PDE III
                        inhibition) activity after administration of cilostazol.
                        Pharmacokinetics are approximately dose proportional. Cilostazol and its active metabolites have apparent elimination
                        half-lives of about 11 to 13 hours. Cilostazol and its active metabolites accumulate about 2-fold with chronic administration and reach steady state blood levels within a few days. The pharmacokinetics of cilostazol and its two major active metabolites were similar in healthy subjects and patients with intermittent claudication due to peripheral arterial disease (PAD). Figure 1 shows the mean ± SEM plasma concentration-time profile at steady state after multiple dosing of
                        cilostazol 100 mg twice daily.
                        
                           
                              Figure 1:Mean ± SEM Plasma Concentration-time Profile at Steady State after Multiple Dosing of Cilostazol 100 mg Twice Daily
                           
                        
                        
                        
                           Distribution
                        
                        Cilostazol is 95 to 98% protein bound, predominantly to albumin. The binding for 3,4-dehydro-cilostazol is 97.4% and for
                        4´-trans-hydroxy-cilostazol is 66%. Mild hepatic impairment did not affect protein binding. The free fraction of cilostazol
                        was 27% higher in subjects with renal impairment than in healthy volunteers. The displacement of cilostazol from plasma
                        proteins by erythromycin, quinidine, warfarin, and omeprazole was not clinically significant.
                        
                           Metabolism
                        
                        Cilostazol is eliminated predominantly by metabolism and subsequent urinary excretion of metabolites. Based on in vitro
                        
                        studies, the primary isoenzymes involved in cilostazol’s metabolism are CYP3A4 and, to a lesser extent, CYP2C19. The
                        enzyme responsible for metabolism of 3,4-dehydro-cilostazol, the most active of the metabolites, is unknown.
                        Following oral administration of 100 mg radiolabeled cilostazol, 56% of the total analytes in plasma was cilostazol, 15%
                        was 3,4-dehydro-cilostazol (4 to 7 times as active as cilostazol), and 4% was 4´-trans-hydroxy-cilostazol (20% as active as
                        cilostazol).
                        
                           Elimination
                        
                        The primary route of elimination was via the urine (74%), with the remainder excreted in feces (20%). No measurable
                        amount of unchanged cilostazol was excreted in the urine, and less than 2% of the dose was excreted as 3,4-dehydrocilostazol. About 30% of the dose was excreted in urine as 4´-trans-hydroxy-cilostazol. The remainder was excreted as other metabolites, none of which exceeded 5%. There was no evidence of induction of hepatic microenzymes.
                        
                           Special Populations
                        
                        
                           Age and Gender
                        
                        The total and unbound oral clearances, adjusted for body weight, of cilostazol and its metabolites were not significantly
                        different with respect to age (50 to 80 years) or gender.
                        
                           Smokers
                        
                        Population pharmacokinetic analysis suggests that smoking decreased cilostazol exposure by about 20%.
                        
                           Hepatic Impairment
                        
                        The pharmacokinetics of cilostazol and its metabolites were similar in subjects with mild hepatic disease as compared to
                        healthy subjects.
                        Patients with moderate or severe hepatic impairment have not been studied.
                        
                           Renal Impairment
                        
                        The total pharmacologic activity of cilostazol and its metabolites was similar in subjects with mild to moderate renal
                        impairment and in healthy subjects. Severe renal impairment increases metabolite levels and alters protein binding of the
                        parent. The expected pharmacologic activity, however, based on plasma concentrations and relative PDE III inhibiting
                        potency of parent drug and metabolites, appeared little changed. Patients on dialysis have not been studied, but, it is
                        unlikely that cilostazol can be removed efficiently by dialysis because of its high protein binding (95 to 98%).
                        
                           Drug Interactions
                        
                        Cilostazol does not appear to inhibit CYP3A4.
                        
                           Warfarin
                        
                        Cilostazol did not inhibit the metabolism of R- and S-warfarin after a single 25-mg dose of warfarin.
                        
                           Clopidogrel
                        
                        Multiple doses of clopidogrel do not significantly increase steady state plasma concentrations of cilostazol.
                        
                           Strong Inhibitors of CYP3A4
                        
                        
                           Warfarin
                        
                        Cilostazol did not inhibit the metabolism of R- and S-warfarin after a single 25-mg dose of warfarin.
                        
                           Clopidogrel
                        
                        Multiple doses of clopidogrel do not significantly increase steady state plasma concentrations of cilostazol.
                        
                           Strong Inhibitors of CYP3A4
                        
                        A priming dose of ketoconazole 400 mg (a strong inhibitor of CYP3A4), was given one day prior to coadministration of
                        single doses of ketoconazole 400 mg and cilostazol 100 mg. This regimen increased cilostazol Cmax by 94% and AUC by
                        117%. Other strong inhibitors of CYP3A4, such as itraconazole, voriconazole, clarithromycin, ritonavir, saquinavir, and
                        nefazodone would be expected to have a similar effect [
                           see Dosage and Administration (2.2), Drug Interactions (7.1)].
                        
                           Moderate Inhibitors of CYP3A4
                        
                        
                           Erythromycin and other macrolide antibiotics: Erythromycin is a moderately strong inhibitor of CYP3A4.
                        Coadministration of erythromycin 500 mg every 8h with a single dose of cilostazol 100 mg increased cilostazol Cmax by
                        47% and AUC by 73%. Inhibition of cilostazol metabolism by erythromycin increased the AUC of 4´-trans-hydroxy-cilostazol by 141% [see Dosage and Administration (
                           
                              2.2
                           )].
                        
                           Diltiazem:
                        Diltiazem 180 mg decreased the clearance of cilostazol by ~30%. Cilostazol Cmax increased ~30% and AUC increased
                        ~40% [see Dosage and Administration (
                           
                              2.2
                           )].
                        
                           Grapefruit Juice:
                        Grapefruit juice increased the Cmax of cilostazol by ~50%, but had no effect on AUC.
                        
                           Inhibitors of CYP2C19
                        
                        
                           Omeprazole: Coadministration of omeprazole did not significantly affect the metabolism of cilostazol, but the systemic
                        exposure to 3,4-dehydro-cilostazol was increased by 69%, probably the result of omeprazole’s potent inhibition of
                        CYP2C19 [see Dosage and Administration (
                           
                              2.2
                           )].
                        
                           Quinidine
                        
                        Concomitant administration of quinidine with a single dose of cilostazol 100 mg did not alter cilostazol pharmacokinetics.
                        
                           Lovastatin
                        
                        The concomitant administration of lovastatin with cilostazol decreases cilostazol Css, max and AUCτ by 15%. There is also a
                        decrease, although nonsignificant, in cilostazol metabolite concentrations. Coadministration of cilostazol with lovastatin
                        increases lovastatin and β-hydroxylovastatin AUC approximately 70% and is not expected to be clinically significant.
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           figure1
                           
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         