
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Prilocaine stabilizes the neuronal membrane by inhibiting the ionic fluxes required for the initiation and conduction of impulses, thereby effecting local anesthetic action.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Onset and Duration of Action
                     
                        When used for infiltration injection in dental patients, the time of onset of anesthesia with Citanest Plain Dental Injection and Citanest Forte Dental Injection averages less than 2 minutes with an average duration of soft tissue anesthesia of approximately 2 hours with Citanest Plain Dental Injection and approximately 2¼ hours with Citanest Forte Dental Injection.
                        Based on electrical stimulation studies, Citanest Plain Dental Injection provides a duration of pulpal anesthesia of approximately 10 minutes in maxillary infiltration injections. In clinical studies, this has been found to provide complete anesthesia for procedures lasting an average of 20 minutes.
                        When used for inferior alveolar nerve block, the time of onset of Citanest Plain Dental Injection and Citanest Forte Dental Injection averages less than three minutes with an average duration of soft tissue anesthesia of approximately 2½ hours with Citanest Plain Dental Injection and approximately 3 hours with Citanest Forte Dental Injection.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Hemodynamics
                     
                        Excessive blood levels may cause changes in cardiac output, total peripheral resistance, and mean arterial pressure. These changes may be attributable to a direct depressant effect of the local anesthetic agent on various components of the cardiovascular system and/or the beta-adrenergic receptor stimulating action of epinephrine when present.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Pharmacokinetics and Metabolism
                     
                        Information derived from diverse formulations, concentrations and usages reveals that prilocaine is completely absorbed following parenteral administration, its rate of absorption depending, for example, upon such factors as the site of administration and the presence or absence of a vasoconstrictor agent. Prilocaine is metabolized in both the liver and the kidney and excreted via the kidney. It is not metabolized by plasma esterases. Hydrolysis of prilocaine by amidases yields ortho-toluidine and N-propylalanine. Both of these compounds may undergo ring hydroxylation.
                        O-toluidine has been found to produce methemoglobin, both in vitro and in vivo (see ADVERSE REACTIONS).
                        Because prilocaine is metabolized in both the liver and kidneys, hepatic and renal dysfunction may alter prilocaine kinetics.
                        As with other local anesthetic agents, the plasma binding of prilocaine may be dependent on drug concentration. At 0.5–1.0 mg/mL it is 55% protein bound.
                        Prilocaine crosses the blood-brain and placental barriers, presumably by passive diffusion.
                        Factors such as acidosis and the use of CNS stimulants and depressants affect the CNS levels of prilocaine required to produce overt systemic effects. In the rhesus monkey, arterial blood levels of 20 mg/mL have been shown to be the threshold for convulsive activity.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         