
                     
                     
                     Interactions
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Drug interactions
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 ACE-inhibitors
                                 
                                    Reports suggest that NSAIDs may diminish the antihypertensive effect of ACE-inhibitors. This interaction should be given consideration in patients taking NSAIDs concomitantly with ACE-inhibitors.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Antacids and Sucralfate
                                 
                                    Concomitant administration of some antacids (magnesium oxide or aluminum hydroxide) and sucralfate can delay the absorption of naproxen.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Aspirin
                                 
                                    When naproxen as naproxen or naproxen sodium tablet is administered with aspirin, its protein binding is reduced, although the clearance of free naproxen or naproxen sodium is not altered. The clinical significance of this interaction is not known; however, as with other NSAIDs, concomitant administration of naproxen and naproxen sodium and aspirin is not generally recommended because of the potential of increased adverse effects.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Cholestyramine
                                 
                                    As with other NSAIDs, concomitant administration of cholestyramine can delay the absorption of naproxen.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Diuretics
                                 
                                    Clinical studies, as well as postmarketing observations, have shown that naproxen and naproxen sodium can reduce the natriuretic effect of furosemide and thiazides in some patients. This response has been attributed to inhibition of renal prostaglandin synthesis. During concomitant therapy with NSAIDs, the patient should be observed closely for signs of renal failure (see 
                                          WARNINGS: Renal Effects 
                                       ), as well as to assure diuretic efficacy.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Lithium
                                 
                                    NSAIDs have produced an elevation of plasma lithium levels and a reduction in renal lithium clearance. The mean minimum lithium concentration increased 15% and the renal clearance was decreased by approximately 20%. These effects have been attributed to inhibition of renal prostaglandin synthesis by the NSAID. Thus, when NSAIDs and lithium are administered concurrently, subjects should be observed carefully for signs of lithium toxicity.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Methotrexate
                                 
                                    NSAIDs have been reported to competitively inhibit methotrexate accumulation in rabbit kidney slices. Naproxen, naproxen sodium and other nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs have been reported to reduce the tubular secretion of methotrexate in an animal model. This may indicate that they could enhance the toxicity of methotrexate. Caution should be used when NSAIDs are administered concomitantly with methotrexate.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Warfarin
                                 
                                    The effects of warfarin and NSAIDs on GI bleeding are synergistic, such that users of both drugs together have a risk of serious GI bleeding higher than users of either drug alone. No significant interactions have been observed in clinical studies with naproxen and coumarin-type anticoagulants. However, caution is advised since interactions have been seen with other nonsteroidal agents of this class. The free fraction of warfarin may increase substantially in some subjects and naproxen interferes with platelet function.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Selective Serotonin Reuptake Inhibitors (SSRIs)
                                 
                                    There is an increased risk of gastrointestinal bleeding when selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) are combined with NSAIDs. Caution should be used when NSAIDs are administered concomitantly with SSRIs.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Other Information Concerning Drug Interactions
                           
                              Naproxen is highly bound to plasma albumin; it thus has a theoretical potential for interaction with other albumin-bound drugs such as coumarin-type anticoagulants, sulphonylureas, hydantoins, other NSAIDs, and aspirin. Patients simultaneously receiving naproxen and a hydantoin, sulphonamide or sulphonylurea should be observed for adjustment of dose if required.
                              Naproxen and other nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs can reduce the antihypertensive effect of propranolol and other beta-blockers. 
                              Probenecid given concurrently increases naproxen anion plasma levels and extends its plasma half-life significantly. 
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Drug/laboratory test interactions
                           
                              Naproxen may decrease platelet aggregation and prolong bleeding time. This effect should be kept in mind when bleeding times are determined. 
                              The administration of naproxen may result in increased urinary values for 17-ketogenic steroids because of an interaction between the drug and/or its metabolites with m-di-nitrobenzene used in this assay. Although 17-hydroxycorticosteroid measurements (Porter-Silber test) do not appear to be artifactually altered, it is suggested that therapy with naproxen be temporarily discontinued 72 hours before adrenal function tests are performed if the Porter-Silber test is to be used. 
                              Naproxen may interfere with some urinary assays of 5-hydroxy indoleacetic acid (5HIAA).
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               