
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  Calcitonin acts primarily on bone, but direct renal effects and actions on the gastrointestinal tract are also recognized. Calcitonin-salmon appears to have actions essentially identical to calcitonins of mammalian origin, but its potency per mg is greater and it has a longer duration of action.
                  The information below, describing the clinical pharmacology of calcitonin, has been derived from studies with injectable calcitonin.  The mean bioavailability of Calcitonin Salmon Nasal Solution  is approximately 3% of that of injectable calcitonin in normal subjects and, therefore, the conclusions concerning the clinical pharmacology of this preparation may be different.
                  The actions of calcitonin on bone and its role in normal human bone physiology are still not completely elucidated, although calcitonin receptors have been discovered in osteoclasts and osteoblasts.
                  Single injections of calcitonin cause a marked transient inhibition of the ongoing bone resorptive process. With prolonged use, there is a persistent, smaller decrease in the rate of bone resorption. Histologically, this is associated with a decreased number of osteoclasts and an apparent decrease in their resorptive activity. In vitro studies have shown that calcitonin-salmon causes inhibition of osteoclast function with loss of the ruffled osteoclast border responsible for resorption of bone.  This activity resumes following removal of calcitonin-salmon from the test system.  There is some evidence from the in vitro studies that bone formation may be augmented by calcitonin through increased osteoblastic activity.
                  Animal studies indicate that endogenous calcitonin, primarily through its action on bone, participates with parathyroid hormone in the homeostatic regulation of blood calcium. Thus, high blood calcium levels cause increased secretion of calcitonin which, in turn, inhibits bone resorption. This reduces the transfer of calcium from bone to blood and tends to return blood calcium towards the normal level. The importance of this process in humans has not been determined. In normal adults, who have a relatively low rate of bone resorption, the administration of exogenous calcitonin results in only a slight decrease in serum calcium in the limits of the normal range. In normal children and in patients with Paget’s disease in whom bone resorption is more rapid, decreases in serum calcium are more pronounced in response to calcitonin.
                  Bone biopsy and radial bone mass studies at baseline and after 26 months of daily injectable calcitonin indicate that calcitonin therapy results in formation of normal bone.
               
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Postmenopausal Osteoporosis
                     
                        Osteoporosis is a disease characterized by low bone mass and architectural deterioration of bone tissue leading to enhanced bone fragility and a consequent increase in fracture risk as patients approach or fall below a bone mineral density associated with increased frequency of fracture. The most common type of osteoporosis occurs in postmenopausal females. Osteoporosis is a result of a disproportionate rate of bone resorption compared to bone formation which disrupts the structural integrity of bone, rendering it more susceptible to fracture. The most common sites of these fractures are the vertebrae, hip, and distal forearm (Colles’ fractures). Vertebral fractures occur with the highest frequency and are associated with back pain, spinal deformity and a loss of height.
                        Calcitonin Salmon Nasal Solution , given by the intranasal route, has been shown to increase spinal bone mass in post-menopausal women with established osteoporosis but not in early postmenopausal women.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Calcium Homeostasis
                     
                        In two clinical studies designed to evaluate the pharmacodynamic response to Calcitonin Salmon Nasal Solution , administration of 100-1600 International Units to healthy volunteers resulted in rapid and sustained small decreases (but still within the normal range) in both total serum calcium and serum ionized calcium. Single doses greater than 400 International Units did not produce any further biological response to the drug. The development of hypocalcemia has not been reported in studies in healthy volunteers or postmenopausal females.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Kidney
                     
                        Studies with injectable calcitonin show increases in the excretion of filtered phosphate, calcium, and sodium by decreasing their tubular reabsorption. Comparable studies have not been carried out with Calcitonin Salmon Nasal Solution .
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Gastrointestinal Tract
                     
                        Some evidence from studies with injectable preparations suggest that calcitonin may have significant actions on the gastrointestinal tract. Short-term administration of injectable calcitonin results in marked transient decreases in the volume and acidity of gastric juice and in the volume and the trypsin and amylase content of pancreatic juice. Whether these effects continue to be elicited after each injection of calcitonin during chronic therapy has not been investigated. These studies have not been conducted with Calcitonin Salmon Nasal Solution.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Pharmacokinetics and Metabolism
                     
                        The bioavailability of Calcitonin Salmon Nasal Solution relative to intramuscular administration is between 3 and 5%.  Calcitonin Salmon Nasal Solution is absorbed by the nasal mucosa with a mean Tmax of about 13 minutes.  The terminal half-life of calcitonin-salmon has been calculated to be around 18 minutes and no evidence of accumulation was observed with multiple dosing.  Plasma exposure was higher following administration of 400 International Units  nasal spray compared to that after 200 International Units  dose.  As is the case with other polypeptide hormones, there is very little value in monitoring plasma levels of salmon calcitonin since these are not directly predictive of the therapeutic response.  Hence, Calcitonin-Salmon activity should be evaluated by using clinical parameters of efficacy.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         