
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              •Caution should be taken when Enablex is used concomitantly with medications that are predominantly metabolized by CYP2D6 and which have a narrow therapeutic window, such as flecainide, thioridazine and tricyclic antidepressants (7.2)
                           
                              •The concomitant use of Enablex with other anticholinergic agents may increase the frequency and/or severity of dry mouth, constipation, blurred vision and other anticholinergic pharmacological effects. Anticholinergic agents may potentially alter the absorption of some concomitantly administered drugs due to effects of gastrointestinal motility (7.3)
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 CYP3A4 Inhibitors
                     
                        The systemic exposure of darifenacin from Enablex extended-release tablets is increased in the presence of CYP3A4 inhibitors. The daily dose of Enablex should not exceed 7.5 mg when co-administered with potent CYP3A4 inhibitors (for example, ketoconazole, itraconazole, ritonavir, nelfinavir, clarithromycin and nefazadone). No dosing adjustments are recommended in the presence of moderate CYP3A4 inhibitors (for example, erythromycin, fluconazole, diltiazem and verapamil) [see Dosage and Administration (2) and Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 CYP2D6 Inhibitors
                     
                        No dosing adjustments are recommended in the presence of CYP2D6 inhibitors (for example, paroxetine, fluoxetine, quinidine and duloxetine) [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3 CYP2D6 Substrates
                     
                        Caution should be taken when Enablex is used concomitantly with medications that are predominantly metabolized by CYP2D6 and which have a narrow therapeutic window (for example, flecainide, thioridazine and tricyclic antidepressants) [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4 CYP3A4 Substrates
                     
                        Darifenacin (30 mg daily) did not have a significant impact on midazolam (7.5 mg) pharmacokinetics [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.5 Combination oral contraceptives
                     
                        Darifenacin (10 mg three times daily) had no effect on the pharmacokinetics of the combination oral contraceptives containing levonorgestrel and ethinyl estradiol [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.6 Warfarin
                     
                        Darifenacin had no significant effect on prothrombin time when a single dose of warfarin 30 mg was co-administered with darifenacin (30 mg daily) at steady-state. Standard therapeutic prothrombin time monitoring for warfarin should be continued.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.7 Digoxin
                     
                        Darifenacin (30 mg daily) did not have a clinically relevant effect on the pharmacokinetics of digoxin (0.25 mg) at steady-state. Routine therapeutic drug monitoring for digoxin should be continued [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)]. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.8 Other Anticholinergic Agents
                     
                        The concomitant use of Enablex with other anticholinergic agents may increase the frequency and/or severity of dry mouth, constipation, blurred vision and other anticholinergic pharmacological effects. Anticholinergic agents may potentially alter the absorption of some concomitantly administered drugs due to effects on gastrointestinal motility.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         