
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
                  
                     [See Clinical Pharmacology (12.3).]
                  
               
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              1.Cyclosporine: Combination increases exposure of ZETIA and cyclosporine. Cyclosporine concentrations should be monitored in patients taking ZETIA concomitantly. (7.1, 12.3)
                           
                              2.Fenofibrate: Combination increases exposure of ZETIA. If cholelithiasis is suspected in a patient receiving ZETIA and fenofibrate, gallbladder studies are indicated and alternative lipid-lowering therapy should be considered. (6.1, 7.3)
                           
                              3.Fibrates: Co-administration of ZETIA with fibrates other than fenofibrate is not recommended until use in patients is adequately studied. (7.2)
                           
                              4.Cholestyramine: Combination decreases exposure of ZETIA. (2.3, 7.4, 12.3)
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 Cyclosporine
                     
                        Caution should be exercised when using ZETIA and cyclosporine concomitantly due to increased exposure to both ezetimibe and cyclosporine. Cyclosporine concentrations should be monitored in patients receiving ZETIA and cyclosporine.
                        The degree of increase in ezetimibe exposure may be greater in patients with severe renal insufficiency. In patients treated with cyclosporine, the potential effects of the increased exposure to ezetimibe from concomitant use should be carefully weighed against the benefits of alterations in lipid levels provided by ezetimibe.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 Fibrates
                     
                        The efficacy and safety of co-administration of ezetimibe with fibrates other than fenofibrate have not been studied.
                        Fibrates may increase cholesterol excretion into the bile, leading to cholelithiasis. In a preclinical study in dogs, ezetimibe increased cholesterol in the gallbladder bile [see Nonclinical Toxicology (13.2)]. Co-administration of ZETIA with fibrates other than fenofibrate is not recommended until use in patients is adequately studied.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3 Fenofibrate
                     
                        If cholelithiasis is suspected in a patient receiving ZETIA and fenofibrate, gallbladder studies are indicated and alternative lipid-lowering therapy should be considered [see Adverse Reactions (6.1) and the product labeling for fenofibrate].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4 Cholestyramine
                     
                        Concomitant cholestyramine administration decreased the mean area under the curve (AUC) of total ezetimibe approximately 55%. The incremental LDL-C reduction due to adding ezetimibe to cholestyramine may be reduced by this interaction.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.5 Coumarin Anticoagulants
                     
                        If ezetimibe is added to warfarin, a coumarin anticoagulant, the International Normalized Ratio (INR) should be appropriately monitored.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         