
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  Following oral administration of minocycline hydrochloride capsules, absorption from gastro-intestinal tract is rapid. Maximum serum concentrations following a single dose of minocycline hydrochloride to normal fasting adult volunteers were attained in 1 to 4 hours. The serum half-life in the normal volunteers ranges from 11 hours to 22 hours.
                  When minocycline hydrochloride capsules were given concomitantly with a meal, which included dairy products, the extent of absorption of minocycline hydrochloride capsules was not noticeably influenced. The peak plasma concentrations were slightly decreased (11.2%) and delayed by one hour when administered with food, compared to dosing under fasting conditions.
                  In previous studies with other minocycline dosage forms, the minocycline serum half-life ranged from 11 to 16 hours in 7 patients with hepatic dysfunction, and from 18 to 69 hours in 5 patients with renal dysfunction. The urinary and fecal recovery of minocycline when administered to 12 normal volunteers was one-half to one-third that of other tetracyclines.
               
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Microbiology
                     
                        The tetracyclines are primarily bacteriostatic and are thought to exert their antimicrobial effect by the inhibition of protein synthesis. The tetracyclines, including minocycline, have a similar antimicrobial spectra of activity against a wide range of gram-positive and gram-negative organisms. Cross-resistance of these organisms to tetracycline is common.
                        While in vitro studies have demonstrated the susceptibility of most strains of the following microorganisms, clinical efficacy for infections other than those included in the INDICATIONS AND USAGE section has not been documented.
                        GRAM-NEGATIVE MICROORGANISMS
                        
                           Bartonella bacilliformis
                        
                        
                           Brucella species
                        
                           Campylobacter fetus
                        
                        
                           Francisella tularensis
                        
                        
                           Haemophilus ducreyi
                        
                        
                           Listeria monocytogenes
                        
                        
                           Neisseria gonorrhoeae
                        
                        
                           Vibrio cholerae
                        
                        
                           Yersinia pestis
                        
                        Because many strains of the following groups of gram-negative microorganisms have been shown to be resistant to tetracyclines, culture and susceptibility tests are especially recommended.
                        
                           Acinetobacter species
                        
                           Enterobacter
                        
                        
                           Enterobacter aerogenes
                        
                        
                           Escherichia coli
                        
                        
                           Haemophilus influenzae
                        
                        
                           Klebsiella species
                        
                           Shigella species
                        Gram-Positive Bacteria
                        Because many strains of the following groups of gram-positive microorganisms have been shown to be resistant to tetracyclines, culture and susceptibility testing are especially recommended. Up to 44 percent of Streptococcus pyogenes strains have been found to be resistant to tetracycline drugs. Therefore, tetracyclines should not be used for streptococcal disease unless the organism has been demonstrated to be susceptible.
                        Alpha-hemolytic streptococci (viridans group)
                        
                           Streptococcus pneumoniae
                        
                        
                           Streptococcus pyogenes
                        
                        “OTHER” MICROORGANISMS
                        
                           Actinomyces species
                        
                           Bacillus anthracis
                        
                        
                           Balantidium coli
                        
                        
                           Borrelia recurrentis
                        
                        
                           Chlamydia psittaci
                        
                        
                           Chlamydia trachomatis
                        
                        
                           Clostridium species
                        
                           Entamoeba species
                        
                           Fusobacterium fusiforme
                        
                        
                           Propionibacterium acnes
                        
                        
                           Treponema pallidum
                        
                        
                           Treponema pertenue
                        
                        
                           Ureaplasma urealyticum
                        
                        
                           Susceptibility Tests
                        
                        
                           Diffusion Techniques:
                        
                        The use of antibiotic disk susceptibility test methods which measure zone diameter gives an accurate estimation of susceptibility of microorganisms to minocycline. One such standard procedure1 has been recommended for use with disks for testing antimicrobials. Either the 30 mcg tetracycline-class disk or the 30 mcg minocycline disk should be used for the determination of the susceptibility of microorganisms to minocycline. With this type of procedure a report of “susceptible” from the laboratory indicates that the infecting organism is likely to respond to therapy. A report of “intermediate susceptibility” suggests that the organism would be susceptible if a high dosage is used or if the infection is confined to tissues and fluids (e.g., urine) in which high antibiotic levels are attained. A report of “resistant” indicates that the infecting organism is not likely to respond to therapy. With either the tetracycline-class disk or the minocycline disk, zone sizes of 19 mm or greater indicate susceptibility, zone sizes of 14 mm or less indicate resistance, and zone sizes of 15 to 18 mm indicate intermediate susceptibility.
                        Standardized procedures require the use of laboratory control organisms. The 30 mcg tetracycline disk should give zone diameters between 19 and 28 mm for Staphylococcus aureus
                           ATCC 25923 and between 18 and 25 mm for Escherichia coli
                           ATCC 25922. The 30 mcg minocycline disk should give zone diameters between 25 and 30 mm for S. aureus
                           ATCC 25923 and between 19 and 25 mm for E. coli ATCC 25922.
                        
                        
                           
                              Dilution Techniques:
                           
                        
                        When using the NCCLS agar dilution or broth dilution (including microdilution) method2 or equivalent, a bacterial isolate may be considered susceptible if the MIC (minimal inhibitory concentration) of minocycline is 4 mcg/mL or less. Organisms are considered resistant if the MIC is 16 mcg/mL or greater. Organisms with an MIC value of less than 16 mcg/mL but greater than 4 mcg/mL are expected to be susceptible if a high dosage is used or if the infection is confined to tissues and fluids (e.g., urine) in which high antibiotic levels are attained.
                        As with standard diffusion methods, dilution procedures require the use of laboratory control organisms. Standard tetracycline or minocycline powder should give MIC values of 0.25 mcg/mL to 1.0 mcg/mL for S. aureus ATCC 25923, and 1.0 mcg/mL to 4.0 mcg/mL for E. coli ATCC 25922.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         