
               
               
               7	DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           Mixed agonist/antagonist and partial agonist opioid analgesics: Avoid use with EMBEDA because they may reduce analgesic effect of EMBEDA or precipitate withdrawal symptoms. (5.11, 7.3)
                           Monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs): Avoid EMBEDA in patients taking MAOIs or within 14 days of stopping such treatment. (7.5)
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 Alcohol
                     
                        Concomitant use of alcohol with EMBEDA can result in an increase of morphine plasma levels and potentially fatal overdose of morphine. Instruct patients not to consume alcoholic beverages or use prescription or non-prescription products containing alcohol while on EMBEDA therapy [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)
                           ].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 CNS Depressants
                     
                        The concomitant use of EMBEDA with other CNS depressants including sedatives, hypnotics, tranquilizers, general anesthetics, phenothiazines, other opioids, and alcohol can increase the risk of respiratory depression, profound sedation, coma and death. Monitor patients receiving CNS depressants and EMBEDA for signs of respiratory depression, sedation and hypotension. 
                        When combined therapy with any of the above medications is considered, the dose of one or both agents should be reduced [see Dosage and Administration (2.2)
                            and 
                              Warnings and Precautions (5.4)
                           ].
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3 Mixed Agonist/Antagonist and Partial Agonist Opioid Analgesics
                     
                        Mixed agonist/antagonist (i.e., pentazocine, nalbuphine, and butorphanol) and partial agonist (buprenorphine) analgesics may reduce the analgesic effect of EMBEDA and/or may precipitate withdrawal symptoms. Avoid the use of agonist/antagonist and partial agonist analgesics in patients receiving EMBEDA. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4 Muscle Relaxants
                     
                        Opioids may enhance the neuromuscular blocking action of skeletal muscle relaxants and produce an increased degree of respiratory depression. Monitor patients receiving muscle relaxants and EMBEDA for signs of respiratory depression that may be greater than otherwise expected.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.5 Monoamine Oxidase Inhibitors (MAOIs)
                     
                        The effects of morphine may be potentiated by MAOIs. Monitor patients on concurrent therapy with an MAOI and EMBEDA for increased respiratory and central nervous system depression. MAOIs have been reported to potentiate the effects of morphine anxiety, confusion, and significant depression of respiration or coma. EMBEDA should not be used in patients taking MAOIs or within 14 days of stopping such treatment. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.6 Cimetidine
                     
                        Cimetidine can potentiate morphine-induced respiratory depression. There is a report of confusion and severe respiratory depression when a patient undergoing hemodialysis was concurrently administered morphine and cimetidine. Monitor patients for respiratory depression when EMBEDA and cimetidine are used concurrently.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.7 Diuretics
                     
                        Morphine can reduce the efficacy of diuretics by inducing the release of antidiuretic hormone. Morphine may also lead to acute retention of urine by causing spasm of the sphincter of the bladder, particularly in men with enlarged prostates.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.8 Anticholinergics
                     
                        Anticholinergics or other drugs with anticholinergic activity when used concurrently with opioid analgesics may result in increased risk of urinary retention and/or severe constipation, which may lead to paralytic ileus. Monitor patients for signs of urinary retention or reduced gastric motility when EMBEDA is used concurrently with anticholinergic drugs. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.9 P-Glycoprotein (P-gp) Inhibitors
                     
                        P-gp inhibitors (e.g., quinidine) may increase the absorption/exposure of morphine by about two-fold. Monitor patients for signs of respiratory and CNS depression when P-gp inhibitors are used concurrently with EMBEDA.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         