
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY

               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action

                     
                        GH binds to dimeric GH receptors located within the cell membranes of target tissue cells. This interaction results in intracellular signal transduction and subsequent induction of transcription and translation of GH-dependent proteins including IGF-I, IGF BP-3 and acid-labile subunit. GH has direct tissue and metabolic effects, including stimulation of chondrocyte differentiation, stimulation of lipolysis and stimulation of hepatic glucose output. In addition, some effects of somatropin are mediated indirectly by IGF-I, including stimulation of protein synthesis and chondrocyte proliferation.

                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics

                     
                        
                           In vitro, preclinical, and clinical testing have demonstrated that Humatrope is therapeutically equivalent to human GH of pituitary origin and achieves equivalent pharmacokinetic profiles in healthy adults. The following effects have been reported for human GH of pituitary origin, and/or somatropin.

                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Cell Growth — Total numbers of muscle cells are reduced in GH deficient  children. Somatropin increases the number and size of muscle cells in such children.

                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Skeletal Growth — Somatropin stimulates skeletal growth in children with GH deficiency as a result of effects on the growth plates (epiphyses) of long bones. Concentrations of IGF-I, which play a role in skeletal growth, are low in the serum of GH deficient children but increase during somatropin treatment in most patients. The stimulation of skeletal growth increases linear growth rate (height velocity) in most somatropin-treated children.

                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Protein Metabolism — Linear growth is facilitated in part by increased cellular protein synthesis as reflected by nitrogen retention, which can be demonstrated by decreased urinary nitrogen excretion and serum urea nitrogen.

                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Connective Tissue Metabolism — Somatropin stimulates the synthesis of chondroitin sulfate and collagen, and increases the urinary excretion of hydroxyproline.

                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Carbohydrate Metabolism — GH has a physiological role in the maintenance of normoglycemia during times of substrate restriction (e.g., fasting), via mechanisms such as stimulation of hepatic gluconeogenesis and suppression of insulin-stimulated glucose uptake by peripheral tissues. Because of these actions GH is considered an insulin antagonist with respect to carbohydrate metabolism. Consequently, the fasting hypoglycemia that may occur in some children with hypopituitarism may be improved by somatropin treatment. As an extension of its physiological actions, supraphysiological GH concentrations may increase glucose production sufficiently to stimulate insulin secretion to maintain normoglycemia. Large doses of somatropin may impair glucose tolerance if compensatory insulin secretion is inadequate. Administration of somatropin to healthy adults and patients with Turner syndrome resulted in increases in mean serum fasting and postprandial insulin concentrations, although mean values remained in the normal range. In addition, mean HbA1c concentrations and mean fasting and postprandial glucose concentrations remained in the normal range.

                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Lipid Metabolism — Somatropin stimulates intracellular lipolysis, and administration of somatropin leads to an increase in plasma free fatty acids and triglycerides. Untreated GH deficiency is associated with increased body fat stores, including increased abdominal visceral and subcutaneous adipose tissue. Treatment of GH deficient patients with somatropin results in a general reduction of fat stores, and decreased serum concentrations of low density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol.

                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Mineral Metabolism — Administration of somatropin results in an increase in total body potassium and phosphorus and to a lesser extent sodium, probably as the result of cell growth. Serum concentrations of inorganic phosphate increase in somatropin-treated GH deficient children because of the metabolic activities associated with bone growth. Although urinary calcium excretion is increased, there is a simultaneous increase in calcium absorption from the intestine. Consequently, serum calcium concentrations generally are not altered, although negative calcium balance may occur occasionally during somatropin treatment. Associated with the changes in mineral metabolism, parathyroid hormone may increase during somatropin treatment.

                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics

                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Absorption — Humatrope has been studied following intramuscular, subcutaneous, and intravenous administration in adult volunteers (see

                                 Figure 1). The absolute bioavailability of somatropin is 75% and 63% after subcutaneous and intramuscular administration, respectively.

                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Distribution — The volume of distribution of somatropin after intravenous injection is about 0.07 L/kg (Table 6).

                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Metabolism — Extensive metabolism studies have not been conducted. The metabolic fate of somatropin involves classical protein catabolism in both the liver and kidneys. In renal cells, at least a portion of the breakdown products of somatropin is returned to the systemic circulation. In healthy volunteers, mean somatropin clearance is 0.14 L/hr/kg. The mean half-life of intravenous somatropin is 0.36 hours, whereas subcutaneously and intramuscularly administered somatropin have mean half-lives of 3.8 and 4.9 hours, respectively. The longer half-life observed after subcutaneous or intramuscular administration is due to slow absorption from the injection site.

                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Excretion — Urinary excretion of intact Humatrope has not been measured. Small amounts of somatropin have been detected in the urine of pediatric patients following replacement therapy.

                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Geriatric patients — The pharmacokinetics of Humatrope have not been studied in patients greater than 65 years of age.

                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Pediatric patients — The pharmacokinetics of Humatrope in pediatric patients are similar to those of adults.

                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Gender — No gender-specific pharmacokinetic studies have been performed with Humatrope. The available literature indicates that the pharmacokinetics of somatropin are similar in men and women.

                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Race — No data are available.

                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Renal, hepatic insufficiency — No studies have been performed with Humatrope.

                              


                              



                                 Figure 1

                              
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Figure 1
                                 
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         