
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Endogenous estrogens are largely responsible for the development and maintenance of the female reproductive system and secondary sexual characteristics. Although circulating estrogens exist in a dynamic equilibrium of metabolic interconversions, estradiol is the principal intracellular human estrogen and is substantially more potent than its metabolites, estrone and estriol, at the receptor level.
                        The primary source of estrogen in normally cycling adult women is the ovarian follicle, which secretes 70 to 500 mcg of estradiol daily, depending on the phase of the menstrual cycle. After menopause, most endogenous estrogen is produced by conversion of androstenedione, which is secreted by the adrenal cortex, to estrone in the peripheral tissues. Thus, estrone and the sulfate conjugated form, estrone sulfate, are the most abundant circulating estrogens in postmenopausal women.
                        Estrogens act through binding to nuclear receptors in estrogen-responsive tissues. To date, two estrogen receptors have been identified. These vary in proportion from tissue to tissue. 
                        Circulating estrogens modulate the pituitary secretion of the gonadotropins, luteinizing hormone (LH) and follicle stimulating hormone (FSH), through a negative feedback mechanism. Estrogens act to reduce the elevated levels of these hormones seen in postmenopausal women.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        There are no pharmacodynamic data for Menostar.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Absorption
                           
                              The bioavailability of estradiol following application of a Menostar transdermal system, relative to that of a transdermal system delivering 25 mcg per day, was investigated in 18 healthy postmenopausal women, mean age 66 years (range 60 to 80 years). The mean serum estradiol concentrations upon administration of the two patches to the lower abdomen are shown in Figure 1. Transdermal administration of Menostar produced geometric mean serum concentration (Cavg) of estradiol of 13.7 pg/mL. No patches failed to adhere during the one week application period of both transdermal systems. Following application of the Menostar transdermal system to the abdomen, it is estimated to provide an average nominal in-vivo daily delivery of 14 mcg estradiol per day.
                              The Menostar transdermal delivery system continuously releases estradiol which is transported across intact skin leading to sustained circulating levels of estradiol during a 7-day treatment period. The systemic availability of estradiol after transdermal administration is about 20 times higher than that after oral administration. This difference is due to the absence of first pass metabolism when estradiol is given by the transdermal route.
                              Figure 1: Mean Uncorrected Serum 17ß-Estradiol Concentrations vs. Time Profile Following Application of the Menostar Transdermal System and the Climara® 6.5 cm2 Transdermal System
                              
                              Table 2 provides a summary of estradiol pharmacokinetic parameters determined during evaluation of the Menostar transdermal system using baseline uncorrected serum concentrations.
                              Summary of Estradiol Pharmacokinetic Parameters (Abdomen Application) 
                              


                              


Pharmacokinetic parameters are expressed in geometric means except for the Tmax which represents the median estimate and the Cmin which is expressed as the arithmetic mean. The estimated estradiol daily delivery rate for Climara 6.5 cm2 is quoted from the Climara labeling.
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Figure 1
                                 
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Distribution
                           
                              The distribution of exogenous estrogens is similar to that of endogenous estrogens. Estrogens are widely distributed in the body and are generally found in higher concentrations in the sex hormone target organs. Estrogens circulate in the blood largely bound to SHBG and albumin. In the clinical study with 208 patients on Menostar, SHBG concentration (mean ± SD) remained essentially unchanged over the 2 year period (baseline 45.1 ± 20.1 nmol/L, 24-month visit 46.4 ± 20.9 nmol/L).
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Metabolism
                           
                              Exogenous estrogens are metabolized in the same manner as endogenous estrogens. Circulating estrogens exist in a dynamic equilibrium of metabolic interconversions. These transformations take place mainly in the liver. Estradiol is converted reversibly to estrone, and both can be converted to estriol, which is a major urinary metabolite. Estrogens also undergo enterohepatic recirculation via sulfate and glucuronide conjugation in the liver, biliary secretion of conjugates into the intestine, and hydrolysis in the intestine followed by reabsorption. In postmenopausal women, a significant proportion of the circulating estrogens exist as sulfate conjugates, especially estrone sulfate, which serves as a circulating reservoir for the formation of more active estrogens.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Excretion 
                           
                              Estradiol, estrone, and estriol are excreted in the urine along with glucuronide and sulfate conjugates.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Adhesion
                           
                              In a Menostar transdermal system pharmacokinetic study with 18 postmenopausal women, no patches failed to adhere during the one week application period
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         