
                     
                     
                     Drug Interactions
                     
                        Cisatracurium besylate has been used safely following varying degrees of recovery from succinylcholine-induced neuromuscular block. Administration of 0.1 mg/kg (2 × ED95) cisatracurium besylate at 10% or 95% recovery following an intubating dose of succinylcholine (1 mg/kg) produced ≥ 95% neuromuscular block. The time to onset of maximum block following cisatracurium besylate is approximately 2 minutes faster with prior administration of succinylcholine. Prior administration of succinylcholine had no effect on the duration of neuromuscular block following initial or maintenance bolus doses of cisatracurium besylate. Infusion requirements of cisatracurium besylate in patients administered succinylcholine prior to infusions of cisatracurium besylate were comparable to or slightly greater than when succinylcholine was not administered.
                        The use of cisatracurium besylate before succinylcholine to attenuate some of the side effects of succinylcholine has not been studied.
                        Although not studied systematically in clinical trials, no drug interactions were observed when vecuronium, pancuronium, or atracurium were administered following varying degrees of recovery from single doses or infusions of cisatracurium besylate.
                        Isoflurane or enflurane administered with nitrous oxide/oxygen to achieve 1.25 MAC [Minimum Alveolar Concentration] may prolong the clinically effective duration of action of initial and maintenance doses of cisatracurium besylate and decrease the required infusion rate of cisatracurium . The magnitude of these effects may depend on the duration of administration of the volatile agents. Fifteen to 30 minutes of exposure to 1.25 MAC isoflurane or enflurane had minimal effects on the duration of action of initial doses of cisatracurium besylate and therefore, no adjustment to the initial dose should be necessary when cisatracurium besylate is administered shortly after initiation of volatile agents. In long surgical procedures during enflurane or isoflurane anesthesia, less frequent maintenance dosing, lower maintenance doses, or reduced infusion rates of cisatracurium besylate may be necessary. The average infusion rate requirement may be decreased by as much as 30% to 40%.
                        In clinical studies propofol had no effect on the duration of action or dosing requirements for cisatracurium besylate.
                        Other drugs which may enhance the neuromuscular blocking action of nondepolarizing agents such as cisatracurium besylate include certain antibiotics (e.g., aminoglycosides, tetracyclines, bacitracin, polymyxins, lincomycin, clindamycin, colistin, and sodium colistemethate), magnesium salts, lithium, local anesthetics, procainamide, and quinidine.
                        Resistance to the neuromuscular blocking action of nondepolarizing neuromuscular blocking agents has been demonstrated in patients chronically administered phenytoin or carbamazepine. While the effects of chronic phenytoin or carbamazepine therapy on the action of cisatracurium besylate are unknown, slightly shorter durations of neuromuscular block may be anticipated and infusion rate requirements may be higher.
                     
                     
                  
               