
               
               
               12	CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY 
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1	Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Daptomycin is an antibacterial drug [see 
                              Microbiology (12.4)
                           ].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2	Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        Based on animal models of infection, the antimicrobial activity of daptomycin appears to correlate with the AUC/MIC (area under the concentration-time curve/minimum inhibitory concentration) ratio for certain pathogens, including S. aureus.   The principal pharmacokinetic/pharmacodynamic parameter best associated with clinical and microbiological cure has not been elucidated in clinical trials with CUBICIN.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3	Pharmacokinetics
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 CUBICIN Administered over a 30-Minute Period
                              
                              The mean and standard deviation (SD) pharmacokinetic parameters of daptomycin at steady-state following intravenous (IV) administration of CUBICIN over a 30-minute period at 4 to 12 mg/kg q24h to healthy young adults are summarized in Table 7.
                              


                              


Daptomycin pharmacokinetics were generally linear and time-independent at CUBICIN doses of 4 to 12 mg/kg q24h administered by IV infusion over a 30-minute period for up to 14 days.  Steady-state trough concentrations were achieved by the third daily dose.  The mean (SD) steady-state trough concentrations attained following the administration of 4, 6, 8, 10, and 12 mg/kg q24h were 5.9 (1.6), 6.7 (1.6), 10.3 (5.5), 12.9 (2.9), and 13.7 (5.2) mcg/mL, respectively.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 CUBICIN Administered over a 2-Minute Period
                              
                              Following IV administration of CUBICIN over a 2-minute period to healthy volunteers at doses of 4 mg/kg (N=8) and 6 mg/kg (N=12), the mean (SD) steady-state systemic exposure (AUC) values were 475 (71) and 701 (82) mcg•h/mL, respectively.  Values for maximum plasma concentration (Cmax) at the end of the 2-minute period could not be determined adequately in this study.  However, using pharmacokinetic parameters from 14 healthy volunteers who received a single dose of CUBICIN 6 mg/kg IV administered over a 30-minute period in a separate study, steady-state Cmax values were simulated for CUBICIN 4 and 6 mg/kg IV administered over a 2-minute period.  The simulated mean (SD) steady-state Cmax values were 77.7 (8.1) and 116.6 (12.2) mcg/mL, respectively.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Distribution
                              
                              Daptomycin is reversibly bound to human plasma proteins, primarily to serum albumin, in a concentration-independent manner.  The overall mean binding ranges from 90 to 93%.
                              In clinical studies, mean serum protein binding in subjects with creatinine clearance (CLCR) ≥30 mL/min was comparable to that observed in healthy subjects with normal renal function.  However, there was a trend toward decreasing serum protein binding among subjects with CLCR <30 mL/min (88%), including those receiving hemodialysis (86%) and continuous ambulatory peritoneal dialysis (CAPD) (84%).  The protein binding of daptomycin in subjects with moderate hepatic impairment (Child-Pugh Class B) was similar to that in healthy adult subjects.
                              The volume of distribution at steady-state (Vss) of daptomycin in healthy adult subjects was approximately 0.1 L/kg and was independent of dose.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Metabolism
                              
                              In in vitro studies, daptomycin was not metabolized by human liver microsomes.
                              In 5 healthy adults after infusion of radiolabeled 14C-daptomycin, the plasma total radioactivity was similar to the concentration determined by microbiological assay.  Inactive metabolites were detected in urine, as determined by the difference between total radioactive concentrations and microbiologically active concentrations.  In a separate study, no metabolites were observed in plasma on Day 1 following the administration of CUBICIN at 6 mg/kg to subjects.  Minor amounts of three oxidative metabolites and one unidentified compound were detected in urine.  The site of metabolism has not been identified.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Excretion
                              
                              Daptomycin is excreted primarily by the kidneys.  In a mass balance study of 5 healthy subjects using radiolabeled daptomycin, approximately 78% of the administered dose was recovered from urine based on total radioactivity (approximately 52% of the dose based on microbiologically active concentrations), and 5.7% of the administered dose was recovered from feces (collected for up to 9 days) based on total radioactivity.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Specific Populations
                              
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Renal Impairment
                                    
                                    Population-derived pharmacokinetic parameters were determined for infected patients (complicated skin and skin structure infections [cSSSI] and S. aureus bacteremia) and noninfected subjects with various degrees of renal function (Table 8).  Total plasma clearance (CLT), elimination half-life (t1/2), and volume of distribution at steady-state (Vss) in patients with cSSSI were similar to those in patients with S. aureus bacteremia.  Following administration of CUBICIN 4 mg/kg q24h by IV infusion over a 30-minute period, the mean CLT was 9%, 22%, and 46% lower among subjects and patients with mild (CLCR 50–80 mL/min), moderate (CLCR 30–<50 mL/min), and severe (CLCR <30 mL/min) renal impairment, respectively, than in those with normal renal function (CLCR >80 mL/min).  The mean steady-state systemic exposure (AUC), t1/2, and Vss increased with decreasing renal function, although the mean AUC for patients with CLCR 30–80 mL/min was not markedly different from the mean AUC for patients with normal renal function.  The mean AUC for patients with CLCR <30 mL/min and for patients on dialysis (CAPD and hemodialysis dosed post-dialysis) was approximately 2 and 3 times higher, respectively, than for patients with normal renal function.  The mean Cmax ranged from 60 to 70 mcg/mL in patients with CLCR ≥30 mL/min, while the mean Cmax for patients with CLCR <30 mL/min ranged from 41 to 58 mcg/mL.  After administration of CUBICIN 6 mg/kg q24h by IV infusion over a 30-minute period, the mean Cmax ranged from 80 to 114 mcg/mL in patients with mild to moderate renal impairment and was similar to that of patients with normal renal function.
                                    


                                    


Because renal excretion is the primary route of elimination, adjustment of CUBICIN dosage interval is necessary in patients with severe renal impairment (CLCR <30 mL/min) [see 
                                          Dosage and Administration (2.4)
                                       ].
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Hepatic Impairment
                                    
                                    The pharmacokinetics of daptomycin were evaluated in 10 subjects with moderate hepatic impairment (Child-Pugh Class B) and compared with those in healthy volunteers (N=9) matched for gender, age, and weight.  The pharmacokinetics of daptomycin were not altered in subjects with moderate hepatic impairment.  No dosage adjustment is warranted when CUBICIN is administered to patients with mild to moderate hepatic impairment.  The pharmacokinetics of daptomycin in patients with severe hepatic impairment (Child-Pugh Class C) have not been evaluated.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Gender
                                    
                                    No clinically significant gender-related differences in daptomycin pharmacokinetics have been observed.  No dosage adjustment is warranted based on gender when CUBICIN is administered.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Geriatric
                                    
                                    The pharmacokinetics of daptomycin were evaluated in 12 healthy elderly subjects (≥75 years of age) and 11 healthy young controls (18 to 30 years of age).  Following administration of a single 4 mg/kg dose of CUBICIN by IV infusion over a 30-minute period, the mean total clearance of daptomycin was approximately 35% lower and the mean AUC0-
                                       ∞ was approximately 58% higher in elderly subjects than in healthy young subjects.  There were no differences in Cmax [see 
                                          Use in Specific Populations (8.5)
                                       ].
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Obesity
                                    
                                    The pharmacokinetics of daptomycin were evaluated in 6 moderately obese (Body Mass Index [BMI] 25 to 39.9 kg/m2) and 6 extremely obese (BMI ≥40 kg/m2) subjects and controls matched for age, gender, and renal function.  Following administration of CUBICIN by IV infusion over a 30-minute period as a single 4 mg/kg dose based on total body weight, the total plasma clearance of daptomycin normalized to total body weight was approximately 15% lower in moderately obese subjects and 23% lower in extremely obese subjects than in nonobese controls.  The AUC0-
                                       ∞ of daptomycin was approximately 30% higher in moderately obese subjects and 31% higher in extremely obese subjects than in nonobese controls.  The differences were most likely due to differences in the renal clearance of daptomycin.  No adjustment of CUBICIN dosage is warranted in obese patients.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Pediatric
                                    
                                    The pharmacokinetics of daptomycin in pediatric populations (<18 years of age) have not been established [see 
                                          Nonclinical Toxicology (13.2)
                                       ].
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Drug-Drug Interactions 
                              
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       In Vitro Studies
                                    
                                    
                                       In vitro studies with human hepatocytes indicate that daptomycin does not inhibit or induce the activities of the following human cytochrome P450 isoforms:  1A2, 2A6, 2C9, 2C19, 2D6, 2E1, and 3A4.  It is unlikely that daptomycin will inhibit or induce the metabolism of drugs metabolized by the P450 system.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Aztreonam
                                    
                                    In a study in which 15 healthy adult subjects received a single dose of CUBICIN 6 mg/kg IV and a combination dose of CUBICIN 6 mg/kg IV and aztreonam 1 g IV, administered over a 30-minute period, the Cmax and AUC0-
                                       ∞ of daptomycin were not significantly altered by aztreonam.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Tobramycin 
                                    
                                    In a study in which 6 healthy adult males received a single dose of CUBICIN 2 mg/kg IV, tobramycin 1 mg/kg IV, and both in combination, administered over a 30-minute period, the mean Cmax and AUC0-
                                       ∞ of daptomycin were 12.7% and 8.7% higher, respectively, when CUBICIN was coadministered with tobramycin.  The mean Cmax and AUC0-
                                       ∞ of tobramycin were 10.7% and 6.6% lower, respectively, when tobramycin was coadministered with CUBICIN.  These differences were not statistically significant.  The interaction between daptomycin and tobramycin with a clinical dose of CUBICIN is unknown.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Warfarin 
                                    
                                    In 16 healthy subjects, administration of CUBICIN 6 mg/kg q24h by IV infusion over a 30-minute period for 5 days, with coadministration of a single oral dose of warfarin (25 mg) on the 5th day, had no significant effect on the pharmacokinetics of either drug and did not significantly alter the INR (International Normalized Ratio).
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Simvastatin
                                    
                                    In 20 healthy subjects on a stable daily dose of simvastatin 40 mg, administration of CUBICIN 4 mg/kg q24h by IV infusion over a 30-minute period for 14 days (N=10) had no effect on plasma trough concentrations of simvastatin and was not associated with a higher incidence of adverse events, including skeletal myopathy, than in subjects receiving placebo once daily (N=10) [see 
                                          Warnings and Precautions (5.2)
                                        and 
                                          Drug Interactions (7.1)
                                       ].
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Probenecid 
                                    
                                    Concomitant administration of probenecid (500 mg 4 times daily) and a single dose of CUBICIN 4 mg/kg by IV infusion over a 30-minute period did not significantly alter the Cmax or AUC0-
                                       ∞ of daptomycin.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.4	Microbiology
                     
                        Daptomycin belongs to the cyclic lipopeptide class of antibacterials.  Daptomycin has clinical utility in the treatment of infections caused by aerobic, Gram-positive bacteria.  The in vitro spectrum of activity of daptomycin encompasses most clinically relevant Gram-positive pathogenic bacteria. 
                        Daptomycin exhibits rapid, concentration-dependent bactericidal activity against Gram-positive bacteria in vitro.   This has been demonstrated both by time-kill curves and by MBC/MIC (minimum bactericidal concentration/minimum inhibitory concentration) ratios using broth dilution methodology.  Daptomycin maintained bactericidal activity in vitro against stationary phase S. aureus in simulated endocardial vegetations.  The clinical significance of this is not known.
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Mechanism of Action
                              
                              The mechanism of action of daptomycin is distinct from that of any other antibacterial.  Daptomycin binds to bacterial cell membranes and causes a rapid depolarization of membrane potential.  This loss of membrane potential causes inhibition of DNA, RNA, and protein synthesis, which results in bacterial cell death.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Mechanism of Resistance 
                              
                              The mechanism(s) of daptomycin resistance is not fully understood.  Currently, there are no known transferable elements that confer resistance to daptomycin.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Complicated Skin and Skin Structure Infection (cSSSI) Trials 
                              
                              The emergence of daptomycin non-susceptible isolates occurred in 2 infected patients across the set of Phase 2 and pivotal Phase 3 clinical trials of cSSSI.  In one case, a non-susceptible S. aureus was isolated from a patient in a Phase 2 trial who received CUBICIN at less than the protocol-specified dose for the initial 5 days of therapy.  In the second case, a non-susceptible Enterococcus faecalis was isolated from a patient with an infected chronic decubitus ulcer who was enrolled in a salvage trial.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                    S. aureus Bacteremia/Endocarditis and Other Post-Approval Trials
                              
                              In subsequent clinical trials, non-susceptible isolates were recovered.  S. aureus was isolated from a patient in a compassionate-use trial and from 7 patients in the S. aureus bacteremia/endocarditis trial [see 
                                    Clinical Trials (14.2)
                                 ].  An E. faecium was isolated from a patient in a vancomycin-resistant enterococci trial.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Interactions with Other Antibacterials
                              
                              
                                 In vitro studies have investigated daptomycin interactions with other antibacterials.  Antagonism, as determined by kill curve studies, has not been observed.  In vitro synergistic interactions of daptomycin with aminoglycosides, β-lactam antibacterials, and rifampin have been shown against some isolates of staphylococci (including some methicillin-resistant isolates) and enterococci (including some vancomycin-resistant isolates).
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Activity In Vitro and In Vivo
                                 
                              
                              Daptomycin has been shown to be active against most isolates of the following Gram-positive bacteria both in 
                                    vitro and in clinical infections, as described in 
                                    Indications and Usage (1)
                                 .
                              
                                 
                                     
                                    Gram-Positive Bacteria
                                 
                              
                              
                                 
                                     
                                    Enterococcus faecalis (vancomycin-susceptible isolates only)
                                 
                                     
                                    Staphylococcus 
                                    aureus (including methicillin-resistant isolates)
                                 
                                     
                                    Streptococcus agalactiae
                                 
                                 
                                     
                                    Streptococcus dysgalactiae subsp. equisimilis
                                 
                                 
                                     
                                    Streptococcus 
                                    pyogenes
                                 
                              
                              The following in vitro data are available, but their clinical significance is unknown.  At least 90% of the following Gram-positive bacteria exhibit an in vitro minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) less than or equal to the susceptible breakpoint for daptomycin versus the bacterial genus (Table 9).  However, the efficacy of CUBICIN in treating clinical infections due to these bacteria has not been established in adequate and well-controlled clinical trials.
                              
                                 
                                     
                                    Gram-Positive Bacteria
                                 
                              
                              
                                 
                                     
                                    Corynebacterium jeikeium
                                 
                                 
                                     
                                    Enterococcus 
                                    faecalis (vancomycin-resistant isolates)
                                 
                                     
                                    Enterococcus 
                                    faecium (including vancomycin-resistant isolates)
                                 
                                     
                                    Staphylococcus 
                                    epidermidis (including methicillin-resistant isolates)
                                 
                                     
                                    Staphylococcus haemolyticus
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Susceptibility Testing Methods
                              
                              When available, the clinical microbiology laboratory should provide the results of in vitro susceptibility tests for antimicrobial drug products used in resident hospitals to the physician as periodic reports that describe the susceptibility profile of nosocomial and community-acquired pathogens.  These reports should aid the physician in selecting an antibacterial drug product for treatment.
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Dilution Techniques
                                    
                                    Quantitative methods are used to determine antimicrobial minimum inhibitory concentrations (MICs).  These MICs provide estimates of the susceptibility of bacteria to antimicrobial compounds.  The MICs should be determined using a standardized broth test method2,3 with the broth adjusted to a calcium content of 50 mg/L.  The use of the agar dilution method is not recommended with daptomycin3.  The MICs should be interpreted according to the criteria listed in Table 9.
                                    


                                    


A report of "Susceptible" indicates that the antimicrobial is likely to inhibit the growth of the pathogen if the antimicrobial compound reaches the concentration at the infection site necessary to inhibit growth of the pathogen.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Diffusion Technique 
                                    
                                    Quantitative methods that require measurement of zone diameters have not been shown to provide reproducible estimates of the susceptibility of bacteria to daptomycin.  The use of the disk diffusion method is not recommended with daptomycin3,4.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Quality Control 
                                    
                                    Standardized susceptibility test procedures require the use of laboratory controls to monitor and ensure the accuracy and precision of supplies and reagents used in the assay, and the techniques of the individuals performing the test2,3.  Standard daptomycin powder should provide the ranges of MIC values noted in Table 10.
                                    


