
               
               
               7	DRUG INTERACTIONS 
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1	HMG-CoA Reductase Inhibitors
                     
                        In healthy subjects, concomitant administration of CUBICIN and simvastatin had no effect on plasma trough concentrations of simvastatin, and there were no reports of skeletal myopathy [see 
                              Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)
                           ]. 
                        However, inhibitors of HMG-CoA reductase may cause myopathy, which is manifested as muscle pain or weakness associated with elevated levels of creatine phosphokinase (CPK).  In the Phase 3 S. aureus bacteremia/endocarditis trial, some patients who received prior or concomitant treatment with an HMG-CoA reductase inhibitor developed elevated CPK [see 
                              Adverse Reactions (6.1)
                           ].  Experience with the coadministration of HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors and CUBICIN in patients is limited; therefore, consideration should be given to suspending use of HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors temporarily in patients receiving CUBICIN.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2	Drug-Laboratory Test Interactions
                     
                        Clinically relevant plasma concentrations of daptomycin have been observed to cause a significant concentration-dependent false prolongation of prothrombin time (PT) and elevation of International Normalized Ratio (INR) when certain recombinant thromboplastin reagents are utilized for the assay.  The possibility of an erroneously elevated PT/INR result due to interaction with a recombinant thromboplastin reagent may be minimized by drawing specimens for PT or INR testing near the time of trough plasma concentrations of daptomycin.  However, sufficient daptomycin concentrations may be present at trough to cause interaction.
                        If confronted with an abnormally high PT/INR result in a patient being treated with CUBICIN, it is recommended that clinicians:
                        
                           Repeat the assessment of PT/INR, requesting that the specimen be drawn just prior to the next CUBICIN dose (i.e., at trough concentration).  If the PT/INR value obtained at trough remains substantially elevated above what would otherwise be expected, consider evaluating PT/INR utilizing an alternative method.
                           Evaluate for other causes of abnormally elevated PT/INR results.
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         