
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Raxibacumab is a monoclonal antibody that binds the PA of B. anthracis [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.4)].
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        The PK of raxibacumab are linear over the dose range of 1 to 40 mg/kg following single IV dosing in humans; raxibacumab was not tested at doses higher than 40 mg/kg in humans. Following single IV administration of raxibacumab 40 mg/kg in healthy, male and female human subjects, the mean Cmax and AUCinf were 1,020.3 ± 140.6 mcg/mL and 15,845.8 ± 4,333.5 mcg•day/mL, respectively. Mean raxibacumab steady-state volume of distribution was greater than plasma volume, suggesting some tissue distribution. Clearance values were much smaller than the glomerular filtration rate indicating that there is virtually no renal clearance of raxibacumab.
                        Because the effectiveness of raxibacumab cannot be tested in humans, a comparison of raxibacumab exposures achieved in healthy human subjects to those observed in animal models of inhalational anthrax in therapeutic efficacy studies is necessary to support the dosage regimen of 40 mg/kg IV as a single dose for the treatment of inhalational anthrax in humans. Humans achieve similar or greater systemic exposure (Cmax and AUCinf) to raxibacumab following a single 40 mg/kg IV dose compared with New Zealand White rabbits and cynomolgus macaques receiving the same dosage regimen. 
                        
                           Effects of Gender, Age, and Race
                        
                        Raxibacumab PK were evaluated via a population PK analysis using serum samples from 322 healthy subjects who received a single 40 mg/kg IV dose across 3 clinical trials. Based on this analysis, gender (female versus male), race (non-white versus white), or age (elderly versus young) had no meaningful effects on the PK parameters for raxibacumab.
                        Raxibacumab PK have not been evaluated in children [see Dosage and Administration (2.2),Use in Specific Populations (8.4)].
                        
                        
                           Repeat Dosing
                        
                        Although raxibacumab is intended for single dose administration, the PK of raxibacumab following a second administration of 40 mg/kg IV given 14 days after the first 40 mg/kg IV dose was assessed in 23 healthy subjects (Study 3). The mean raxibacumab concentration at 28 days after the second dose was approximately twice the mean raxibacumab concentration at 14 days following the first dose. In the human trial assessing the immunogenicity of raxibacumab (Study 2), 20 healthy subjects who had initially received a single dose of raxibacumab 40 mg/kg IV received a second 40 mg/kg IV dose at ≥4 months following their first dose. No statistically significant differences in mean estimates of AUCinf, CL, or half-life of raxibacumab between the 2 doses administered ≥4 months apart were observed. The mean Cmax following the second dose was 15% lower than the Cmax following the first dose.
                        
                           Ciprofloxacin Interaction Trial
                        
                        In an open-label trial evaluating the effect of raxibacumab on ciprofloxacin PK in healthy adult male and female subjects (Study 1), the administration of 40 mg/kg raxibacumab IV following ciprofloxacin IV infusion or ciprofloxacin oral tablet ingestion did not alter the PK of ciprofloxacin administered orally and/or intravenously. Likewise, ciprofloxacin did not alter the PK of raxibacumab. [See Drug Interactions (7.1).]
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.4 Microbiology
                     
                        
                           Mechanism of Action
                        
                        Raxibacumab is a monoclonal antibody that binds free PA with an affinity equilibrium dissociation constant (Kd) of 2.78 ± 0.9 nM. Raxibacumab inhibits the binding of PA to its cellular receptors, preventing the intracellular entry of the anthrax lethal factor and edema factor, the enzymatic toxin components responsible for the pathogenic effects of anthrax toxin.
                        
                           Activity In Vitro and In Vivo
                        
                        Raxibacumab binds in vitro to PA from the Ames, Vollum, and Sterne strains of B. anthracis. Raxibacumab binds to an epitope on PA that is conserved across reported strains of B. anthracis.
                        
                        In vivo studies in rats suggest that raxibacumab neutralizes the toxicity due to lethal toxin, as animals slowly infused with lethal toxin (a combination of PA + lethal factor) survived 7 days following administration. The median time to death in control rats was 16 hours. Similar observations were noted in animal efficacy studies in rabbits and monkeys challenged with B. anthracis spores by the inhalational route. PA was detected in animals following exposure to B. anthracis spores. PA levels rose and then fell to undetectable levels in animals that responded to treatment and survived, whereas levels continued to rise in animals that failed treatment and died or were euthanized because of poor clinical condition. [See Clinical Studies (14.1).]
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         