
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Mucopolysaccharide storage disorders are caused by the deficiency of specific lysosomal enzymes required for the catabolism of glycosaminoglycans (GAG). Mucopolysaccharidosis I (MPS I) is characterized by the deficiency of α-L-iduronidase, a lysosomal hydrolase which catalyzes the hydrolysis of terminal α-L-iduronic acid residues of dermatan sulfate and heparan sulfate. Reduced or absent α-L-iduronidase activity results in the accumulation of the GAG substrates, dermatan sulfate and heparan sulfate, throughout the body and leads to widespread cellular, tissue, and organ dysfunction.
                        The rationale of ALDURAZYME therapy in MPS I is to provide exogenous enzyme for uptake into lysosomes and increase the catabolism of GAG. ALDURAZYME uptake by cells into lysosomes is most likely mediated by the mannose-6-phosphate-terminated oligosaccharide chains of laronidase binding to specific mannose-6-phosphate receptors. 
                        Because many proteins in the blood are restricted from entry into the central nervous system (CNS) by the blood brain barrier, effects of intravenously administered ALDURAZYME on cells within the CNS cannot be inferred from activity in sites outside the CNS. The ability of ALDURAZYME to cross the blood brain barrier has not been evaluated in animal models or in clinical studies.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        The pharmacodynamic effect of ALDURAZYME was assessed by reductions in urinary GAG levels. The responsiveness of urinary GAG to dosage alterations of ALDURAZYME is unknown, and the relationship of urinary GAG to other measures of clinical response has also not been established [see Clinical Studies (14)
                           ].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        The pharmacokinetics of laronidase were evaluated in 6 year old or older patients (N = 10 to 12) with MPS I who received 0.58 mg/kg of body weight once weekly of ALDURAZYME as a 4-hour infusion in the placebo-controlled clinical study (Study 1). After the 1st, 12th, and 26th weekly infusions, the mean maximum plasma concentrations (Cmax) ranged from 1.2 to 1.7 μg/mL for the 3 time points. The mean area under the plasma concentration-time curve (AUC∞) ranged from 4.5 to 6.9 μg • hour/mL. The mean volume of distribution (Vz) ranged from 0.24 to 0.60 L/kg. Mean plasma clearance (CL) ranged from 1.7 to 2.7 mL/min/kg, and the mean elimination half-life (t1/2) ranged from 1.5 to 3.6 hours.
                        Most patients who received once weekly infusions of ALDURAZYME in Study 1 developed antibodies to laronidase by Week 12. Between Weeks 1 and 12, increases in the plasma clearance of laronidase were observed in some patients and appeared to be proportional to the antibody titer. At Week 26, plasma clearance of laronidase was comparable to that at Week 1, in spite of the continued and, in some cases, increased titers of antibodies. 
                        The pharmacokinetics of laronidase were evaluated in 6 year old or younger patients (N=7 to 9) with MPS I disease who received 0.58 mg/kg of body weight once weekly of ALDURAZYME as a 4-hour infusion in the open label clinical study (Study 3).  After the 26th infusion, the 95% confidence interval of the geometric mean values of PK parameters  ranged from 0.6 to 1.6 µg/mL for the maximum plasma concentrations (Cmax), from 1.3 to 4.4 µg • hour/mL for area under the plasma concentration-time curve (AUC∞), from 0.12 to 0.56 L/kg for volume of distribution (Vz), from 2.2 to 7.7 mL/min/kg for plasma clearance (CL), and from 0.3 to 1.9 hours for elimination half-life (t1/2).
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         