
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
                  No specific drug-drug interaction studies were performed. Risedronate is not metabolized and does not induce or inhibit hepatic microsomal drug-metabolizing enzymes (for example, Cytochrome P450). 
               
               
               
                  
                     
                        Calcium, antacids, or oral medications containing divalent cations interfere with the absorption of risedronate (7.1). 
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 Calcium Supplements/Antacids
                     
                        Co-administration of risedronate and calcium, antacids, or oral medications containing divalent cations will interfere with the absorption of risedronate. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 Hormone Replacement Therapy
                     
                        One study of about 500 early postmenopausal women has been conducted to date in which treatment with risedronate 5 mg daily plus estrogen replacement therapy was compared to estrogen replacement therapy alone. Exposure to study drugs was approximately 12 to 18 months and the primary endpoint was change in BMD. If considered appropriate, risedronate may be used concomitantly with hormone replacement therapy. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3 Aspirin/Nonsteroidal Anti-Inflammatory Drugs
                     
                        Of over 5700 patients enrolled in the risedronate Phase 3 osteoporosis studies, aspirin use was reported by 31% of patients, 24% of whom were regular users (3 or more days per week). Forty-eight percent of patients reported NSAID use, 21% of whom were regular users. Among regular aspirin or NSAID users, the incidence of upper gastrointestinal adverse experiences in placebo-treated patients (24.8%) was similar to that in risedronate-treated patients (24.5%). 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4 H2 Blockers and Proton Pump Inhibitors (PPIs)
                     
                        Of over 5700 patients enrolled in the risedronate Phase 3 osteoporosis studies, 21% used H2 blockers and/or PPIs. Among these patients, the incidence of upper gastrointestinal adverse experiences in the placebo-treated patients was similar to that in risedronate-treated patients.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         