
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action 
                     
                        Insulin-like growth factor-1 (IGF-1) is a key hormonal mediator on statural growth.  Under normal circumstances, growth hormone (GH) binds to its receptor in the liver, and other tissues, and stimulates the synthesis/secretion of IGF-1.  In target tissues, the Type 1 IGF-1 receptor, which is homologous to the insulin receptor, is activated by IGF-1, leading to intracellular signaling which stimulates multiple processes resulting in statural growth.  The metabolic actions of IGF-1 are in part directed at stimulating the uptake of glucose, fatty acids, and amino acids so that metabolism supports growing tissues.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        The following actions have been demonstrated for endogenous human IGF-1:
                        
                           Tissue Growth – 1) Skeletal growth occurs at the cartilage growth plates of the epiphyses of bones where stem cells divide to produce new cartilage cells or chondrocytes.  The growth of chondrocytes is under the control of IGF-1 and GH.  The chondrocytes become calcified so that new bone is formed allowing the length of the bones to increase.  This results in skeletal growth until the cartilage growth plates fuse at the end of puberty.  2) Cell growth: IGF-1 receptors are present on most types of cells and tissues.  IGF-1 has mitogenic activities that lead to an increased number of cells in the body.  3) Organ growth: Treatment of IGF-1 deficient rats with rhIGF-1 results in whole body and organ growth.
                        
                           Carbohydrate Metabolism –IGF-1 suppresses hepatic glucose production and stimulates peripheral glucose utilization and therefore has a hypoglycemic potential.  IGF-1 has inhibitory effects on insulin secretion.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3  Pharmacokinetics 
                     
                        
                           Absorption – The absolute bioavailability of rhIGF-1 after subcutaneous administration in healthy subjects is estimated to be close to 100%.  However, the absolute bioavailability of INCRELEX® given subcutaneously to subjects with primary insulin-like growth factor-1 deficiency (Primary IGFD) has not been determined. 
                        
                           Distribution – In blood, IGF-1 is bound to six IGF binding proteins, with > 80% bound as a complex with IGFBP-3 and an acid-labile subunit.  IGFBP-3 is greatly reduced in subjects with severe Primary IGFD, resulting in increased clearance of IGF-1 in these subjects relative to healthy subjects.  The total IGF-1 volume of distribution after subcutaneous administration in subjects with severe Primary IGFD is estimated to be 0.257 (± 0.073) L/kg at an INCRELEX® dose of 0.045 mg/kg, and is estimated to increase as the dose of INCRELEX® increases.
                        
                           Elimination – IGF-1 is metabolized by both liver and kidney.  The mean terminal t1/2 after single subcutaneous administration of 0.12 mg/kg INCRELEX® in pediatric subjects with severe Primary IGFD is estimated to be 5.8 hours.  Clearance of INCRELEX® is inversely proportional to IGF binding protein-3 (IGFBP-3) levels.  CL/F is estimated to be 0.04 L/hr/kg at 0.5 micrograms/mL of IGFBP-3, and 0.01 L/hr/kg at 3 micrograms/mL IGFBP-3; the latter is the median IGFBP-3 in subjects with normal IGF-1 serum levels.
                        
                           Gender – In children with Primary IGFD there were no apparent differences between males and females in the pharmacokinetics of INCRELEX®.
                        
                           Race –The effect of race on pharmacokinetics of INCRELEX® has not been studied.
                        



                        



                           Renal impairment– No studies have been conducted in Primary IGFD children with renal impairment.
                        
                           Hepatic impairment– No studies have been conducted to determine the effect of hepatic impairment on the pharmacokinetics of rhIGF-1 in Primary IGFD children with hepatic impairment.
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           Figure
                           
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         