
                     
                     
                     Drug Interactions
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           CYP3A4 Interactions
                           
                              Lovastatin is metabolized by CYP3A4 but has no CYP3A4 inhibitory activity; therefore it is not expected to affect the plasma concentrations of other drugs metabolized by CYP3A4. Strong inhibitors of CYP3A4. (e.g., itraconazole, ketoconazole, posaconazole, voriconazole, clarithromycin, telithromycin, HIV protease inhibitors, boceprevir, telaprevir, nefazodone, and erythromycin), and grapefruit juice increase the risk of myopathy by reducing the elimination of lovastatin. See WCONTRAINDICATIONS, WARNINGS
                                 , 
                                    
                                       Myopathy/Rhabdomyolysis,
                                 
                                 and CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
                                  , 
                                    
                                       Pharmacokinetics.
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Interactions With Lipid-Lowering Drugs That Can Cause Myopathy When Given Alone
                           
                              The risk of myopathy is also increased by the following lipid-lowering drugs that are not potent CYP3A4 inhibitors, but which can cause myopathy when given alone.
                              
                                 See  WARNINGS,
                                 
                                    Myopathy/Rhabdomyolysis.
                                 
                              
                              
                                 Gemfibrozil
Other fibrates
Niacin (nicotinic acid) (1 g/day)
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Other drug interactions
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Cyclosporine: The risk of myopathy/rhabdomyolysis is increased by concomitant administration of cyclosporine or danazol (see WARNING, 
                                          Myopathy/Rhabdomyolysis
                                       ; CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY, Pharmacokinetics).
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Amiodarone:  The risk of myopathy/rhabdomyolysis is increased when either amiodarone or verapamil is used concomitantly with a closely related member of the HMG-CoA reductase inhibitor class (see WARNINGS, 
                                          Myopathy/Rhabdomyolysis
                                       ).
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Coumarin Anticoagulants:  In a small clinical trial in which lovastatin was administered to warfarin treated patients; no effect on prothrombin time was detected. However, another HMG-CoA reductase inhibitor has been found to produce a less than two seconds increase in prothrombin time in healthy volunteers receiving low doses of warfarin. Also, bleeding and/or increased prothrombin time have been reported in a few patients taking coumarin anticoagulants concomitantly with lovastatin. It is recommended that in patients taking anticoagulants, prothrombin time be determined before starting lovastatin and frequently enough during early therapy to insure that no significant alteration of prothrombin time occurs. Once a stable prothrombin time has been documented, prothrombin times can be monitored at the intervals usually recommended for patients on coumarin anticoagulants. If the dose of lovastatin is changed, the same procedure should be repeated. Lovastatin therapy has not been associated with bleeding or with changes in prothrombin time in patients not taking anticoagulants.

                                       

                                       Colchicine: Cases of myopathy, including rhabdomyolysis, have been reported with lovastatin coadministered with colchicine. See WARNINGS, Myopathy/Rhabdomyolysis.

                                       

                                       Ranolazine: The risk of myopathy, including rhabdomyolysis, may be increased by concomitant administration of ranolazine. See WARNINGS, Myopathy/Rhabdomyolysis. 

                                    
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Propranolol:   In normal volunteers, there was no clinically significant pharmacokinetic or pharmacodynamic interaction with concomitant administration of single doses of lovastatin and propranolol.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Digoxin:   In patients with hypercholesterolemia, concomitant administration of lovastatin and digoxin resulted in no effect on digoxin plasma concentrations.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Oral Hypoglycemic Agents:  In pharmacokinetic studies of lovastatin in hypercholesterolemic non-insulin dependent diabetic patients, there was no drug interaction with glipizide or with chlorpropamide (see CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY , 
                                          Clinical Studies
                                        ).
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               