


CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
Sulfamethoxazole and Trimethoprim Oral Suspension is rapidly absorbed following oral administration. Both sulfamethoxazole and trimethoprim exist in the blood as unbound, protein-bound and metabolized forms; sulfamethoxazole also exists as the conjugated form. The metabolism of sulfamethoxazole occurs predominately by N4-acetylation, although the glucuronide conjugate has been identified. The principal metabolites of trimethoprim are the 1 - and 3 - oxides and the 3' - and 4' – hydroxy derivatives. The free forms of sulfamethoxazole and trimethoprim are considered to be the therapeutically active forms. Approximately 70% of sulfamethoxazole and 44% of trimethoprim are bound to plasma proteins. The presence of 10 mg percent sulfamethoxazole in plasma decreases the protein binding of trimethoprim by an insignificant degree; trimethoprim does not influence the protein binding of sulfamethoxazole.4-acetylation, although the glucuronide conjugate has been identified. The principal metabolites of trimethoprim are the 1 - and 3 - oxides and the 3' - and 4' – hydroxy derivatives. The free forms of sulfamethoxazole and trimethoprim are considered to be the therapeutically active forms. Approximately 70% of sulfamethoxazole and 44% of trimethoprim are bound to plasma proteins. The presence of 10 mg percent sulfamethoxazole in plasma decreases the protein binding of trimethoprim by an insignificant degree; trimethoprim does not influence the protein binding of sulfamethoxazole.Peak blood levels for the individual components occur 1 to 4 hours after oral administration. The mean serum half-lives of sulfamethoxazole and trimethoprim are 10 and 8 to 10 hours, respectively. However, patients with severely impaired renal function exhibit an increase in the half-lives of both components, requiring dosage regimen adjustment (see DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION section). Detectable amounts of sulfamethoxazole and trimethoprim are present in the blood 24 hours after drug administration. During administration of 800 mg sulfamethoxazole and 160 mg trimethoprim b.i.d., the mean steady-state plasma concentration of trimethoprim was 1.72 μg/mL. The steady-state mean plasma levels of free and total sulfamethoxazole were 57.4 μg/mL and 68.0 μg/mL, respectively. These steady-state levels were achieved after three days of drug administration.1DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION section). Detectable amounts of sulfamethoxazole and trimethoprim are present in the blood 24 hours after drug administration. During administration of 800 mg sulfamethoxazole and 160 mg trimethoprim b.i.d., the mean steady-state plasma concentration of trimethoprim was 1Excretion of sulfamethoxazole and trimethoprim is primarily by the kidneys through both glomerular filtration and tubular secretion. Urine concentrations of both sulfamethoxazole and trimethoprim are considerably higher than are the concentrations in the blood. The average percentage of the dose recovered in urine from 0 to 72 hours after a single oral dose is 84.5% for total sulfonamide and 66.8% for free trimethoprim. Thirty percent of the total sulfonamide is excreted as free sulfamethoxazole, with the remaining as N4-acetylated metabolite.2 When administered together, neither sulfamethoxazole nor trimethoprim affects the urinary excretion pattern of the other..5% for total sulfonamide and 66Both sulfamethoxazole and trimethoprim distribute to sputum, vaginal fluid, and middle ear fluid; trimethoprim also distributes to bronchial secretion, and both pass the placental barrier and are excreted in breast milk.Microbiology: Sulfamethoxazole inhibits bacterial synthesis of dihydrofolic acid by competing with para-aminobenzoic acid (PABA). Trimethoprim blocks the production of tetrahydrofolic acid from dihydrofolic acid by binding to and reversibly inhibiting the required enzyme,: Sulfamethoxazole inhibits bacterial synthesis of dihydrofolic acid by competing with dihydrofolate reductase. Thus, this combination blocks two consecutive steps in the biosynthesis of nucleic acids and proteins essential to many bacteria.In vitro studies have shown that bacterial resistance develops more slowly with this combination than with either sulfamethoxazole or trimethoprim alone.In vitro studies have shown that bacterial resistance develops more slowly with this combination than with either sulfamethoxazole or trimethoprim alone.In vitro serial dilution tests have shown that the spectrum of antibacterial activity of sulfamethoxazole and trimethoprim includes the common urinary tract pathogens with the exception of Pseudomonas aeruginosa. The following organisms are usually susceptible: Escherichia coli, Klebsiella species, Enterobacter species, Morganella morganii, Proteus mirabilis and indole-positive Proteus species including Proteus vulgaris. The usual spectrum of antimicrobial activity of sulfamethoxazole and trimethoprim includes the following bacterial pathogens isolated from middle ear exudate and from bronchial secretions: Haemophilus influenzae, including ampicillin-resistant strains, and Streptococcus pneumoniae. Shigella flexneri and Shigella sonnei are usually susceptible. The usual spectrum also includes enterotoxigenic strains of Escherichia coli (ETEC) causing bacterial gastroenteritis.In vitro serial dilution tests have shown that the spectrum of antibacterial activity of sulfamethoxazole and trimethoprim includes the common urinary tract pathogens with the exception of 




Susceptibility Testing:Susceptibility Testing:The recommended quantitative disc susceptibility method may be used for estimating the susceptibility of bacteria to sulfamethoxazole and trimethoprim.3,4 With this procedure, a report from the laboratory of “Susceptible to trimethoprim and sulfamethoxazole” indicates that the infection is likely to respond to therapy with this product. If the infection is confined to the urine, a report of “Intermediate susceptibility to trimethoprim and sulfamethoxazole” also indicates that the infection is likely to respond. A report of “Resistant to trimethoprim and sulfamethoxazole” indicates that the infection is unlikely to respond to therapy with this product.3,4 With this procedure, a report from the laboratory of “Susceptible to trimethoprim and sulfamethoxazole” indicates that the infection is likely to respond to therapy with this product. If the infection is confined to the urine, a report of “Intermediate susceptibility to trimethoprim and sulfamethoxazole” also indicates that the infection is likely to respond. A report of “Resistant to trimethoprim and sulfamethoxazole” indicates that the infection is unlikely to respond to therapy with this product.


