
                     
                     
                     Drug Interactions
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Beta Blockers
                           
                              In controlled clinical studies, adrenergic beta-receptor blockers have been frequently administered concomitantly with nicardipine. The combination is well tolerated.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Cimetidine
                           
                              Cimetidine increases nicardipine plasma levels. Patients receiving the two drugs concomitantly should be carefully monitored.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Digoxin
                           
                              Some calcium blockers may increase the concentration of digitalis preparations in the blood. Nicardipine usually does not alter the plasma levels of digoxin, however, serum digoxin levels should be evaluated after concomitant therapy with nicardipine is initiated.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Aluminum and Magnesium Hydroxides
                           
                              Co-administration of an antacid containing 600 mg aluminum hydroxide and 300 mg magnesium hydroxide had no effect on nicardipine absorption. 
                              

                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Fentanyl Anesthesia
                           
                              Severe hypotension has been reported during fentanyl anesthesia with concomitant use of a beta-blocker and a calcium channel blocker. Even though such interactions were not seen during clinical studies with nicardipine, an increased volume of circulating fluids might be required if such an interaction were to occur.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Cyclosporine
                           
                              Concomitant administration of nicardipine and cyclosporine results in elevated plasma cyclosporine levels. Plasma concentrations of cyclosporine should therefore be closely monitored, and its dosage reduced accordingly, in patients treated with nicardipine.
                              When therapeutic concentrations of furosemide, propranolol, dipyridamole, warfarin, quinidine, or naproxen were added to human plasma (in vitro), the plasma protein binding of nicardipine was not altered.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               