
               
               
               12  CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Maraviroc is an antiviral drug [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.4)
                           ].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2  Pharmacodynamics
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Exposure Response Relationship in Treatment-Experienced Subjects 
                              
                              The relationship between maraviroc, modeled plasma trough concentration (Cmin) (1–9 samples per patient taken on up to 7 visits), and virologic response was evaluated in 973 treatment-experienced HIV-1-infected subjects with varied optimized background antiretroviral regimens in studies A4001027 and A4001028. The Cmin, baseline viral load, baseline CD4+ cell count and overall sensitivity score (OSS) were found to be important predictors of virologic success (defined as viral load < 400 copies/mL at 24 weeks). Table 7 illustrates the proportion of subjects with virologic success (%) within each Cmin quartile for 150 mg twice daily and 300 mg twice daily groups. 
                              


                           



                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                  Exposure Response Relationship in Treatment-Naive Subjects 
                              
                              The relationship between maraviroc,  modeled plasma trough concentration (Cmin) (1–12 samples per patient taken on up to 8 visits), and virologic response was evaluated in 294 treatment-naive HIV-1-infected subjects receiving maraviroc 300 mg twice daily in combination with zidovudine/lamivudine in study A4001026. Table 8 illustrates the proportion (%) of subjects with virologic success < 50 copies/mL at 48 weeks within each Cmin quartile for the 300 mg twice daily dose.   
                              


                           



                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 Effects on Electrocardiogram  
                              
                                A placebo-controlled, randomized, crossover study to evaluate the effect on the QT interval of healthy male and female volunteers was conducted with three single oral doses of maraviroc and moxifloxacin. The placebo-adjusted mean maximum (upper 1-sided 95% CI) increases in QTc from baseline after 100, 300 and 900 mg of maraviroc were  –2 (0), -1 (1), and 1 (3) msec, respectively, and 13 (15) msec for moxifloxacin 400 mg. No subject in any group had an increase in QTc of ≥60 msec from baseline. No subject experienced an interval exceeding the potentially clinically relevant threshold of 500 msec. 
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3	Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        


                     



                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Absorption
                              
                              Peak maraviroc plasma concentrations are attained 0.5–4h following single oral doses of 1–1200 mg administered to uninfected volunteers. The pharmacokinetics of oral maraviroc are not dose-proportional over the dose range. 
                              The absolute bioavailability of a 100 mg dose is 23% and is predicted to be 33% at 300 mg. Maraviroc is a substrate for the efflux transporter P-glycoprotein.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Effect of Food on Oral Absorption
                              
                              Coadministration of a 300mg tablet with a high fat breakfast reduced maraviroc Cmax and AUC by 33% in healthy volunteers.  There were no food restrictions in the studies that demonstrated the efficacy and safety of maraviroc [see Clinical Studies (14)
                                 ]. Therefore, maraviroc can be taken with or without food at the recommended dose [see Dosage and Administration (2)
                                 ].
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Distribution
                              
                              Maraviroc is bound (approximately 76%) to human plasma proteins, and shows moderate affinity for albumin and alpha-1 acid glycoprotein. The volume of distribution of maraviroc is approximately 194L. 
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Metabolism
                              
                              Studies in humans and in vitro studies using human liver microsomes and expressed enzymes have demonstrated that maraviroc is principally metabolized by the cytochrome P450 system to metabolites that are essentially inactive against HIV-1. In vitro studies indicate that CYP3A is the major enzyme responsible for maraviroc metabolism. In vitro studies also indicate that polymorphic enzymes CYP2C9, CYP2D6 and CYP2C19 do not contribute significantly to the metabolism of maraviroc.
                              Maraviroc is the major circulating component (~42% drug-related radioactivity) following a single oral dose of 300 mg[14C]-maraviroc. The most significant circulating metabolite in humans is a secondary amine (~22% radioactivity) formed by N-dealkylation. This polar metabolite has no significant pharmacological activity. Other metabolites are products of mono-oxidation and are only minor components of plasma drug-related radioactivity.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Excretion
                              
                              The terminal half-life of maraviroc following oral dosing to steady state in healthy subjects was 14–18 hours. A mass balance/excretion study was conducted using a single 300mg dose of 14C-labeled maraviroc. Approximately 20% of the radiolabel was recovered in the urine and 76% was recovered in the feces over 168 hours. Maraviroc was the major component present in urine (mean of 8% dose) and feces (mean of 25% dose). The remainder was excreted as metabolites.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Hepatic Impairment
                              
                              Maraviroc is primarily metabolized and eliminated by the liver. A study compared the pharmacokinetics of a single 300 mg dose of SELZENTRY in subjects with mild (Child-Pugh Class A, n=8), and moderate (Child-Pugh Class B, n=8) hepatic impairment to pharmacokinetics in healthy subjects (n=8). The mean Cmax and AUC were 11% and 25% higher, respectively, for subjects with mild hepatic impairment, and 32% and 46% higher, respectively, for subjects with moderate hepatic impairment compared to subjects with normal hepatic function. These changes do not warrant a dose adjustment. Maraviroc concentrations are higher when SELZENTRY 150 mg is administered with a potent CYP3A inhibitor compared to following administration of 300 mg without a CYP3A inhibitor, so patients with moderate hepatic impairment who receive SELZENTRY 150 mg with a potent CYP3A inhibitor should be monitored closely for maraviroc-associated adverse events. The pharmacokinetics of maraviroc have not been studied in subjects with severe hepatic impairment [see Warnings and Precautions (5.1)
                                 ].
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Renal Impairment
                              
                              A study compared the pharmacokinetics of a single 300 mg dose of SELZENTRY in subjects with severe renal impairment (CLcr < 30 mL/min, n=6) and end-stage renal disease (ESRD) (n=6) to healthy volunteers (n=6).  Geometric mean ratios for maraviroc Cmax and AUCinf were 2.4-fold and 3.2-fold higher respectively for subjects with severe renal impairment, and 1.7-fold and 2.0-fold higher respectively for subjects with ESRD as compared to subjects with normal renal function in this study.  Hemodialysis had a minimal effect on maraviroc clearance and exposure in subjects with ESRD. Exposures observed in subjects with severe renal impairment and ESRD were within the range observed in previous SELZENTRY 300 mg single-dose studies in healthy volunteers with normal renal function.  However, maraviroc exposures in the subjects with normal renal function in this study were 50% lower than that observed in previous studies. Based on the results of this study, no dose adjustment is recommended for patients with renal impairment receiving SELZENTRY without a potent CYP3A inhibitor or inducer.  However,  if patients with severe renal impairment or ESRD experience any symptoms of postural hypotension while taking SELZENTRY 300 mg twice daily, their dose should be reduced to 150 mg twice daily [see 
                                    Dosage and Administration (2.2); Warnings and Precautions (5.2)
                                 ]. 
                               In addition, the study compared the pharmacokinetics of multiple dose SELZENTRY in combination with saquinavir/ritonavir 1000/100 mg twice daily (a potent CYP3A inhibitor combination) for 7 days in subjects with mild renal impairment (CLcr >50 and ≤80 mL/min, n=6) and moderate renal impairment (CLcr ≥30 and ≤50 mL/min, n=6) to healthy volunteers with normal renal function (n=6).  Subjects received 150 mg of SELZENTRY at different dose frequencies (healthy volunteers – every 12 hours; mild renal impairment – every 24 hours; moderate renal impairment – every 48 hours).  Compared to healthy volunteers (dosed every 12 hours), geometric mean ratios for maraviroc AUCtau, Cmax and Cmin were 50% higher, 20% higher and 43% lower, respectively for subjects with mild renal impairment (dosed every 24 hours).  Geometric mean ratios for maraviroc AUCtau, Cmax and Cmin were 16% higher, 29% lower and 85% lower, respectively for subjects with moderate renal impairment (dosed every 48 hours) compared to healthy volunteers (dosed every 12 hours). Based on the data from this study, no adjustment in dose is recommended for patients with mild or moderate renal impairment [see 
                                    Dosage and Administration (2.2)
                                 ].   
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Effect of Concomitant Drugs on the Pharmacokinetics of Maraviroc
                              
                              Maraviroc is a substrate of CYP3A and Pgp and hence its pharmacokinetics are likely to be modulated by inhibitors and inducers of these enzymes/transporters. The CYP3A/Pgp inhibitors ketoconazole, lopinavir/ritonavir, ritonavir, darunavir/ritonavir, saquinavir/ritonavir and atazanavir ± ritonavir  all increased the Cmax and AUC of maraviroc [see Table 10]. The CYP3A inducers rifampin, etravirine and efavirenz decreased the Cmax and AUC of maraviroc [see Table 10].
                              Tipranavir/ritonavir (net CYP3A inhibitor/Pgp inducer) did not affect the steady state pharmacokinetics of maraviroc (see Table 10). Co-trimoxazole and tenofovir did not affect the pharmacokinetics of maraviroc. 
                              


                           



                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Effect of Maraviroc on the Pharmacokinetics of Concomitant Drugs 
                              
                              Maraviroc is unlikely to inhibit the metabolism of coadministered drugs metabolized by the following cytochrome P enzymes (CYP1A2, CYP2B6, CYP2C8, CYP2C9, CYP2C19, and CYP3A) because maraviroc did not inhibit activity of those enzymes at clinically relevant concentrations in vitro. Maraviroc does not induce CYP1A2 in vitro.
                              In vitro results indicate that maraviroc could inhibit P-glycoprotein in the gut and may thus affect bioavailability of certain drugs.
                              Drug interaction studies were performed with maraviroc and other drugs likely to be coadministered or commonly used as probes for pharmacokinetic interactions [see Table 6].  Maraviroc had no effect on the pharmacokinetics of zidovudine or lamivudine.  Maraviroc decreased the Cmin and AUC of raltegravir by 27% and 37%, respectively, which is not clinically significant. Maraviroc had no clinically relevant effect on the pharmacokinetics of midazolam, the oral contraceptives ethinylestradiol and levonorgestrel, no effect on the urinary 6β-hydroxycortisol/cortisol ratio, suggesting no induction of CYP3A in vivo. Maraviroc had no effect on the debrisoquine metabolic ratio (MR) at 300 mg twice daily or less in vivo and did not cause inhibition of CYP2D6 in vitro until concentrations >100µM. However, there was 234% increase in debrisoquine MR on treatment compared to baseline at 600 mg once daily, suggesting potential inhibition of CYP2D6 at higher dose.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.4 Microbiology
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Mechanism of Action
                              
                               Maraviroc is a member of a therapeutic class called CCR5 co-receptor antagonists. Maraviroc selectively binds to the human chemokine receptor CCR5 present on the cell membrane, preventing the interaction of HIV-1 gp120 and CCR5 necessary for CCR5-tropic HIV-1 to enter cells.  CXCR4-tropic and dual-tropic HIV-1 entry is not inhibited by maraviroc. 
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Antiviral Activity in Cell Culture
                              
                              Maraviroc inhibits the replication of CCR5-tropic laboratory strains and primary isolates of HIV-1 in models of acute peripheral blood leukocyte infection. The mean EC50 value (50% effective concentration) for maraviroc against HIV-1 group M isolates (subtypes A to J and circulating recombinant form AE) and group O isolates ranged from 0.1 to 4.5 nM (0.05 to 2.3 ng/mL) in cell culture. 
                              When used with other antiretroviral agents in cell culture, the combination of maraviroc was not antagonistic with NNRTIs (delavirdine, efavirenz and nevirapine), NRTIs (abacavir, didanosine, emtricitabine, lamivudine, stavudine, tenofovir, zalcitabine and zidovudine), or protease inhibitors (amprenavir, atazanavir, darunavir, indinavir, lopinavir, nelfinavir, ritonavir, saquinavir and tipranavir). Maraviroc was additive/synergistic with the HIV fusion inhibitor enfuvirtide. Maraviroc was not active against CXCR4-tropic and dual-tropic viruses (EC50 value >10 µM). The antiviral activity of maraviroc against HIV-2 has not been evaluated. 
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Resistance in Cell Culture
                              
                              HIV-1 variants with reduced susceptibility to maraviroc have been selected in cell culture, following serial passage of two CCR5-tropic viruses (CC1/85 and RU570). The maraviroc-resistant viruses remained CCR5-tropic with no evidence of a change from a CCR5-tropic virus to a CXCR4-using virus. Two amino acid residue substitutions in the V3-loop region of the HIV-1 envelope glycoprotein (gp160), A316T and I323V (HXB2 numbering), were shown to be necessary for the maraviroc-resistant phenotype in the HIV-1 isolate CC1/85. In the RU570 isolate a 3-amino acid residue deletion in the V3 loop, ΔQAI (HXB2 positions 315–317), was associated with maraviroc resistance. The relevance of the specific gp120 mutations observed in maraviroc-resistant isolates selected in cell culture to clinical maraviroc resistance is not known. Maraviroc-resistant viruses were characterized phenotypically by concentration response curves that did not reach 100% inhibition in phenotypic drug assays, rather than increases in EC50 values. 
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Cross-resistance in Cell Culture
                              
                              Maraviroc had antiviral activity against HIV-1 clinical isolates resistant to NNRTIs, NRTIs, PIs and the fusion inhibitor enfuvirtide in cell culture (EC50 values ranged from 0.7 to 8.9 nM (0.36 to 4.57 ng/mL)). Maraviroc-resistant viruses that emerged in cell culture remained susceptible to the enfuvirtide and the protease inhibitor saquinavir. 
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Clinical Resistance
                              
                              Virologic failure on maraviroc can result from genotypic and phenotypic resistance to maraviroc, through outgrowth of undetected CXCR4-using virus present before maraviroc treatment (see 
                                    Tropism
                                  below), through resistance to background therapy drugs (Table 11), or due to low exposure to maraviroc [see  
                                    Clinical Pharmacology  (12.2)
                                 ]. 
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Antiretroviral treatment-experienced subjects (Studies A4001027 and A4001028)
                              
                              Week 48 data from treatment-experienced subjects failing maraviroc-containing regimens with CCR5-tropic virus (n=58) have identified 22 viruses that had decreased susceptibility to maraviroc characterized in phenotypic drug assays by concentration response curves that did not reach 100% inhibition. Additionally, CCR5-tropic virus from 2 of these treatment failure subjects had ≥3-fold shifts in EC50 values for maraviroc at the time of failure. 
                               Fifteen of these viruses were sequenced in the gp120 encoding region and multiple amino acid substitutions with unique patterns in the heterogeneous V3 loop region were detected. Changes at either amino acid position 308 or 323 (HXB2 numbering) were seen in the V3 loop in 7 of the subjects with decreased maraviroc susceptibility. Substitutions outside the V3 loop of gp120 may also contribute to reduced susceptibility to maraviroc.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Antiretroviral treatment-naïve subjects (Study A4001026)
                              
                              Treatment-naïve subjects receiving SELZENTRY had more virologic failures and more treatment emergent resistance to the background regimen drugs compared to those receiving efavirenz (Table 11).
                              


                              


In an as-treated analysis of treatment-naïve subjects at 96 weeks, 32 subjects failed a maraviroc-containing regimen with CCR5-tropic virus and had a tropism result at failure; 7 of these subjects had evidence of maraviroc phenotypic resistance defined as concentration response curves that did not reach 95% inhibition. One additional subject had a ≥3-fold shift in the EC50 value for maraviroc at the time of failure. A clonal analysis of the V3 loop amino acid envelope sequences was performed from 6 of the 7 subjects. Changes in V3 loop amino acid sequence differed between each of these different subjects, even for those infected with the same virus clade suggesting that that there are multiple diverse pathways to maraviroc resistance. The subjects who failed with CCR5-tropic virus and without a detectable maraviroc shift in susceptibility were not evaluated for genotypic resistance.
                              Of the 32 maraviroc virologic failures failing with CCR5-tropic virus, 20(63%) also had genotypic and/or phenotypic resistance to background drugs in the regimen (lamivudine, zidovudine). 
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Tropism
                              
                              In both treatment-experienced and treatment-naive subjects, detection of CXCR4-using virus prior to initiation of therapy has been associated with a reduced virologic response to maraviroc. 
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Antiretroviral treatment-experienced subjects
                              
                              In the majority of cases, treatment failure on maraviroc was associated with detection of CXCR4-using virus (i.e., CXCR4-or dual/mixed-tropic) which was not detected by the tropism assay prior to treatment. CXCR4-using virus was detected at failure in approximately 55% of subjects who failed treatment on maraviroc by week 48, as compared to 9% of subjects who experienced treatment failure in the placebo arm. To investigate the likely origin of the on-treatment CXCR4-using virus, a detailed clonal analysis was conducted on virus from 20 representative subjects (16 subjects from the maraviroc arms and 4 subjects from the placebo arm) in whom CXCR4-using virus was detected at treatment failure. From analysis of amino acid sequence differences and phylogenetic data, it was determined that CXCR4-using virus in these subjects emerged from a low level of pre-existing CXCR4-using virus not detected by the tropism assay (which is population-based) prior to treatment rather than from a co-receptor switch from CCR5-tropic virus to CXCR4-using virus resulting from mutation in the virus. 
                              Detection of CXCR4-using virus prior to initiation of therapy has been associated with a reduced virological response to maraviroc. Furthermore, subjects failing maraviroc BID at week 48 with CXCR4-using virus had a lower median increase in CD4+ cell counts from baseline (+41 cells/mm3) than those subjects failing with CCR5-tropic virus (+162 cells/mm3). The median increase in CD4+ cell count in subjects failing in the placebo arm was +7 cells/mm3. 
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Antiretroviral treatment-naïve subjects  
                              
                              In a 96-week study of antiretroviral treatment-naïve subjects, 14% (12/85) who had CCR5-tropic virus at screening with an enhanced sensitivity tropism assay (Trofile®) and failed therapy on maraviroc had CXCR4-using virus at the time of treatment failure. A detailed clonal analysis was conducted in two previously antiretroviral treatment-naïve subjects enrolled in a Phase 2a monotherapy study who had CXCR4-using virus detected after 10 days treatment with maraviroc. Consistent with the detailed clonal analysis conducted in treatment-experienced subjects, the CXCR4-using variants appear to emerge from outgrowth of a pre-existing undetected CXCR4-using virus. Screening with an enhanced sensitivity tropism assay reduced the number of maraviroc virologic failures with CXCR4- or dual/mixed-tropic virus at failure to 12 compared to 24 when screening with the original tropism assay.  All but one (11/12; 92%) of the maraviroc failures failing with CXCR4 or dual/mixed-tropic virus also had genotypic and phenotypic resistance to the background drug lamivudine at failure and 33% (4 /12) developed zidovudine-associated resistance substitutions. 
                              Subjects who had CCR5-tropic virus at baseline and failed maraviroc therapy with CXCR4-using virus had a median increase in CD4+ cell counts from baseline of +113 cells/mm3 while those subjects failing with CCR5-tropic virus had an increase of +135  cells/mm3. The median increase in CD4+ cell count in subjects failing in the efavirenz arm was + 95 cells/mm3.  
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         