
                     
                     
                     Drug Interactions
                     
                        Oxycodone is metabolized in part to oxymorphone via the cytochrome P450 isoenzyme CYP2D6. While this pathway may be blocked by a variety of drugs (e.g., certain cardiovascular drugs and antidepressants), such blockade has not yet been shown to be of clinical significance with this agent. However, clinicians should be aware of this possible interaction.
                        Anticholinergics: The concurrent use of anticholinergics with oxycodone preparations may produce paralytic ileus.
                        CNS Depressants: Patients receiving narcotic analgesics, general anesthetics, phenothiazines, other tranquilizers, sedative-hypnotics or other CNS depressants (including alcohol) concomitantly with oxycodone may exhibit an additive CNS depression. Interactive effects resulting in respiratory depression, hypotension, profound sedation, or coma may result if these drugs are taken in combination with the usual dosage of oxycodone. When such combined therapy is contemplated, the dose of one or both agents should be reduced.
                        Mixed Agonist/Antagonist Opioid Analgesics: Agonist/antagonist analgesics (i.e., pentazocine, nalbuphine, butorphanol and buprenorphine) should be administered with caution to patients who have received or are receiving a course of therapy with a pure opioid agonist analgesic such as oxycodone. In this situation, mixed agonist/antagonist analgesics may reduce the analgesic effect of oxycodone and/or may precipitate withdrawal symptoms in these patients.
                        Monoamine Oxidase Inhibitors (MAOIs): MAOIs have been reported to intensify the effects of at least one opioid drug causing anxiety, confusion and significant depression of respiration or coma. The use of oxycodone is not recommended for patients taking MAOIs or within 14 days of stopping such treatment.
                        Neuromuscular Blocking Agents: Oxycodone, as well as other opioid analgesics, may enhance the neuromuscular blocking action of skeletal muscle relaxants and produce an increased degree of respiratory depression.
                        ACE-Inhibitors: Reports suggest that NSAIDs may diminish the antihypertensive effect of ACE-inhibitors. This interaction should be given consideration in patients taking oxycodone hydrochloride and ibuprofen tablets concomitantly with ACE-inhibitors.
                        Aspirin: When oxycodone hydrochloride and ibuprofen tablets are administered with aspirin, its protein binding is reduced, although the clearance of free oxycodone hydrochloride and ibuprofen tablets are not altered. The clinical significance of this interaction is not known; however as with other products containing NSAIDs, concomitant administration of oxycodone hydrochloride and ibuprofen tablets and aspirin is not generally recommended because of the potential of increased adverse effects.
                        Diuretics: Ibuprofen has been shown to reduce the natriuretic effect of furosemide and thiazides in some patients. This response has been attributed to inhibition of renal prostaglandin synthesis. During concomitant therapy with oxycodone hydrochloride and ibuprofen tablets, the patient should be observed closely for signs of renal failure (see 
                              WARNINGS; Renal Effects
                           ), as well as diuretic efficacy.
                        Lithium: Ibuprofen has been shown to produce an elevation of plasma lithium levels and a reduction in renal lithium clearance. The mean minimum lithium concentration increased 15% and the renal clearance was decreased by approximately 20%. These effects have been attributed to inhibition of renal prostaglandin synthesis by the NSAID. Thus, when oxycodone hydrochloride and ibuprofen tablets and lithium are administered concurrently, subjects should be observed carefully for signs of lithium toxicity.
                        Methotrexate: Ibuprofen, as well as other NSAIDs, has been reported to competitively inhibit methotrexate accumulation in rabbit kidney slices. This may indicate that ibuprofen could enhance the toxicity of methotrexate. Caution should be used when oxycodone hydrochloride and ibuprofen tablets are administered concomitantly with methotrexate.
                        Warfarin: The effects of warfarin and NSAIDs on GI bleeding are synergistic, such that users of both drugs together have a greater risk of serious GI bleeding than users of either drug alone.
                     
                     
                  
               