
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY 
               
                  Subjective Effects:Comparisons of buprenorphine with full agonists such as methadone 
and hydromorphone suggest that sublingual buprenorphine produces typical opioid 
agonist effects which are limited by a ceiling effect.
                  In non-dependent subjects, acute sublingual doses of SUBOXONE tablets 
produced opioid agonist effects, which reached a maximum between doses of 8 mg 
and 16mg of SUBUTEX. The effects of 16mg SUBOXONE were similar to those produced 
by 16mg SUBUTEX (buprenorphine alone).
                  Opioid agonist ceiling effects were also observed in a double-blind, parallel 
group, dose ranging comparison of single doses of buprenorphine sublingual 
solution (1, 2, 4, 8, 16, or 32 mg), placebo, and a full agonist control at 
various doses. The treatments were given in ascending dose order at intervals of 
at least one week to 16 opioid-experienced, non-dependent subjects. Both drugs 
produced typical opioid agonist effects. For all the measures for which the 
drugs produced an effect, buprenorphine produced a dose-related response but, in 
each case, there was a dose that produced no further effect. In contrast, the 
highest dose of the full agonist control always produced the greatest effects. 
Agonist objective rating scores remained elevated for the higher doses of 
buprenorphine (8-32 mg) longer than for the lower doses and did not return to 
baseline until 48 hours after drug administrations. The onset of effects 
appeared more rapidly with buprenorphine than with the full agonist control, 
with most doses nearing peak effect after 100 minutes for buprenorphine compared 
to 150 minutes for the full agonist control.
                  
                  Physiologic Effects:Buprenorphine in intravenous (2mg, 4mg, 8mg, 12mg and 16 mg) and 
sublingual (12mg) doses has been administered to non-dependent subjects to 
examine cardiovascular, respiratory and subjective effects at doses comparable 
to those used for treatment of opioid dependence. Compared with placebo, there 
were no statistically significant differences among any of the treatment 
conditions for blood pressure, heart rate, respiratory rate, O2 saturation or skin temperature across time. Systolic BP was 
higher in the 8 mg group than placebo (3 hour AUC values). Minimum and maximum 
effects were similar across all treatments. Subjects remained responsive to low 
voice and responded to computer prompts. Some subjects showed irritability, but 
no other changes were observed.
                  The respiratory effects of sublingual buprenorphine were compared with the 
effects of methadone in a double-blind, parallel group, dose ranging comparison 
of single doses of buprenorphine sublingual solution (1, 2, 4, 8, 16, or 32 mg) 
and oral methadone (15, 30, 45, or 60 mg) in non-dependent, opioid-experienced 
volunteers. In this study, hypoventilation not requiring medical intervention 
was reported more frequently after buprenorphine doses of 4 mg and higher than 
after methadone. Both drugs decreased O2 saturation to 
the same degree.
                  
                  Effect of Naloxone:Physiologic and subjective effects following acute sublingual 
administration of SUBOXONE and SUBUTEX tablets were similar at equivalent dose 
levels of buprenorphine. Naloxone, in the SUBOXONE formulation, had no 
clinically significant effect when administered by the sublingual route, 
although blood levels of the drug were measurable. SUBOXONE, when administered 
sublingually even to an opioid-dependent population, was recognized as an opioid 
agonist, whereas when administered intramuscularly, combinations of 
buprenorphine with naloxone produced opioid antagonist actions similar to 
naloxone. In methadone-maintained patients and heroin-dependent subjects, 
intravenous administration of buprenorphine/naloxone combinations precipitated 
opioid withdrawal and was perceived as unpleasant and dysphoric. In 
morphine-stabilized subjects, intravenously administered combinations of 
buprenorphine with naloxone produced opioid antagonist and withdrawal effects 
that were ratio-dependent; the most intense withdrawal effects were produced by 
2:1 and 4:1 ratios, less intense by an 8:1 ratio. SUBOXONE tablets contain 
buprenorphine with naloxone at a ratio of 4:1.
                  
                  Pharmacokinetics:
                  Absorption:Plasma levels of buprenorphine increased with the sublingual dose 
of SUBUTEX and SUBOXONE, and plasma levels of naloxone increased with the 
sublingual dose of SUBOXONE (Table 1). There was a wide 
inter-patient variability in the sublingual absorption of buprenorphine and 
naloxone, but within subjects the variability was low. Both Cmax and AUC of buprenorphine increased in a linear fashion with 
the increase in dose (in the range of 4 to 16 mg), although the increase was not 
directly dose-proportional.
                  Naloxone did not affect the pharmacokinetics of buprenorphine and both 
SUBUTEX and SUBOXONE deliver similar plasma concentrations of buprenorphine. The 
levels of naloxone were too low to assess dose-proportionality. At the three 
naloxone doses of 1 mg, 2 mg, and 4 mg, levels above the limit of quantitation 
(0.05 ng/mL) were not detected beyond 2 hours in seven of eight subjects. In one 
individual, at the 4mg dose, the last measurable concentration was at 8 hours. 
Within each subject (for most of the subjects), across the doses there was a 
trend toward an increase in naloxone concentrations with increase in dose. Mean 
peak naloxone levels ranged from 0.11 to 0.28ng/mL in the dsose range of 1-4 
mg.
                  
                  


                  



                  Distribution:Buprenorphine is approximately 96% protein bound, primarily to 
alpha and beta globulin.
                  Naloxone is approximately 45% protein bound, primarily to albumin.
                  
                  Metabolism:Buprenorphine undergoes both N-dealkylation to norbuprenorphine 
and glucuronidation. The N-dealkylation pathway is mediated by cytochrome P-450 
3A4 isozyme. Norbuprenorphine, an active metabolite, can further undergo 
glucuronidation.
                  Naloxone undergoes direct glucuronidation to naloxone 3-glucuronide as well 
as N-dealkylation, and reduction of the 6-oxo group.
                  
                  Elimination:A mass balance study of buprenorphine showed complete recovery of 
radiolabel in urine (30%) and feces (69%) collected up to 11 days after dosing. 
Almost all of the dose was accounted for in terms of buprenorphine, 
norbuprenorphine, and two unidentified buprenorphine metabolites. In urine, most 
of buprenorphine and norbuprenorphine was conjugated (buprenorphine, 1% free and 
9.4% conjugated; norbuprenorphine, 2.7% free and 11% conjugated). In feces, 
almost all of the buprenorphine and norbuprenorphine were free (buprenorphine, 
33% free and 5% conjugated; norbuprenorphine, 21% free and 2% conjugated).
                  Buprenorphine has a mean elimination half-life from plasma of 37 h.
                  Naloxone has a mean elimination half-life from plasma of 1.1 h.
                  
                  Special Populations:
                  Hepatic Disease:The effect of hepatic impairment on the pharmacokinetics of 
buprenorphine and naloxone is unknown. Since both drugs are extensively 
metabolized, the plasma levels will be expected to be higher in patients with 
moderate and severe hepatic impairment. However, it is not known whether both 
drugs are affected to the same degree. Therefore, in patients with hepatic 
impairment dosage should be adjusted and patients should be observed for 
symptoms of precipitated opioid withdrawal.
                  
                  Renal Disease:No differences in buprenorphine pharmacokinetics were observed 
between 9 dialysis-dependent and 6 normal patients following intravenous 
administration of 0.3mg buprenorphine.
                  The effects of renal failure on naloxone pharmacokinetics are unknown.
                  
                  Drug-drug interactions:
                     CYP3A4 Inhibitors and Inducers: A 
pharmacokinetic interaction study of ketoconazole (400 mg/day), a potent 
inhibitor of CYP 3A4, in 12 patients stabilized on SUBOXONE [8mg (n=1) or 12mg 
(n=5) or 16mg (n=6)] resulted in increases in buprenorphine mean Cmax values (from 4.3 to 9.8, 6.3 to 14.4 and 9.0 to 17.1) and 
mean AUC values (from 30.9 to 46.9, 41.9 to 83.2 and 52.3 to 120) respectively. 
Subjects receiving SUBUTEX or SUBOXONE should be closely monitored and may 
require dose-reduction if inhibitors of CYP 3A4 such as azole antifungal agents 
(e.g. ketoconazole), macrolide antibiotics (e.g., erythromycin) and HIV protease 
inhibitors (e.g. ritonavir, indinavir and saquinavir) are co-administered. The 
interaction of buprenorphine with CYP 3A4 inducers has not been investigated; 
therefore it is recommended that patients receiving SUBUTEX or SUBOXONE should 
be closely monitored if inducers of CYP 3A4 (e.g. phenobarbital, carbamazepine, 
phenytoin, rifampicin) are co-administered (SEE WARNINGS).  
               
               
            
         