
               
               
               7	DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              Cyclosporine: Reduction in cyclosporine plasma levels when XENICAL was coadministered with cyclosporine. (7.1)
                           
                              Fat-soluble Vitamin Supplements and Analogues: All patients should take a daily multivitamin that contains vitamins A, D, E, K, and beta-carotene. (7.2)
                           
                              Levothyroxine:  Patients treated concomitantly with XENICAL and levothyroxine should be monitored for changes in thyroid function. (7.3)

                              Warfarin: Patients on chronic stable doses of warfarin who are prescribed XENICAL should be monitored closely for changes in coagulation parameters. (7.4)
                           
                              Antiepileptic Drugs: Convulsions have been reported in patients taking XENICALwith antiepileptic drugs. Patients should be monitored for possible changes in frequency or severity of convulsions. (6.2, 7.5)
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1	Cyclosporine
                     
                        Data from a XENICAL and cyclosporine drug interaction study indicate a reduction in cyclosporine plasma levels when XENICAL was coadministered with cyclosporine. XENICAL and cyclosporine should not be simultaneously coadministered. Cyclosporine should be administered 3 hours after the administration of XENICAL [see Dosage and Administration (2), Warnings and Precautions (5.1), and Adverse Reactions (6.2)].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2	Fat-soluble Vitamin Supplements and Analogues
                     
                        Data from a pharmacokinetic interaction study showed that the absorption of beta-carotene supplement is reduced when concomitantly administered with XENICAL. XENICAL inhibited absorption of a vitamin E acetate supplement. The effect of XENICAL on the absorption of supplemental vitamin D, vitamin A, and nutritionally-derived vitamin K is not known at this time [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3	Levothyroxine
                     
                        Hypothyroidism has been reported in patients treated concomitantly with XENICAL and levothyroxine postmarketing [see Adverse Reactions (6.2)]. Patients treated concomitantly with XENICAL and levothyroxine should be monitored for changes in thyroid function. Administer levothyroxine and XENICAL at least 4 hours apart [see Dosage and Administration (2)].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4	Warfarin
                     
                        Vitamin K absorption may be decreased with XENICAL. Patients on chronic stable doses of warfarin who are prescribed XENICAL should be monitored closely for changes in coagulation parameters [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.5	Antiepileptic Drugs
                     
                        Convulsions have been reported in patients treated concomitantly with orlistat and antiepileptic drugs. Patients should be monitored for possible changes in the frequency and/or severity of convulsions [see Adverse Reactions (6.2)].
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         