
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGYDicyclomine relieves smooth muscle spasm of the gastrointestinal tract. Animal studies indicate that this action is achieved via adual mechanism: (1) a specific anticholinergic effect (antimuscarinic) at the acetylcholine-receptor sites with approximately 1/8 themilligram potency of atropine (in vitro, guinea pig ileum); and (2) a direct effect upon smooth muscle (musculotropic) as evidencedby dicyclomine's antagonism of bradykinin- and histamine-induced spasms of the isolated guinea pig ileum. Atropine did not affectresponses to these two agonists. In vivo studies in cats and dogs showed dicyclomine to be equally potent against acetylcholine (ACh)-or barium chloride (BaCl2)-induced intestinal spasm while atropine was at least 200 times more potent against effects of ACh thanBaCl2. Tests for mydriatic effects in mice showed that dicyclomine was approximately 1/500 as potent as atropine; antisialagoguetests in rabbits showed dicyclomine to be 1/300 as potent as atropine.In man, dicyclomine is rapidly absorbed after oral administration, reaching peak values within 60-90 minutes. The principal routeof elimination is via the urine (79.5% of the dose). Excretion also occurs in the feces, but to a lesser extent (8.4%). Mean half-lifeof plasma elimination in one study was determined to be approximately 1.8 hours when plasma concentrations were measured for 9hours after a single dose. In subsequent studies, plasma concentrations were followed for up to 24 hours after a single dose, showing asecondary phase of elimination with a somewhat longer half-life. Mean volume of distribution for a 20 mg oral dose is approximately3.65 L/kg suggesting extensive distribution in tissues.In controlled clinical trials involving over 100 patients who received drug, 82% of patients treated for functional bowel/irritable bowelsyndrome with dicyclomine hydrochloride at initial doses of 160 mg daily (40 mg q.i.d.) demonstrated a favorable clinical responsecompared with 55% treated with placebo. (P<.05). In these trials, most of the side effects were typically anticholinergic in nature (seetable) and were reported by 61% of the patients.   Dicyclomine Hydrochloride     Side  (40 mg q.i.d.)   Placebo   Effect   %   %   Dry Mouth   33   5   Dizziness  29   2   Blurred Vision  27   2   Nausea  14   6   Light-Headedness  11   3   Drowsiness  9   1   Weakness  7   1   Nervousness   6   2  Nine percent (9%) of patients were discontinued from the drug because of one or more of these side effects (compared with 2%in the placebo group). In 41% of the patients with side effects, side effects disappeared or were tolerated at the 160 mg daily dosewithout reduction. A dose reduction from 160 mg daily to an average daily dose of 90 mg was required in 46% of the patients withside effects who then continued to experience a favorable clinical response; their side effects either disappeared or were tolerated. (See
               
            
         