
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        
                           
                              Treatment of ITP
                           
                        
                        WinRho® SDF has been shown to increase platelet counts in non-splenectomized, Rho(D)-positive patients with ITP. Platelet counts usually rise within one to two days and peak within seven to 14 days after initiation of therapy. The mechanism of action is not completely understood, but is thought to be due to the formation of anti-Rho(D)-coated RBC complexes, which are preferentially removed by the reticuloendothelial system, particularly the spleen. This results in Fc receptor blockade, thus sparing antibody-coated platelets.9,10
                        
                        
                           
                              Suppression of Rh Isoimmunization
                           
                        
                        The mechanism by which Rho(D) immune globulin suppresses immunization to Rho(D)-positive RBCs is not completely understood. 
                        WinRho® SDF when administered within 72 hours of a full-term delivery of a Rho(D)-positive infant by a Rho(D) negative mother will reduce the incidence of Rh isoimmunization from 12-13% to 1-2%. The 1-2% is, for the most part, due to isoimmunization during the last trimester of pregnancy. When treatment is given both antenatally, at 28 weeks gestation, and postpartum, the Rh immunization rate drops to about 0.1%.13,14
                        
                        When 600 international unit (120 mcg) of WinRho® SDF is administered to pregnant women, passive anti-Rho(D) antibodies are not detectable in the circulation for more than six weeks and therefore a dose of 1,500 international unit (300 mcg) should be used for antenatal administration.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        In a clinical study with Rho(D)-negative volunteers (nine males and one female), Rho(D)-positive RBCs were completely cleared from the circulation within eight hours of intravenous administration of WinRho. There was no indication of Rh isoimmunization of these subjects at six months after the clearance of the Rho(D)-positive RBCs.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        
                           IM versus IV Administration (Lyophilized Powder)
                        
                        In a clinical study involving Rho(D-negative volunteers, two subjects received 600 international unit (120 mcg) WinRho by intravenous (IV) administration and two subjects received this dose by intramuscular (IM) administration. Peak levels (36 to 48 ng/mL) were reached within two hours of IV administration and peak levels (18 to 19 ng/mL) were reached at five to 10 days after IM administration. Although no statistical comparisons were made, the calculated areas under the curve were comparable for both routes of administration. The t½ for anti-Rho(D) was about 24 days following IV administration and about 30 days following IM administration.
                        
                           Lyophilized Powder versus Liquid Formulation
                        
                        In two comparative pharmacokinetics studies, 101 volunteers were administered the liquid or lyophilized formulation of WinRho® SDF intravenously (n=41) or intramuscularly (n=60). The formulations were bioequivalent following IV administration based on area under the curve to 84 days and had comparable pharmacokinetics following IM administration. The average peak concentrations (Cmax) of anti-Rho(D) for both formulations were comparable following IV or IM administration and occurred within 30 minutes or 2-4 days of administration, respectively. Both formulations also had similar elimination half-lives (t½) following IV or IM administration.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         