
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  
                     
                        Drugs or herbal products that induce certain enzymes (for example, CYP3A4) may decrease the effectiveness of COCs or increase breakthrough bleeding.
                        Counsel patients to use a back-up or alternative method of contraception when enzyme inducers are used with COCs (7.1)
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        Consult the labeling of all concurrently-used drugs to obtain further information about interactions with hormonal contraceptives or the potential for enzyme alterations.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     7.1 Effects of Other Drugs on Combined Oral Contraceptives
                     
                        
                           
                              Substances Diminishing the Efficacy of COCs
                           
                        
                        Drugs or herbal products that induce certain enzymes, including cytochrome P450 3A4 (CYP3A4), may decrease the effectiveness of COCs or increase breakthrough bleeding. Some drugs or herbal products that may decrease the effectiveness of hormonal contraceptives include phenytoin, barbiturates, carbamazepine, bosentan, felbamate, griseofulvin, oxcarbazepine, rifampin, topiramate and products containing St. John's wort. Interactions between oral contraceptives and other drugs may lead to breakthrough bleeding and/or contraceptive failure. Counsel women to use an alternative method of contraception or a back-up method when enzyme inducers are used with COCs, and to continue back-up contraception for 28 days after discontinuing the enzyme inducer to ensure contraceptive reliability.
                        
                           
                              Substances Increasing the Plasma Concentrations of COCs
                           
                        
                        Co-administration of atorvastatin and certain COCs containing EE increase AUC values for EE by approximately 20%. Ascorbic acid and acetaminophen may increase plasma EE concentrations, possibly by inhibition of conjugation. 
                        Concomitant administration of moderate or strong CYP3A4 inhibitors such as azole antifungals (e.g., ketoconazole, itraconazole, voriconazole, fluconazole), verapamil, macrolides (e.g., clarithromycin, erythromycin), diltiazem, and grapefruit juice can increase the plasma concentrations of the estrogen or the progestin or both. In a clinical drug-drug interaction study conducted in premenopausal women, once daily co-administration of DRSP 3 mg/EE 0.02 mg containing tablets with strong CYP3A4 inhibitor, ketoconazole 200 mg twice daily for 10 days resulted in a moderate increase of DRSP systemic exposure. The exposure of EE was increased mildly [see WARNINGS AND PRECAUTIONS (5.2) and CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY (12.3)].
                        
                        
                           
                              Human immunodeficiency Virus (HIV)/ Hepatitis C Virus (HCV) Protease Inhibitors and Non-nucleoside Reverse Transcriptase Inhibitors
                           
                        
                        Significant changes (increase or decrease) in the plasma concentrations of estrogen and progestin have been noted in some cases of co-administration with HIV/HCV protease inhibitors or with non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors.
                        
                           
                              Antibiotics
                           
                        
                        There have been reports of pregnancy while taking hormonal contraceptives and antibiotics, but clinical pharmacokinetic studies have not shown consistent effects of antibiotics on plasma concentrations of synthetic steroids.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     7.2 Effects of Combined Oral Contraceptives on Other Drugs
                     
                        COCs containing EE may inhibit the metabolism of other compounds. COCs have been shown to significantly decrease plasma concentrations of lamotrigine, likely due to induction of lamotrigine glucuronidation. This may reduce seizure control; therefore, dosage adjustments of lamotrigine may be necessary. Consult the labeling of the concurrently-used drug to obtain further information about interactions with COCs or the potential for enzyme alterations.
                        
                           
                              COCs Increasing the Plasma Concentrations of CYP450 Enzymes:
                            In clinical studies, administration of a hormonal contraceptive containing EE did not lead to any increase or only to a weak increase in plasma concentrations of CYP3A4 substrates (e.g., midazolam) while plasma concentrations of CYP2C19 substrates (e.g., omeprazole and voriconazole) and CYP1A2 substrates (e.g., theophylline and tizanidine) can have a weak or moderate increase.
                        Clinical studies did not indicate an inhibitory potential of DRSP towards human CYP enzymes at clinically relevant concentrations [see 
                              CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY (12.3)
                           ].
                        Women on thyroid hormone replacement therapy may need increased doses of thyroid hormone because serum concentration of thyroid-binding globulin increases with use of COCs.
                        
                           
                              Potential to Increase Serum Potassium Concentration
                           
                        
                        There is a potential for an increase in serum potassium concentration in women taking Nikki with other drugs that may increase serum potassium [see 
                              WARNING AND PRECAUTION (5.2)
                            and 
                              CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY (12.3)
                           ].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     7.3 Interference with Laboratory Tests
                     
                        The use of contraceptive steroids may influence the results of certain laboratory tests, such as coagulation factors, lipids, glucose tolerance, and binding proteins. DRSP causes an increase in plasma renin activity and plasma aldosterone induced by its mild anti-mineralocorticoid activity. [see 
                              WARNINGS AND PRECAUTIONS (5.12)
                            and 
                              DRUG INTERACTIONS (7.2)
                           .]
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         