
               
               
               Clinical Pharmacology
               
                  When used as a pharmaceutic aid, 10% Dextrose Injection, USP serves as an appropriate diluent or solvent for parenteral administration of certain other drugs and usually involves volumes too small to affect carbohydrate or water balance except possibly in newborn or very small infants.  Dextrose injected parenterally undergoes eventual absorption and oxidation to carbon dioxide and water.  

                  
                  Sodium chloride in water dissociates to provide sodium (Na+) and chloride (Cl-) ions.  These ions are normal constituents of the body fluids (principally extracellular) and are essential for maintaining electrolyte balance.
                  The distribution and excretion of sodium (Na+) and chloride (Cl-) are largely under the control of the kidney which maintains a balance between intake and output.  

                  
                  The small volume of fluid and amount of sodium chloride provided by 0.9% Sodium Chloride Injection, when used only as an isotonic vehicle for parenteral injection fo drugs, is unlikely to exert a significant effect on fluid and electrolyte balance except possibly in newborn and very small infants. 

                  
                  Water is an essential constituent of all body tissues and accounts for approximately 70% of total body weight.  Average normal adult daily requirement ranges from two to three liters (1.0 to 1.5 liters each for insensible water loss by perspiration and urine production).
                  Water balance is maintained by various regulatory mechanisms.  Water distribution depends primarily on the concentration of electrolytes in the body compartments and sodium (Na+) plays a major role in maintaining physiologic equilibrium.
                  The small volume of fluid provided by Sterile Water for Injection, USP when used only as a pharmaceutic aid for diluting or dissolving drugs for parenteral injection, is unlikely to exert a significant effect on fluid balance except possibly in newborns or very small infants.  

                  
               
               
            
         