
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Mechanism of Action
                     
                        DIANEAL is a hypertonic peritoneal dialysis solution containing dextrose, a monosaccharide, as the primary osmotic agent. An osmotic gradient must be created between the peritoneal membrane and the dialysis solution in order for ultrafiltration to occur. The hypertonic concentration of glucose in DIANEAL exerts an osmotic pressure across the peritoneal membrane resulting in transcapillary ultrafiltration. Like other peritoneal dialysis solutions, DIANEAL contains electrolytes to facilitate the correction of electrolyte abnormalities. DIANEAL contains a buffer, lactate, to help normalize acid-base abnormalities.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Pharmacokinetics of DIANEAL
                     
                        Glucose content in DIANEAL is expressed as dextrose monohydrate and is available in three concentrations: 1.5%, 2.5% and 4.25%.
                        Glucose is rapidly absorbed from the peritoneal cavity by diffusion and appears quickly in the circulation due to the high glucose concentration gradient between DIANEAL compared to blood capillary glucose level. Absorption per unit time will be the highest at the start of an exchange and decreases over time. The rate of glucose absorption will be dependent upon the transport characteristics of the patient's peritoneal membrane as determined by a peritoneal equilibration test (PET). Glucose absorption will also depend upon the concentration of glucose used for the exchange and the length of the dwell. Glucose is metabolized by normal cellular pathways (e.g. glycolysis) and provides a source of calories and may elevate blood glucose levels.
                        Transport of other molecules across the peritoneal membrane, such as lactate, will occur by diffusion. Metabolism of lactate occurs in the liver and results in the generation of the bicarbonate. Transport of other molecules will be dependent upon the molecular size of the solute, the concentration gradient, and the effective peritoneal surface area as determined by the PET.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         