
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  
                     1. Mode of Action. Nor-QD progestin-only oral contraceptives prevent conception by suppressing ovulation in approximately half of users, thickening the cervical mucus to inhibit sperm penetration, lowering the mid-cycle LH and FSH peaks, slowing the movement of the ovum through the fallopian tubes, and altering the endometrium.
                  
                     2. Pharmacokinetics.
                  
                  
                     Absorption: Norethindrone is rapidly absorbed with maximum plasma concentrations occurring within 1 to 2 hours after Nor-QD administration (see Table 1). Norethindrone appears to be completely absorbed following oral administration; however, it is subject to first pass metabolism resulting in an absolute bioavailability of approximately 65%.
                  
                  Peak plasma concentrations occur approximately 1 hour after administration (mean Tmax 1.2 hours). The mean (SD) Cmax was 4816.8 (1532.6) pg/mL and generally occurred within 1 hour (mean) of tablet administration, ranging from 0.5 to 2 hours. The mean (SD) Cavg was 885 (250) pg/mL, however, the mean concentration at 24 hrs was 130 (47) pg/mL.
                  Table 1 provides summary statistics of the pharmacokinetic parameters associated with single dose Nor-QD administration.
                  


                  


The food effect on the rate and extent of norethindrone absorption after Nor-QD administration has not been evaluated.
                  
                     Distribution: Following oral administration, norethindrone is 36% bound to sex hormone-binding globulin (SHBG) and 61% bound to albumin. Volume of distribution of norethindrone is approximately 4 L/kg.
                  
                     Metabolism: Norethindrone undergoes extensive biotransformation, primarily via reduction, followed by sulfate and glucuronide conjugation; less than 5% of a norethindrone dose is excreted unchanged; greater than 50% and 20-40% of a dose is excreted in urine and feces, respectively. The majority of metabolites in the circulation are sulfate, with glucuronides accounting for most of the urinary metabolites.
                  
                     Excretion: Plasma clearance rate for norethindrone has been estimated to be approximately 600 L/day. Norethindrone is excreted in both urine and feces, primarily as metabolites. The mean terminal elimination half-life of norethindrone following single dose administration of Nor-QD is approximately 8 hours.
               
               
               
                  
                     Figure 1: Mean  ± SD Norethindrone Plasma Concentrations Following Nor-QD Administration.
                     
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         