
                     
                     
                     Drug Interactions
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Use with Other CNS Depressants
                           
                              If XANAX XR Tablets are to be combined with other psychotropic agents or anticonvulsant drugs, careful consideration should be given to the pharmacology of the agents to be employed, particularly with compounds which might potentiate the action of benzodiazepines. The benzodiazepines, including alprazolam, produce additive CNS depressant effects when coadministered with other psychotropic medications, anticonvulsants, antihistaminics, ethanol and other drugs which themselves produce CNS depression.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Use with Digoxin
                           
                              Increased digoxin concentrations have been reported when alprazolam was given, especially in elderly (>65 years of age). Patients who receive alprazolam and digoxin should therefore be monitored for signs and symptoms related to digoxin toxicity.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Use with Imipramine and Desipramine
                           
                              The steady state plasma concentrations of imipramine and desipramine have been reported to be increased an average of 31% and 20%, respectively, by the concomitant administration of XANAX Tablets in doses up to 4 mg/day. The clinical significance of these changes is unknown.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Drugs that inhibit alprazolam metabolism via cytochrome P450 3A
                           
                              The initial step in alprazolam metabolism is hydroxylation catalyzed by cytochrome P450 3A (CYP3A). Drugs which inhibit this metabolic pathway may have a profound effect on the clearance of alprazolam (see CONTRAINDICATIONS and WARNINGS for additional drugs of this type).
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Drugs demonstrated to be CYP3A inhibitors of possible clinical significance on the basis of clinical studies involving alprazolam (caution is recommended during coadministration with alprazolam)
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Fluoxetine
                                 
                                    Coadministration of fluoxetine with alprazolam increased the maximum plasma concentration of alprazolam by 46%, decreased clearance by 21%, increased half-life by 17%, and decreased measured psychomotor performance.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Propoxyphene
                                 
                                    Coadministration of propoxyphene decreased the maximum plasma concentration of alprazolam by 6%, decreased clearance by 38%, and increased half-life by 58%.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Oral Contraceptives
                                 
                                    Coadministration of oral contraceptives increased the maximum plasma concentration of alprazolam by 18%, decreased clearance by 22%, and increased half-life by 29%.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Drugs and other substances demonstrated to be CYP3A inhibitors on the basis of clinical studies involving benzodiazepines metabolized similarly to alprazolam or on the basis of in vitro studies with alprazolam or other benzodiazepines (caution is recommended during coadministration with alprazolam)
                           
                              Available data from clinical studies of benzodiazepines other than alprazolam suggest a possible drug interaction with alprazolam for the following: diltiazem, isoniazid, macrolide antibiotics such as erythromycin and clarithromycin, and grapefruit juice. Data from in vitro studies of alprazolam suggest a possible drug interaction with alprazolam for the following: sertraline and paroxetine. However, data from an in vivo drug interaction study involving a single dose of alprazolam 1 mg and steady state doses of sertraline (50 to 150 mg/day) did not reveal any clinically significant changes in the pharmacokinetics of alprazolam. Data from in vitro studies of benzodiazepines other than alprazolam suggest a possible drug interaction for the following: ergotamine, cyclosporine, amiodarone, nicardipine, and nifedipine. Caution is recommended during the coadministration of any of these with alprazolam (see WARNINGS).
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Drugs demonstrated to be inducers of CYP3A
                           
                              Carbamazepine can increase alprazolam metabolism and therefore can decrease plasma levels of alprazolam.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               