
               
               
               7  DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
                  Oxcarbazepine and MHD induce a subgroup of the cytochrome P450 3A family (CYP3A4 and CYP3A5).
                  In addition, several AEDs that are cytochrome P450 inducers can decrease plasma concentrations of oxcarbazepine and MHD.
                  These interactions have implications when Oxtellar XR™ is used with other AEDs or hormonal contraceptives.
               
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              Phenytoin, Carbamazepine, and Phenobarbital: Coadministration decreased blood levels of an active metabolite of Oxtellar XR™:  Greater dose of Oxtellar XR™ may be required (
                                 2.6, 7.1
                              ).
                           
                              Oral Contraceptives: Advise patients that Oxtellar XR™ may decrease the effectiveness of hormonal contraceptives. Additional non-hormonal forms of contraception are recommended. (
                                 7.2
                              )
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1	Other Antiepileptic Drugs
                     
                        Potential interactions between immediate-release oxcarbazepine and other AEDs were assessed in clinical studies. Oxtellar XR™ would be expected to have the same effects on coadministered AEDs as immediate-release oxcarbazepine.
                        


                     



                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2  Hormonal Contraceptives
                     
                        Coadministration of immediate-release oxcarbazepine with an oral contraceptive decreased the plasma concentrations of two components of hormonal contraceptives, ethinylestradiol and levonorgestrel. Therefore, concurrent use of Oxtellar XR™ with these hormonal contraceptives and other oral or implant contraceptives may render these contraceptives less effective [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].  Additional non-hormonal forms of contraception are recommended.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         