
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  Gonal-f® RFF (follitropin alfa for injection) stimulates ovarian follicular growth in women who do not have primary ovarian failure. FSH, the active component of Gonal-f® RFF is the primary hormone responsible for follicular recruitment and development. In order to effect final maturation of the follicle and ovulation in the absence of an endogenous LH surge, human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) must be given following the administration of Gonal-f® RFF when monitoring of the patient indicates that sufficient follicular development has occurred. There is interpatient variability in response to FSH administration.
               
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        Single-dose pharmacokinetics of follitropin alfa were determined following subcutaneous administration of 300 IU Gonal-f® RFF to 21 pre-menopausal healthy female volunteers who were pituitary down-regulated with a GnRH agonist.
                        The descriptive statistics for the pharmacokinetic parameters are presented in Table 1.
                        


                     



                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Absorption
                           
                              The absorption rate of Gonal-f® RFF following subcutaneous administration is slower than the elimination rate. Hence, the pharmacokinetics of Gonal-f® RFF are absorption rate-limited.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Distribution
                           
                              Human tissue or organ distribution of FSH has not been determined for Gonal-f® RFF.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Metabolism/Excretion
                           
                              FSH metabolism and excretion following administration of Gonal-f® RFF have not been studied in humans.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Special populations
                     
                        Safety, efficacy, and pharmacokinetics of Gonal-f® RFF in patients with renal or hepatic insufficiency have not been established.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Drug-Drug Interactions
                     
                        No drug-drug interaction studies have been conducted (see PRECAUTIONS).
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Clinical Studies
                     
                        The safety and efficacy of Gonal-f® RFF have been examined in two clinical studies: one study (Study 22240) for ovulation induction and one study (Study 21884) for assisted reproductive technologies (ART).
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           1. Ovulation Induction (OI)
                           
                              Study 22240 was a phase III, assessor-blind, randomized, comparative, multinational, multicenter study in oligo-anovulatory infertile women undergoing ovulation induction. Patients were randomized to either Gonal-f® RFF (n=83), administered subcutaneously, or a comparator recombinant human FSH. The use of insulin-sensitizing agents was allowed during the study. Efficacy was assessed using the mean ovulation rate in the first cycle of treatment. The cycle 1 ovulation rate (primary outcome) for Gonal-f® RFF is presented in Table 2. Additionally, this table includes cumulative secondary outcome results from cycle 1 through 3. Study 22240 was not powered to demonstrate differences in these secondary outcomes.
                              


                           



                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           2. Assisted Reproductive Technologies (ART)
                           
                              Study 21884 was a phase III, assessor-blind, randomized, comparative, multinational, multicenter study in ovulatory, infertile women undergoing stimulation of multiple follicles for Assisted Reproductive Technologies (ART) after pituitary down-regulation with a GnRH agonist. Patients were randomized to either Gonal-f® RFF (n=237), administered subcutaneously, or a comparator recombinant human FSH. Randomization was stratified by insemination technique [conventional in vitro fertilization (IVF) vs. intra-cytoplasmic sperm injection (ICSI)]. Efficacy was assessed using the mean number of fertilized oocytes the day after insemination. The initial doses of Gonal-f® RFF were 150 IU a day for patients < 35 years old and 225 IU for patients ≥ 35 years old. The maximal dose allowed for both age groups was 450 IU per day. Treatment outcomes for Gonal-f® RFF are summarized in Table 3.
                              


