
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  
               
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        The mechanism of action of Doxycycline 40 mg in the treatment of inflammatory lesions of rosacea is unknown.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        Doxycycline 40 mg capsules are not bioequivalent to other doxycycline products.
                        The pharmacokinetics of doxycycline following oral administration of Doxycycline 40 mg was investigated in 2 volunteer studies involving 61 adults.
                        Pharmacokinetic parameters for Doxycycline 40 mg following single oral doses and at steady-state in healthy subjects are presented in Table 2.
                        
                           
                        
                        
                           Absorption: In a single-dose food-effect study involving administration of Doxycycline 40 mg to healthy volunteers, concomitant administration with a 1000 calorie, high-fat, high-protein meal that included dairy products, resulted in a decrease in the rate and extent of absorption (Cmax and AUC) by about 45% and 22%, respectively, compared to dosing under fasted conditions. This decrease in systemic exposure can be clinically significant, and therefore if Doxycycline 40 mg is taken close to meal times, it is recommended that it be taken at least one hour prior to or two hours after meals.
                        
                           Distribution: Doxycycline is greater than 90% bound to plasma proteins.
                        
                           Metabolism: Major metabolites of doxycycline have not been identified. However, enzyme inducers such as barbiturates, carbamazepine, and phenytoin decrease the half-life of doxycycline.
                        
                           Excretion: Doxycycline is excreted in the urine and feces as unchanged drug. It is reported that between 29% and 55.4% of an administered dose can be accounted for in the urine by 72 hours. Terminal half-life averaged 21.2 hours in subjects receiving a single dose of doxycycline 40 mg.
                        
                           Special Populations
                        
                        
                           Geriatric: Doxycycline pharmacokinetics have not been evaluated in geriatric patients.
                        
                           Pediatric: Doxycycline pharmacokinetics have not been evaluated in pediatric patients [see Warnings and Precautions (5.1)].
                        
                           Gender: The pharmacokinetics of Doxycycline 40 mg were compared in 16 male and 14 female subjects under fed and fasted conditions. While female subjects had a higher Cmax and AUC than male subjects, these differences were thought to be due to differences in body weight/lean body mass.
                        
                           Race: Differences in doxycycline pharmacokinetics among racial groups have not been evaluated.
                        
                           Renal Insufficiency: Studies have shown no significant difference in serum half-life of doxycycline in patients with normal and severely impaired renal function. Hemodialysis does not alter the serum half-life of doxycycline.
                        
                           Hepatic Insufficiency: Doxycycline pharmacokinetics have not been evaluated in patients with hepatic insufficiency.
                        
                           Gastric Insufficiency: In a study in healthy volunteers (N=24) the bio- availability of doxycycline is reported to be reduced at high pH. This reduced bioavailability may be clinically significant in patients with gastrectomy, gastric bypass surgery or who are otherwise deemed achlorhydric.
                        
                           
                              Drug Interactions:
                           [see Drug Interactions (7)].
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           table-2
                           
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.4 Microbiology
                     
                        Doxycycline is a member of the tetracycline-class of drugs. The plasma concentrations of doxycycline achieved with Doxycycline 40 mg during administration [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3) and Dosage and Administration (2.2)] are less than the concentration required to treat bacterial diseases. Doxycycline 40 mg should not be used for treating bacterial infections, providing antibacterial prophylaxis, or reducing the numbers or eliminating microorganisms associated with any bacterial disease [see Indications and Usage (1.2)]. In vivo microbiological studies utilizing a similar drug exposure for up to 18 months demonstrated no detectable long term effects on bacterial flora of the oral cavity, skin, intestinal tract and vagina.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         