


CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
Promethazine HCl is a phenothiazine derivative which possesses antihistaminic, sedative, antimotion sickness, antiemetic, and anticholinergic effects. Promethazine is a competitive H1 receptor antagonist, but does not block the release of histamine. Structural differences from the neuroleptic phenothiazines results in its relative lack (1/10) of dopamine antagonist properties. In therapeutic doses, promethazine HCl produces no significant effects on the cardiovascular system. Clinical effects are generally apparent within 5 minutes of an intravenous injection and within 20 minutes of an intramuscular injection. Duration of action is four to six hours, although effects may persist up to 12 hours. Promethazine HCl is metabolized in the liver, with the sulfoxides of promethazine and N-desmethylpromethazine being the predominant metabolites appearing in the urine. Following intravenous administration in healthy volunteers, the plasma half-life for promethazine has been reported to range from 9 to 16 hours. The mean plasma half-life for promethazine after intramuscular administration in healthy volunteers has been reported to be 9.8±3.4 hours.1 receptor antagonist, but does not block the release of histamine. Structural differences from the neuroleptic phenothiazines results in its relative lack (1/10) of dopamine antagonist properties. In therapeutic doses, promethazine HCl produces no significant effects on the cardiovascular system. Clinical effects are generally apparent within 5 minutes of an intravenous injection and within 20 minutes of an intramuscular injection. Duration of action is four to six hours, although effects may persist up to 12 hours. Promethazine HCl is metabolized in the liver, with the sulfoxides of promethazine and N-desmethylpromethazine being the predominant metabolites appearing in the urine. Following intravenous administration in healthy volunteers, the plasma half-life for promethazine has been reported to range from 9 to 16 hours. The mean plasma half-life for promethazine after intramuscular administration in healthy volunteers has been reported to be 9.8±3.4 hours.


