


Drug Interactions
CNS Depressants -
Promethazine HCl Injection may increase, prolong, or intensify the sedative action of central nervous system depressants, such as alcohol, sedative-hypnotics (including barbiturates), general anesthetics, narcotics, narcotic analgesics, tranquilizers, etc. When given concomitantly with Promethazine HCl Injection, the dose of barbiturates should be reduced by at least one-half, and the dose of narcotics should be reduced by one-quarter to one-half. Dosage must be individualized. Excessive amounts of Promethazine HCl Injection relative to a narcotic may lead to restlessness and motor hyperactivity in the patient with pain; these symptoms usually disappear with adequate control of the pain.
Promethazine HCl Injection may increase, prolong, or intensify the sedative action of central nervous system depressants, such as alcohol, sedative-hypnotics (including barbiturates), general anesthetics, narcotics, narcotic analgesics, tranquilizers, etc. When given concomitantly with Promethazine HCl Injection, the dose of barbiturates should be reduced by at least one-half, and the dose of narcotics should be reduced by one-quarter to one-half. Dosage must be individualized. Excessive amounts of Promethazine HCl Injection relative to a narcotic may lead to restlessness and motor hyperactivity in the patient with pain; these symptoms usually disappear with adequate control of the pain.Epinephrine -
Although reversal of the vasopressor effect of epinephrine has not been reported with Promethazine HCl Injection, it is recommended that epinephrine NOT be used in the case of Promethazine HCl Injection overdose.
Although reversal of the vasopressor effect of epinephrine has not been reported with Promethazine HCl Injection, it is recommended that epinephrine NOT be used in the case of Promethazine HCl Injection overdose.Anticholinergics -
Concomitant use of other agents with anticholinergic properties should be undertaken with caution.
Concomitant use of other agents with anticholinergic properties should be undertaken with caution.Monoamine Oxidase Inhibitors (MAOI) -
Drug interactions, including an increased incidence of extrapyramidal effects, have been reported when some MAOI and phenothiazines are used concomitantly. Although such a reaction has not been reported with Promethazine HCl Injection, the possibility should be considered.
Drug interactions, including an increased incidence of extrapyramidal effects, have been reported when some MAOI and phenothiazines are used concomitantly. Although such a reaction has not been reported with Promethazine HCl Injection, the possibility should be considered.


