
               
               
               12  CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1  Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Ferric iron binds dietary phosphate in the GI tract and precipitates as ferric phosphate.  This compound is insoluble and is excreted in the stool.  By binding phosphate in the GI tract and decreasing absorption, ferric citrate lowers the phosphate concentration in the serum.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2  Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        In addition to effects on serum phosphorus levels, Auryxia has been shown to increase serum iron parameters, including ferritin, iron and TSAT.  In dialysis patients treated with Auryxia in a 52-week study in which IV iron could also be administered, mean (SD) ferritin levels rose from 593 (293) ng/mL to 895 (482) ng/mL, mean (SD) TSAT levels rose from 31% (11) to 39% (17) and mean (SD) iron levels rose from 73 (29) mcg/dL to 88 (42) mcg/dL. In contrast, in patients treated with active control, these parameters remained relatively constant [see Contraindications (4) and Warnings and Precautions (5.1)].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3  Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        
                           Absorption and Distribution
                        
                        Formal pharmacokinetic studies have not been performed with Auryxia.  Examination of serum iron parameters has shown that there is systemic absorption of iron from Auryxia [see Contraindications (4), Warnings and Precautions (5.1) and Clinical Pharmacology (12.2)].
                        
                           Drug Interaction Studies
                        
                        
                           In vitro
                        
                        Of the drugs screened for an interaction with ferric citrate in vitro, only doxycycline showed the potential for interaction with at least 70% decrease in its concentration.  This interaction can be avoided by spacing the administration of doxycycline and ferric citrate [see Drug Interactions (7)]. 
                        
                           In vivo
                        
                        Six drug interaction studies (N=26-60/study) were conducted to establish the effects of Auryxia (administered as 3 x 2 g/day with meals) on the disposition of concomitantly orally administered clopidogrel, ciprofloxacin, digoxin, diltiazem, glimepiride and losartan in healthy subjects. With the exception of ciprofloxacin, Auryxia did not alter the systemic exposure of the tested drugs, as measured by the area under the curve (AUC) and Cmax of the tested drugs when either co-administered with Auryxia or given 2 hours later. Auryxia decreased the relative bioavailability of concomitantly administered ciprofloxacin by approximately 45%. However, there was no interaction when Auryxia and ciprofloxacin were taken 2 hours apart. Consequently, ciprofloxacin should be taken at least 2 hours before or after Auryxia is dosed [see Drug Interactions (7)].
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         