
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Degarelix is a GnRH receptor antagonist. It binds reversibly to the pituitary GnRH receptors, thereby reducing the release of gonadotropins and consequently testosterone.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        A single dose of 240 mg FIRMAGON causes a decrease in the plasma concentrations of luteinizing hormone (LH) and follicle stimulating hormone (FSH), and subsequently testosterone.
                        FIRMAGON is effective in achieving and maintaining testosterone suppression below the castration level of 50 ng/dL.
                        
                           Figure 1: Plasma Testosterone Levels from Day 0 to 364 for Degarelix 240 mg/80 mg (Median with Interquartile Ranges)
                        
                        
                           
                        
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           Figure 1
                           
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Absorption
                              
                              FIRMAGON forms a depot upon subcutaneous administration, from which degarelix is released to the circulation. Following administration of FIRMAGON 240 mg at a product concentration of 40 mg/mL, the mean Cmax was 26.2 ng/mL (coefficient of variation, CV 83%) and the mean AUC was 1054 ng∙day/mL (CV 35%). Typically Cmax occurred within 2 days after subcutaneous administration. In prostate cancer patients at a product concentration of 40 mg/mL, the pharmacokinetics of degarelix were linear over a dose range of 120 to 240 mg. The pharmacokinetic behavior of the drug is strongly influenced by its concentration in the injection solution.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Distribution
                              
                              The distribution volume of degarelix after intravenous (> 1 L/kg) or subcutaneous administration (> 1000L) indicates that degarelix is distributed throughout total body water. In vitro plasma protein binding of degarelix is estimated to be approximately 90%.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Metabolism
                              
                              Degarelix is subject to peptide hydrolysis during the passage of the hepato-biliary system and is mainly excreted as peptide fragments in the feces. No quantitatively significant metabolites were detected in plasma samples after subcutaneous administration. In vitro studies have shown that degarelix is not a substrate, inducer or inhibitor of the CYP450 or p-glycoprotein transporter systems.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Excretion
                              
                              Following subcutaneous administration of 240 mg FIRMAGON at a concentration of 40 mg/mL to prostate cancer patients, degarelix is eliminated in a biphasic fashion, with a median terminal half-life of approximately 53 days. The long half-life after subcutaneous administration is a consequence of a very slow release of degarelix from the FIRMAGON depot formed at the injection site(s). Approximately 20-30% of a given dose of degarelix was renally excreted, suggesting that approximately 70-80% is excreted via the hepato-biliary system in humans. Following subcutaneous administration of degarelix to prostate cancer patients the clearance is approximately 9 L/hr.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Effect of Age, Weight and Race
                              
                              There was no effect of age, weight or race on the degarelix pharmacokinetic parameters or testosterone concentration.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         