
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  Following a single dose of two minocycline hydrochloride capsules, 100 mg administered to 18 normal fasting adult volunteers, maximum serum concentrations were attained in 1 to 4 hours (average 2.1 hours) and ranged from 2.1 to 5.1 mcg/mL (average 3.5 mcg/mL). The serum half-life in the normal volunteers ranged from 11.1 to 22.1 hours (average 15.5 hours). 
                  When minocycline hydrochloride capsules were given concomitantly with a high-fat meal, which included dairy products, the extent of absorption of minocycline hydrochloride capsules was unchanged compared to dosing under fasting conditions. The mean Tmax was delayed by one hour when administered with food, compared to dosing under fasting conditions. Minocycline hydrochloride capsules may be administered with or without food. 
                  In previous studies with other minocycline dosage forms, the minocycline serum half-life ranged from 11 to 16 hours in 7 patients with hepatic dysfunction, and from 18 to 69 hours in 5 patients with renal dysfunction. The urinary and fecal recovery of minocycline when administered to 12 normal volunteers was one-half to one-third that of other tetracyclines.
               
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Microbiology
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Mechanism of Action
                           
                           
                              The tetracyclines are primarily bacteriostatic and are thought to exert their antimicrobial effect by the inhibition of protein synthesis. The tetracyclines, including minocycline, have a similar antimicrobial spectrum of activity against a wide range of gram-positive and gram-negative organisms. Cross-resistance of these organisms to tetracycline is common.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              List of Microorganisms
                           
                           
                              Minocycline has been shown to be active against most strains of the following microorganisms, both in vitro and in clinical infections as described in the INDICATIONS AND USAGE section:
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Gram-positive Bacteria
                           
                           
                              
                                 Bacillus anthracis
                              
                              
                                 Listeria monocytogenes
                              
                              
                                 Staphylococcus aureus
                              
                              
                                 Streptococcus pneumoniae
                              
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Gram-negative Bacteria
                           
                           
                              
                                 Bartonella bacilliformis
                              
                              
                                 Brucella species
                              
                                 Klebsiella granulomatis
                              
                              
                                 Campylobacter fetus
                              
                              
                                 Francisella tularensis
                              
                              
                                 Haemophilus ducreyi
                              
                              
                                 Vibrio cholerae
                              
                              
                                 Yersinia pestis
                              
                              
                                 Acinetobacter species
                              
                                 Enterobacter aerogenes
                              
                              
                                 Escherichia coli
                              
                              
                                 Haemophilus influenzae
                              
                              
                                 Klebsiella species
                              
                                 Neisseria gonorrhoea
                                 1
                              
                              
                                 Neisseria meningitidis
                                 1
                              
                              
                                 Shigella species
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Other Microorganisms
                           
                           
                              
                                 Actinomyces species
                              
                                 Borrelia recurrentis
                              
                              
                                 Chlamydophila psittaci
                              
                              
                                 Chlamydia trachomatis
                              
                              
                                 Clostridium species
                              
                                 Entamoeba species
                              
                                 Fusobacterium nucleatum subspecies fusiforme
                              
                              
                                 Mycobacterium marinum
                              
                              
                                 Mycoplasma pneumoniae
                              
                              
                                 Propionibacterium acnes
                              
                              
                                 Rickettsiae
                              
                              
                                 Treponema pallidum subspecies pallidum
                              
                              
                                 Treponema pallidum subspecies pertenue
                              
                              
                                 Ureaplasma urealyticum
                              
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Susceptibility Test Methods 
                     
                        When available, the clinical microbiology laboratory should provide the results of in vitro susceptibility test results for antimicrobial drugs used in resident hospitals to the physician as periodic reports that describe the susceptibility profile of nosocomial and community-acquired pathogens. These reports should aid the physician in selecting an antibacterial drug for treatment 
                        
                           Dilution techniques: 
                        
                        Quantitative methods are used to determine antimicrobial minimal inhibitory concentrations (MICs). These MICs provide estimates of the susceptibility of bacteria to antimicrobial compounds. The MICs should be determined using a standardized test method (broth or agar) or equivalent with standardized inoculum concentrations and standardized concentrations of tetracycline (class) or minocycline powder1,2. The MIC values should be interpreted according to the criteria provided in Table 1.
                        
                           Diffusion techniques:
                        
                        Quantitative methods that require measurement of zone diameters also provide reproducible estimates of the susceptibility of bacteria to antimicrobial compounds. The zone size provides an estimate of the susceptibility of bacteria to antimicrobial compounds. The zone size should be determined using a standardized method.2,3 This procedure uses paper disks impregnated with 30 mcg tetracycline (class disk) or 30 mcg minocycline to test the susceptibility of microorganisms to minocycline. The disk diffusion interpretive criteria are provided in Table 1. 
                        


                        


A report of “Susceptible” indicates that the antimicrobial drug is likely to inhibit growth of the microorganism if the antimicrobial drug reaches the concentration usually achievable at the site of infection. A report of “Intermediate” indicates that the result should be considered equivocal, and, if the microorganism is not fully susceptible to alternative, clinically feasible drugs, the test should be repeated. This category implies possible clinical applicability in body sites where the drug is physiologically concentrated or in situations where high dosage of drug can be used. This category also provides a buffer zone which prevents small uncontrolled technical factors from causing major discrepancies in interpretation. A report of “Resistant” indicates that the antimicrobial drug is not likely to inhibit growth of the microorganism, if the antimicrobial drug reaches the concentrations usually achievable at the infection site; other therapy should be selected.
                        
                           Quality Control
                        
                        Standardized susceptibility test procedures require the use of laboratory controls to monitor and ensure the accuracy and precision of supplies and reagents used in the assay, and the techniques of the individuals performing the test 1,2,3. Standard tetracycline (class compound) or minocycline powder should provide the following range of MIC values noted in Table 2. For the disc diffusion technique, using the 30 mcg tetracycline or 30 mcg minocycline disk the criteria in Table 2 should be achieved.
                        


