
               
               
               12	CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1	Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Capsaicin is an agonist for the transient receptor potential vanilloid 1 receptor (TRPV1), which is an ion channel-receptor complex expressed on nociceptive nerve fibers in the skin. Topical administration of capsaicin causes an initial enhanced stimulation of the TRPV1-expressing cutaneous nociceptors that may be associated with painful sensations. This is followed by pain relief thought to be mediated by a reduction in TRPV1-expressing nociceptive nerve endings [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.2)]. Over the course of several months, there may be a gradual re-emergence of painful neuropathy thought to be due to TRPV1 nerve fiber reinnervation of the treated area.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2	Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        Two studies evaluated the pharmacodynamic effects of Qutenza on sensory function and epidermal nerve fiber (ENF) density in healthy volunteers. Consistent with the known pharmacodynamic effects of capsaicin on TRPV1-expressing nociceptive nerve endings, reduced ENF density and minor changes in cutaneous nociceptive function (heat detection and sharp sensation) were noted one week after exposure to Qutenza. ENF density reduction and sensory changes were fully reversible. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3	Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        Pharmacokinetic data in humans showed transient, low (< 5 ng/mL) systemic exposure to capsaicin in about one third of PHN patients following 60-minute applications of Qutenza. The highest plasma concentration of capsaicin detected was 4.6 ng/mL and occurred immediately after Qutenza removal. Most quantifiable levels were observed at the time of Qutenza removal and were below the limit of quantitation 3 to 6 hours after Qutenza removal. No detectable levels of metabolites were observed in any subject.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         