
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
                  
                     See also Contraindications (4), Warnings and Precautions (5.3), and Clinical Pharmacology (12.3).
                  
               
               
               
                  
                     
                        Co-administration of VIEKIRA PAK can alter the plasma concentrations of some drugs and some drugs may alter the plasma concentrations of VIEKIRA PAK. The potential for drug interactions must be considered before and during treatment. Consult the full prescribing information prior to and during treatment for potential drug interactions. (4, 5.3, 7, 12.3)
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 Potential for VIEKIRA PAK to Affect Other Drugs 
                     
                        Ombitasvir, paritaprevir, and dasabuvir are inhibitors of UGT1A1, and ritonavir is an inhibitor of CYP3A4. Paritaprevir is an inhibitor of OATP1B1 and OATP1B3 and paritaprevir, ritonavir and dasabuvir are inhibitors of BCRP. Co-administration of VIEKIRA PAK with drugs that are substrates of CYP3A, UGT1A1, BCRP, OATP1B1 or OATP1B3 may result in increased plasma concentrations of such drugs. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 Potential for Other Drugs to Affect One or More Components of VIEKIRA PAK
                     
                        Paritaprevir and ritonavir are primarily metabolized by CYP3A enzymes. Co-administration of VIEKIRA PAK with strong inhibitors of CYP3A may increase paritaprevir and ritonavir concentrations. Dasabuvir is primarily metabolized by CYP2C8 enzymes. Co-administration of VIEKIRA PAK with drugs that inhibit CYP2C8 may increase dasabuvir plasma concentrations. Ombitasvir is primarily metabolized via amide hydrolysis while CYP enzymes play a minor role in its metabolism. Ombitasvir, paritaprevir, dasabuvir and ritonavir are substrates of P-gp. Ombitasvir, paritaprevir and dasabuvir are substrates of BCRP. Paritaprevir is a substrate of OATP1B1 and OATP1B3. Inhibition of P-gp, BCRP, OATP1B1 or OATP1B3 may increase the plasma concentrations of the various components of VIEKIRA PAK.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        7.3 Established and Other Potential Drug Interactions 
                     
                     
                        If dose adjustments of concomitant medications are made due to treatment with VIEKIRA PAK, doses should be re-adjusted after administration of VIEKIRA PAK is completed. Dose adjustment is not required for VIEKIRA PAK.
                        
                           Table 5 provides the effect of co-administration of VIEKIRA PAK on concentrations of concomitant drugs  and the effect of concomitant drugs on the various components of VIEKIRA PAK. See Contraindications (4) for drugs that are contraindicated with VIEKIRA PAK. Refer to the ritonavir prescribing information for other potentially significant drug interactions with ritonavir.
                        


                     



                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4 Drugs without Clinically Significant Interactions with VIEKIRA PAK
                     
                        No dose adjustments are recommended when VIEKIRA PAK is co-administered with the following medications: digoxin, duloxetine, emtricitabine/tenofovir disoproxil fumarate,  escitalopram,  methadone, progestin only contraceptives, raltegravir, warfarin and zolpidem.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         