
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism Of Action
                     
                        Fexofenadine hydrochloride,
the major active metabolite of terfenadine, is an antihistamine with
selective peripheral H1-receptor antagonist activity. Both
enantiomers of fexofenadine hydrochloride displayed approximately
equipotent antihistaminic effects. Fexofenadine hydrochloride inhibited
antigen-induced bronchospasm in sensitized guinea pigs and histamine
release from peritoneal mast cells in rats. The clinical significance
of these findings is unknown. In laboratory animals, no anticholinergic
or alpha1-adrenergic blocking effects were observed. Moreover,
no sedative or other central nervous system effects were observed.
Radiolabeled tissue distribution studies in rats indicated that fexofenadine
does not cross the blood-brain barrier.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Wheal and Flare. Human histamine skin
wheal and flare studies in adults following single and twice daily
doses of 20 and 40 mg fexofenadine hydrochloride demonstrated that
the drug exhibits an antihistamine effect by 1 hour, achieves maximum
effect at 2 to 3 hours, and an effect is still seen at 12 hours. There
was no evidence of tolerance to these effects after 28 days of dosing.
The clinical significance of these observations is unknown. 
                              Histamine skin
wheal and flare studies in 7 to 12 year old subjects showed that following
a single dose of 30 or 60 mg, antihistamine effect was observed at
1 hour and reached a maximum by 3 hours. Greater than 49% inhibition
of wheal area, and 74% inhibition of flare area were maintained for
8 hours following the 30 and 60 mg dose.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Effects on QTc. In dogs (30
mg/kg/orally twice daily for 5 days) and rabbits (10 mg/kg,  intravenously
over 1 hour), fexofenadine hydrochloride did not prolong QTc. In dogs, the plasma fexofenadine concentration was approximately
9 times the therapeutic plasma concentrations in adults receiving
the maximum recommended human daily oral dose of 180 mg. In rabbits,
the plasma fexofenadine concentration was approximately 20 times the
therapeutic plasma concentration in adults receiving the maximum recommended
human daily oral dose of 180 mg. No effect was observed on calcium
channel current, delayed K+ channel current, or action
potential duration in guinea pig myocytes, or on the delayed rectifier
K+ channel cloned from human heart at concentrations up
to 1 × 10-5 M of fexofenadine.
                              No statistically significant increase in mean QTc interval
compared to placebo was observed in 714 adult subjects with seasonal
allergic rhinitis given fexofenadine hydrochloride capsules in doses
of 60 to 240 mg twice daily for 2 weeks. Pediatric subjects from 2
placebo- controlled trials (n=855) treated with up to 60 mg fexofenadine
hydrochloride twice daily demonstrated no significant treatment- or
dose-related increases in QTc. In addition, no statistically
significant increase in mean QTc interval compared to placebo
was observed in 40 healthy adult subjects given fexofenadine hydrochloride
as an oral solution at doses up to 400 mg twice daily for 6 days,
or in 230 healthy adult subjects given fexofenadine hydrochloride
240 mg once daily for 1 year. In subjects with chronic idiopathic
urticaria, there were no clinically relevant differences for any ECG
intervals, including QTc, between those treated with fexofenadine
hydrochloride 180 mg once daily (n = 163) and those treated with placebo
(n = 91) for 4 weeks.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        The pharmacokinetics
of fexofenadine hydrochloride in subjects with seasonal allergic rhinitis
and subjects with chronic urticaria were similar to those in healthy
subjects.
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                           
                              Absorption
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       ALLEGRA Tablets: Fexofenadine hydrochloride
was rapidly absorbed following oral administration of a single dose
of two 60 mg capsules to healthy male subjects with a mean time to
maximum plasma concentration occurring at 2.6 hours post-dose. After
administration of a single 60 mg capsule to healthy adult subjects,
the mean maximum plasma concentration (Cmax) was 131 ng/mL. Following
single dose oral administrations of either the 60 and 180 mg tablet
to healthy adult male subjects, mean Cmax were 142 and 494 ng/mL,
respectively. The tablet formulations are bioequivalent to the capsule
when administered at equal doses. Fexofenadine hydrochloride pharmacokinetics
are linear for oral doses up to a total daily dose of 240 mg (120
mg twice daily). The administration of the 60 mg capsule contents
mixed with applesauce did not have a significant effect on the pharmacokinetics
of fexofenadine in adults. Co-administration of 180 mg fexofenadine
hydrochloride tablet with a high fat meal decreased the mean area
under the curve (AUC) and (Cmax) of fexofenadine by 21 and 20% respectively.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       ALLEGRA ODT: Fexofenadine hydrochloride
was rapidly absorbed following single-dose oral administration of
ALLEGRA ODT 30 mg to healthy adult subjects. The mean maximum plasma
concentration (Cmax) was 88.0 ng/mL and occurred at approximately
2.0 hours (Tmax) following oral administration. ALLEGRA ODT 30 mg
tablets are bioequivalent to the 30 mg ALLEGRA Tablets. The administrationof ALLEGRA ODT 30 mg with a high-fat meal decreased the AUC and Cmax
by approximately 40% and 60% respectively and a 2-hour delay in the
time to peak exposure (Tmax) was observed. ALLEGRA ODT should be taken
on an empty stomach. The bioavailability of ALLEGRA ODT was comparable
whether given with or without water. (See DOSAGE
AND ADMINISTRATION.)
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       ALLEGRA Oral Suspension: A dose of 5
mL of ALLEGRA Oral Suspension containing 30 mg of fexofenadine hydrochloride
is bioequivalent to a 30 mg dose of ALLEGRA Tablets. Following oral
administration of a 30 mg dose of ALLEGRA Oral Suspension to healthy
adult subjects, the mean Cmax was 118.0 ng/mL and occurred at approximately
1.0 hour. The administration of 30 mg ALLEGRA Oral Suspension with
a high fat meal decreased the AUC and the mean Cmax by approximately
30 and 47%, respectively in healthy adult subjects.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                           
                              Distribution
                              Fexofenadine
hydrochloride is 60% to 70% bound to plasma proteins, primarily albumin
and α1-acid glycoprotein.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                           
                              Metabolism
                              Approximately
5% of the total dose of fexofenadine hydrochloride was eliminated
by hepatic metabolism.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                           
                              Elimination
                              The mean elimination
half-life of fexofenadine was 14.4 hours following administration
of 60 mg twice daily in healthy adult subjects.
                              Human mass balance studies documented a recovery of approximately
80% and 11% of the [14C] fexofenadine hydrochloride dose
in the feces and urine, respectively. Because the absolute bioavailability
of fexofenadine hydrochloride has not been established, it is unknown
if the fecal component represents primarily unabsorbed drug or is
the result of biliary excretion.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                           
                              Special
Populations
                              Pharmacokinetics in renally and hepatically impaired subjects and
geriatric subjects, obtained after a single dose of 80 mg fexofenadine
hydrochloride, were compared to those from healthy subjects in a separate
study of similar design.
                              
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Renally Impaired. In subjects with mild
to moderate (creatinine clearance 41–80 mL/min) and severe
(creatinine clearance 11–40 mL/min) renal impairment, peak
plasma concentrations of fexofenadine were 87% and 111% greater, respectively,
and mean elimination half-lives were 59% and 72% longer, respectively,
than observed in healthy subjects. Peak plasma concentrations in subjects
on dialysis (creatinine clearance ≤10 mL/min) were 82% greater
and half-life was 31% longer than observed in healthy subjects. Based
on increases in bioavailability and half-life, a dose of 60 mg once
daily is recommended as the starting dose in adult patients with decreased
renal function. For pediatric patients with decreased renal function,
the recommended starting dose of fexofenadine is 30 mg once daily
for patients 2 to 11 years of age and 15 mg once daily for patients
6 months to less than 2 years of age. (See DOSAGE
AND ADMINISTRATION).
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Hepatically Impaired. The pharmacokinetics
of fexofenadine hydrochloride in subjects with hepatic disease did
not differ substantially from that observed in healthy subjects.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Geriatric Subjects. In older subjects
(≥65 years old), peak plasma levels of fexofenadine were 99%
greater than those observed in younger subjects (<65 years old).
Mean fexofenadine elimination half-lives were similar to those observed
in younger subjects.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Pediatric Subjects. A population pharmacokinetic
analysis was performed with data from 77 pediatric subjects (6 months
to 12 years of age) with allergic rhinitis and 136 adult subjects.
 The individual apparent oral clearance estimates of fexofenadine
were on average 44% and 36% lower in pediatric subjects 6 to 12 years
(n=14) and 2 to 5 years of age (n=21), respectively, compared to adult
subjects. 
                                    Administration of a 15 mg dose of fexofenadine hydrochloride to pediatric
subjects 6 months to less than 2 years of age and a 30 mg dose to
pediatric subjects 2 to 11 years of age produced exposures comparable
to those seen with a dose of 60 mg administered to adults.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Effect of Gender. Across several trials,
no clinically significant gender-related differences were observed
in the pharmacokinetics of fexofenadine hydrochloride.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         