
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  Lisinopril and Hydrochlorothiazide

                  As a result of its diuretic effects, hydrochlorothiazide increases plasma renin activity, increases aldosterone secretion, and decreases serum potassium. Administration of lisinopril blocks the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone axis and tends to reverse the potassium loss associated with the diuretic.
In clinical studies, the extent of blood pressure reduction seen with the combination of lisinopril and hydrochlorothiazide was approximately additive. The lisinopril and hydrochlorothiazide 10/12.5 mg combination worked equally well in Black and Caucasian patients. The lisinopril and hydrochlorothiazide 20/12.5 mg and lisinopril and hydrochlorothiazide 20/25 mg combinations appeared somewhat less effective in Black patients, but relatively few Black patients were studied. In most patients, the antihypertensive effect of lisinopril and hydrochlorothiazide was sustained for at least 24 hours.
In a randomized, controlled comparison, the mean antihypertensive effects of lisinopril and hydrochlorothiazide 20/12.5 mg and lisinopril and hydrochlorothiazide 20/25 mg were similar, suggesting that many patients who respond adequately to the latter combination may be controlled with lisinopril and hydrochlorothiazide 20/12.5 mg (see DOSAGE ANDADMINISTRATION).
Concomitant administration of lisinopril and hydrochlorothiazide has little or no effect on the bioavailability of either drug. The combination tablet is bioequivalent to concomitant administration of the separate entities.

                  

                  Lisinopril

                  
                  

                  Mechanism of Action

                  
                  
ACE is identical to kininase, an enzyme that degrades bradykinin. Whether increased levels of bradykinin, a potent vasodepressor peptide, play a role in the therapeutic effects of lisinopril remains to be elucidated.
While the mechanism through which lisinopril lowers blood pressure is believed to be primarily suppression of the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system, lisinopril is antihypertensive even in patients with low-renin hypertension. Although lisinopril was antihypertensive in all races studied, Black hypertensive patients (usually a low-renin hypertensive population) had a smaller average response to lisinopril monotherapy than non-Black patients.

                  

               
               
            
         