
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
                  Concomitant use of esmolol hydrochloride with other drugs that can lower blood pressure, reduce myocardial contractility, or interfere with sinus node function or electrical impulse propagation in the myocardium can exaggerate esmolol hydrochloride’s effects on blood pressure, contractility, and impulse propagation. Severe interactions with such drugs can result in, for example, severe hypotension, cardiac failure, severe bradycardia, sinus pause, sinoatrial block, atrioventricular block, and/or cardiac arrest. In addition, with some drugs, beta blockade may precipitate increased withdrawal effects. (See clonidine, guanfacine, and moxonidine below.) Esmolol hydrochloride should therefore be used only after careful individual assessment of the risks and expected benefits in patients receiving drugs that can cause these types of pharmacodynamic interactions, including but not limited to:
 
                  
                     Digitalis glycosides: Concomitant administration of digoxin and esmolol hydrochloride leads to an approximate 10% to 20% increase of digoxin blood levels at some time points. Digoxin does not affect esmolol hydrochloride pharmacokinetics. Both digoxin and beta blockers slow atrioventricular conduction and decrease heart rate. Concomitant use increases the risk of bradycardia. 
                     Anticholinesterases: Esmolol hydrochloride prolonged the duration of succinylcholine-induced neuromuscular blockade and moderately prolonged clinical duration and recovery index of mivacurium. 
                     Antihypertensive agents clonidine, guanfacine, or moxonidine: Beta blockers also increase the risk of clonidine-, guanfacine-, or moxonidine-withdrawal rebound hypertension. If, during concomitant use of a beta blocker, antihypertensive therapy needs to be interrupted or discontinued, discontinue the beta blocker first, and the discontinuation should be gradual. 
                     Calcium channel antagonists: In patients with depressed myocardial infarction, use of esmolol hydrochloride with cardiodepressant calcium channel antagonists (e.g., verapamil) can lead to fatal cardiac arrests. 
                     Sympathomimetic drugs: Sympathomimetic drugs having beta-adrenergic agonist activity will counteract effects of esmolol hydrochloride. 
                     Vasoconstrictive and positive inotropic agents: Because of the risk of reducing cardiac contractility in presence of high systemic vascular resistance, do not use esmolol hydrochloride to control tachycardia in patients receiving drugs that are vasoconstrictive and have positive inotropic effects, such as epinephrine, norepinephrine, and dopamine.
                  
               
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           Digitalis glycosides: Risk of bradycardia (7)
                           
                           Anticholinesterases: Prolongs neuromuscular blockade (7)
                           
                           Antihypertensive agents: Risk of rebound hypertension (7)
                           
                           Sympathomimetic drugs: Dose adjustment needed (7)
                           
                           Vasoconstrictive and positive inotropic effect substances: Avoid concomitant use (7)
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         