
               
               
               
                  7 
                  DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           Androgens may decrease blood glucose and insulin requirement in diabetic patients. (7.1)

                           
                           Changes in anticoagulant activity may be seen with androgens. More frequent monitoring of International Normalized Ratio (INR) and prothrombin time is recommended. (
                              7.2)

                           
                           Use of testosterone with adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) or corticosteroids may result in increased fluid retention. Use with caution, particularly in patients with cardiac, renal, or hepatic disease. (7.3)
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        7.1 
                        Insulin
                     
                     
                        Changes in insulin sensitivity or glycemic control may occur in patients treated with androgens. In diabetic patients, the metabolic effects of androgens may decrease blood glucose and, therefore, insulin requirement.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        7.2
                         
                        Oral Anticoagulants
                     
                     
                        Changes in anticoagulant activity may be seen with androgens. More frequent monitoring of INR and prothrombin time is recommended in patients taking anticoagulants, especially at the initiation and termination of androgen therapy.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        7.3 Corticosteroids
                     
                     
                        The concurrent use of testosterone with ACTH or corticosteroids may result in increased fluid retention and should be monitored, particularly in patients with cardiac, renal or hepatic disease.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        7.4 Triamcinolone
                     
                     
                        
                           The topical administration of 0.1% triamcinolone cream to the skin under the central drug reservoir prior to the application of the ANDRODERM system did not significantly alter transdermal absorption of testosterone; however, the rate of complete adherence was lower. 

                           
                           Pretreatment with triamcinolone ointment formulation significantly reduced testosterone absorption from the ANDRODERM system.
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         