
               
               
               
                  12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                     
                        Endogenous androgens, including testosterone and dihydrotestosterone (DHT), are responsible for the normal growth and development of the male sex organs and for maintenance of secondary sex characteristics. These effects include the growth and maturation of prostate, seminal vesicles, penis and scrotum; the development of male hair distribution, such as facial, pubic, chest and axillary hair; laryngeal enlargement; vocal cord thickening; and alterations in body musculature and fat distribution. Testosterone and DHT are necessary for the normal development of secondary sex characteristics. 
                        Male hypogonadism, a clinical syndrome resulting from insufficient secretion of testosterone, has two main etiologies. Primary hypogonadism is caused by defects of the gonads, such as Klinefelter Syndrome or Leydig cell aplasia, whereas secondary hypogonadism is the failure of the hypothalamus (or pituitary) to produce sufficient gonadotropins (FSH, LH).
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                     
                     
                        No specific pharmacodynamic studies were conducted using ANDRODERM.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        12.3
                         
                        Pharmacokinetics
                     
                     
                        
                           Absorption
                        
                        ANDRODERM delivers physiologic amounts of testosterone, producing circulating testosterone concentrations that approximate the normal concentration range (300 - 1030 ng/dL) seen in healthy men. ANDRODERM provides a continuous daily dose of testosterone in a self-contained transdermal system. Following ANDRODERM application, testosterone is continuously absorbed during the 24-hour dosing period with a median (range) Tmax of 8 (4-12) hours.
                        
                           Distribution
                        
                        Circulating testosterone is primarily bound in the serum to sex hormone-binding globulin (SHBG) and albumin. Approximately 40% of testosterone in plasma is bound to SHBG, 2% remains unbound (free) and the rest is bound to albumin and other proteins.
                        
                           Metabolism
                        
                        Testosterone is metabolized to various 17-keto steroids through two different pathways. The major active metabolites of testosterone are estradiol and dihydrotestosterone (DHT).
                        During steady-state pharmacokinetic studies in hypogonadal men treated with ANDRODERM, the average DHT:T and E2:T ratios were approximately 1:10 and 1:200, respectively.
                        
                           Excretion
                        
                        There is considerable variation in the half-life of testosterone as reported in the literature, ranging from 10 to 100 minutes. About 90% of a dose of testosterone given intramuscularly is excreted in the urine as glucuronic and sulfuric acid conjugates of testosterone and its metabolites; about 6% of a dose is excreted in the feces, mostly in the unconjugated form. Inactivation of testosterone occurs primarily in the liver.
                        Upon removal of the ANDRODERM systems, serum testosterone concentrations decrease with an apparent half-life of approximately 70 minutes. Hypogonadal concentrations are reached within 24 hours following system removal. There is no accumulation of testosterone during continuous treatment.
                        
                           Effect of Showering
                        
                        In a two-way crossover study, the effects of showering on the pharmacokinetics of total testosterone following a single application of ANDRODERM 4 mg/day were assessed in 16 hypogonadal males. Showering 3 hours after application of ANDRODERM increased Cavg by 0.5% and decreased Cmax by 0.4% respectively, as compared to not showering. The systemic exposure to ANDRODERM was similar following applications with or without showering 3 hours after application. 
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         