
               
               
               7   DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1   Strong CYP2D6 Inhibitors
                     
                        
                           In vitro studies indicate that α-HTBZ and β-HTBZ are substrates for CYP2D6.  Strong CYPD6 inhibitors (e.g., paroxetine, fluoxetine, quinidine) markedly increase exposure to these metabolites. A reduction in XENAZINE dose may be necessary when adding a strong CYP2D6 inhibitor (e.g., fluoxetine, paroxetine, quinidine) in patients maintained on a stable dose of XENAZINE.  The daily dose of XENAZINE should not exceed 50 mg per day and the maximum single dose of XENAZINE should not exceed 25 mg in patients taking strong CYP2D6 inhibitors [see Dosage and Administration (2.3), Warnings and Precautions (5.3), Use in Specific Populations (8.7),Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2   Reserpine
                     
                        Reserpine binds irreversibly to VMAT2 and the duration of its effect is several days.  Prescribers should wait for chorea to reemerge before administering XENAZINE to avoid overdosage and major depletion of serotonin and norepinephrine in the CNS. At least 20 days should elapse after stopping reserpine before starting XENAZINE. XENAZINE and reserpine should not be used concomitantly [see Contraindications (4), Warnings and Precautions (5.12)].
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3   Monoamine Oxidase Inhibitors (MAOIs)
                     
                        XENAZINE is contraindicated in patients taking MAOIs. XENAZINE should not be used in combination with an MAOI, or within a minimum of 14 days of discontinuing therapy with an MAOI [see Contraindications (4), Warnings and Precautions (5.12)].
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4   Alcohol
                     
                        Concomitant use of alcohol or other sedating drugs may have additive effects and worsen sedation and somnolence.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.5   Drugs that Cause QTc Prolongation
                     
                        XENAZINE causes a small prolongation of QTc (about 8 msec), concomitant use with other drugs that are known to cause QTc prolongation should be avoided, these including antipsychotic medications (e.g., chlorpromazine, haloperidol, thioridazine, ziprasidone), antibiotics (e.g., moxifloxacin), Class 1A (e.g., quinidine, procainamide), and Class III (e.g., amiodarone, sotalol) antiarrhythmic medications or any other medications known to prolong the QTc interval.  XENAZINE should be avoided in patients with congenital long QT syndrome and in patients with a history of cardiac arrhythmias.  Certain conditions may increase the risk for torsade de pointes or sudden death such as, (1) bradycardia; (2) hypokalemia or hypomagnesemia; (3) concomitant use of other drugs that prolong the QTc interval; and (4) presence of congenital prolongation of the QT interval [see Warnings and Precautions (5.9), Clinical Pharmacology (12.2)].
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.6   Neuroleptic Drugs
                     
                        The risk for Parkinsonism, NMS, and akathisia may be increased by concomitant use of XENAZINE and dopamine antagonists or antipsychotics (e.g., chlorpromazine, haloperidol, olanzapine, risperidone, thioridazine, ziprasidone).
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         