
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              •
                              Cationic drugs:  eliminated by renal tubular secretion may reduce metformin elimination; use with caution. (5.10, 7.3)
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 Positive Urine Glucose Test 
                     
                        
                           Dapagliflozin
                        
                        Monitoring glycemic control with urine glucose tests is not recommended in patients taking SGLT2 inhibitors as SGLT2 inhibitors increase urinary glucose excretion and will lead to positive urine glucose tests. Use alternative methods to monitor glycemic control.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 Interference with 1,5-anhydroglucitol (1,5-AG) Assay 
                     
                        
                           Dapagliflozin
                        
                        Monitoring glycemic control with 1,5-AG assay is not recommended as measurements of 1,5-AG are unreliable in assessing glycemic control in patients taking SGLT2 inhibitors. Use alternative methods to monitor glycemic control.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3 Cationic Drugs
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Metformin hydrochloride
                              
                              Cationic drugs (e.g., amiloride, cimetidine, digoxin, morphine, procainamide, quinidine, quinine, ranitidine, triamterene, trimethoprim, or vancomycin) that are eliminated by renal tubular secretion theoretically have the potential for interaction with metformin by competing for common renal tubular transport systems. A 40% increase in exposure (AUC) of metformin when coadministered with cimetidine was observed in normal healthy volunteers. Although such interactions remain theoretical (except for cimetidine), careful patient monitoring and dose adjustment of XIGDUO XR and/or the interfering drug is recommended in patients who are taking cationic medications that are excreted via the proximal renal tubular secretory system.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4 Use with Other Drugs
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Metformin hydrochloride
                              
                              Some medications can predispose to hyperglycemia and may lead to loss of glycemic control. These medications include the thiazides and other diuretics, corticosteroids, phenothiazines, thyroid products, estrogens, oral contraceptives, phenytoin, nicotinic acid, sympathomimetics, calcium channel blocking drugs, and isoniazid. When such drugs are administered to a patient receiving XIGDUO XR, the patient should be observed closely for loss of glycemic control. When such drugs are withdrawn from a patient receiving XIGDUO XR, the patient should be observed closely for hypoglycemia.
                              In healthy volunteers, the pharmacokinetics of metformin and propranolol, and of metformin and ibuprofen were not affected when coadministered in single-dose interaction studies.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         