
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  Combination oral contraceptives act by suppression of gonadotropins. Although the primary mechanism of this action is inhibition of ovulation, other alterations include changes in the cervical mucus (which increase the difficulty of sperm entry into the uterus) and the endometrium (which reduce the likelihood of implantation).
               
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           PHARMACOKINETICS
                        
                        
                           Absorption
                        
                        No specific investigation of the absolute bioavailability of levonorgestrel and ethinyl estradiol of levonorgestrel and ethinyl estradiol tablets in humans has been conducted. However, literature indicates that levonorgestrel is rapidly and completely absorbed after oral administration and is not subject to first-pass metabolism. Ethinyl estradiol is rapidly and almost completely absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract but, due to first-pass metabolism in gut mucosa and liver, the absolute bioavailability of ethinyl estradiol is about 40%. 
                        After a single dose of three levonorgestrel and ethinyl estradiol tablets to 17 women under fasting conditions, the extents of absorption of levonorgestrel and ethinyl estradiol were 98.6% and 99%, respectively, relative to the same dose of the 2 drugs when given as a microcrystalline suspension in water. The effect of food on the bioavailability of levonorgestrel and ethinyl estradiol tablets following oral administration has not been evaluated. 
                        The pharmacokinetics of levonorgestrel and ethinyl estradiol following daily administration of levonorgestrel and ethinyl estradiol tablets for 21 days per cycle for three cycles, were determined in 18 women. Estimates of the pharmacokinetic parameters of levonorgestrel and ethinyl estradiol following single and multiple dose administration of levonorgestrel and ethinyl estradiol tablets are summarized in Table I. Mean levonorgestrel and ethinyl estradiol levels after a single dose and on day 21 at steady state are shown in Figure I. 
                        The pharmacokinetics of total levonorgestrel are non-linear due to an increase in binding to SHBG, which is attributed to increased SHBG levels that are induced by the daily administration of ethinyl estradiol. Increased binding of levonorgestrel to SHBG leads to decreased clearance of levonorgestrel. Observed maximum levonorgestrel concentrations increased from day 1 to day 21 of the 1st and 3rd cycles by 66% and 83%, respectively.
                        
                        
                        In calculating the mean concentration for ethinyl estradiol, any individual subject value below the quantifiable limit (i.e., 20 pg/mL) was converted to 0; and the 0 values were included for calculation of the mean concentration.
                        Table I provides a summary of levonorgestrel and ethinyl estradiol pharmacokinetic parameters.
                        
                           Table I Mean (SD) pharmacokinetic parameters of levonorgestrel and ethinyl estradiol tablets after single dose and after multiple dosing for 3 cycles
                        
                        
                                                                                                                                                 Levonorgestrel
                        
                        


                        



                                                                                                                                                 Ethinyl Estradiol
                        
                        


                        


Cmax = maximum concentration
                        tmax = time to maximum concentration
                        AUC = area under the drug concentration curve from time 0 to infinity
                        CL/f = oral clearance
                        Vz = volume of distribution
                        SHBG = sex hormone-binding globulin
                        AUC(0-24) = area under the drug concentration time curve from time 0 to 24 hours; this represents the area for one dosing interval at steady state.
                        
                           Distribution
                        
                        Levonorgestrel in serum is primarily bound to SHBG. Protein binding values for levonorgestrel are provided in Table II. Ethinyl estradiol is about 97% bound to plasma albumin. Ethinyl estradiol does not bind to SHBG, but induces SHBG synthesis.
                        
                           Table II Protein binding (mean ± SD) of levonorgestrel in pools of serum samples collected from 18 women after a single dose of levonorgestrel and ethinyl estradiol tablets and following administration (once daily) over 3x21 days.
                        
                        


                        



                           Metabolism
                        
                        
                           Levonorgestrel: The most important metabolic pathway occurs in the reduction of the ∆4-3-oxo group and hydroxylation at positions 2α, 1β, and 16β, followed by conjugation. Most of the metabolites that circulate in the blood are sulfates of 3α, 5β-tetrahydrolevonorgestrel, while excretion occurs predominantly in the form of glucuronides. Some of the parent levonorgestrel also circulates as 17β-sulfate. Metabolic clearance rates may differ among individuals by several-fold, and this may account in part for the wide variation in levonorgestrel concentrations among users.
                        
                           Ethinyl estradiol: Cytochrome P450 enzymes (CYP3A4) in the liver are responsible for the 2- hydroxylation that is the major oxidative reaction. The 2-hydroxy metabolite is further transformed by methylation and glucuronidation prior to urinary and fecal excretion. Levels of Cytochrome P450 (CYP3A) vary widely among individuals and can explain the variation in the rates of ethinyl estradiol 2-hydroxylation. Ethinyl estradiol is excreted in the urine and feces as glucuronide and sulfate conjugates and undergoes enterohepatic circulation.
                        
                           Excretion
                        
                        The elimination half-life for levonorgestrel after a single dose of levonorgestrel and ethinyl estradiol tablets is 25.4 ± 9.7 hours. Levonorgestrel and its metabolites are primarily excreted in the urine. The elimination half-life of ethinyl estradiol has been reported to be between 15 and 25 hours.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     SPECIAL POPULATIONS
                     
                        
                           Hepatic Insufficiency
                        
                        No formal studies have evaluated the effect of hepatic disease on the disposition of levonorgestrel and ethinyl estradiol tablets. However, steroid hormones may be poorly metabolized in patients with impaired liver function.
                        
                           Renal Insufficiency
                        
                        No formal studies have evaluated the effect of renal disease on the disposition of levonorgestrel and ethinyl estradiol tablets.
                        
                           Drug-Drug Interactions
                        
                        
                           Interactions between ethinyl estradiol and other drugs have been reported in the literature.
                        
                        
                           
                              
                                 Interactions with Absorption.
                                Diarrhea may increase gastrointestinal motility and reduce hormone absorption. Similarly, any drug which reduces gut transit time may reduce hormone concentrations in the blood.
                           
                              
                                 Interactions with Metabolism
                              
                           
                        
                        
                           Gastrointestinal Wall: Sulfation of ethinyl estradiol has been shown to occur in the gastrointestinal wall. Therefore, drugs which act as competitive inhibitors for sulfation in the gastrointestinal wall may increase ethinyl estradiol bioavailability.
                        
                           Hepatic metabolism: Interactions can occur with drugs that induce microsomal enzymes which can decrease ethinyl estradiol concentrations (e.g., rifampin, barbiturates,phenylbutazone, phenytoin, griseofulvin).
                        
                           
                              
                                 Interference with Enterohepatic Circulation:
                                Some clinical reports suggest that enteroheptic circulation of estrogens may decrease when certain antibiotic agents are given, which may reduce ethinyl estradiol concentrations (e.g., ampicillin, tetracycline).
                           
                              
                                 Interference in the Metabolism of Other Drugs:
                                Ethinyl estradiol may interfere with the metabolism of other drugs by inhibiting hepatic microsomal enzymes or by inducing hepatic drug conjugation, particularly glucuronidation. Accordingly, plasma and tissue concentrations may either be increased or decreased, respectively (e.g., cyclosporin, theophylline).
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     Graph
                     
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     graph
                     
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         