
               
               
               12        CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1      Mechanism of Action
                     
                        VORAXAZE (glucarpidase) is a recombinant bacterial enzyme that hydrolyzes the carboxyl-terminal glutamate residue from folic acid and classical antifolates such as methotrexate.  VORAXAZE converts methotrexate to its inactive metabolites 4-deoxy-4-amino-N10-methylpteroic acid (DAMPA) and glutamate.  VORAXAZE provides an alternative non-renal pathway for methotrexate elimination in patients with renal dysfunction during high-dose methotrexate treatment.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2      Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        Plasma methotrexate concentrations within 48 hours following administration of VORAXAZE can only be reliably measured by a chromatographic method because DAMPA interferes with the immunoassays [see Warnings and Precautions (5.2)].  Following administration of VORAXAZE 50 Units/kg to patients in Study 1, methotrexate concentration measured by a chromatographic method was reduced by ≥ 97% within 15 minutes in all 22 treatment-evaluable patients, and was maintained at a > 95% reduction up to 8 days in 20 of the 22 patients [see Clinical Studies (14)].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3      Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        The pharmacokinetics of glucarpidase in the absence of methotrexate were studied in eight healthy subjects following an intravenous injection of VORAXAZE 50 Units/kg over 5 minutes.  Serum glucarpidase activity levels were measured by an enzymatic assay and serum total glucarpidase concentrations were measured by ELISA.
                        Serum glucarpidase activity levels declined with a mean elimination half-life (t1/2) of 5.6 hours.  The mean Cmax was 3.3 μg/mL and the mean area under the curve (AUC0-inf) was 23.3 μg•h/mL.  The mean systemic clearance (CL) was 7.5 mL/min.  The mean volume of distribution (Vd) was 3.6 L, suggesting that glucarpidase distribution is restricted to plasma volume.  The pharmacokinetic parameters derived from the serum total glucarpidase concentrations were similar to those generated by serum glucarpidase activity levels except for a longer t1/2 of 9 hours.
                        
                           Renal Impairment
                        
                        The pharmacokinetics of glucarpidase in the absence of methotrexate were studied in four subjects with severe renal impairment (creatinine clearance <30 mL/min).  Following an intravenous dose of 50 Units/kg of VORAXAZE, the mean pharmacokinetic parameters were similar to those observed in healthy subjects except for a longer t1/2 of 8.2 hours as compared to 5.6 hours in healthy subjects by the enzymatic assay. 
                        
                           Drug Interactions
                        
                        In a study of cancer patients receiving a high-dose methotrexate (≥1 g/m2) and leucovorin rescue regimen, intravenous administration of 50 Units/kg VORAXAZE 2 hours before leucovorin reduced (6S)-leucovorin AUC0-3h by 33% and Cmax by 52%, and also reduced its active metabolite, (6S)-5-methyltetrahydrofolate, AUC0-3h by 92% and Cmax by 93% [see Drug Interactions (7.1)]. 
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         