
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Pharmacokinetics: 
                     
                        Systemic absorption of mupirocin through intact human skin is minimal. The systemic absorption of mupirocin was studied following application of mupirocin cream three times daily for 5 days to various skin lesions (>10 cm in length or 100 cm2 in area) in 16 adults (aged 29 to 60 years) and 10 children (aged 3 to 12 years). Some systemic absorption was observed as evidenced by the detection of the metabolite, monic acid, in urine. Data from this trial indicated more frequent occurrence of percutaneous absorption in children (90% of subjects) compared with adults (44% of subjects); however, the observed urinary concentrations in children (0.07 - 1.3 mcg/mL [1 pediatric patient had no detectable level]) are within the observed range (0.08 - 10.03 mcg/mL [9 adults had no detectable level]) in the adult population. In general, the degree of percutaneous absorption following multiple dosing appears to be minimal in adults and children. Any mupirocin reaching the systemic circulation is rapidly metabolized, predominantly to inactive monic acid, which is eliminated by renal excretion.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Microbiology: 
                     
                        Mupirocin is an antibacterial agent produced by fermentation using the organism Pseudomonas fluorescens. Mupirocin inhibits bacterial protein synthesis by reversibly and specifically binding to bacterial isoleucyl transfer-RNA (tRNA) synthetase. Due to this unique mode of action, mupirocin does not demonstrate cross-resistance with other classes of antimicrobial agents.
                        When mupirocin resistance occurs, it results from the production of a modified isoleucyl-tRNA synthetase, or the acquisition of, by genetic transfer, a plasmid mediating a new isoleucyl-tRNA synthetase. High-level plasmid-mediated resistance (MIC >512 mcg/mL) has been reported in increasing numbers of isolates of Staphylococcus aureus and with higher frequency in coagulase-negative staphylococci. Mupirocin resistance occurs with greater frequency in methicillin-resistant than methicillin-susceptible staphylococci. Because of the occurrence of mupirocin resistance in methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA), it is appropriate to test MRSA populations for mupirocin susceptibility prior to the use of mupirocin using a standardized method.1,2,3
                        
                        Mupirocin is bactericidal at concentrations achieved by topical administration. Mupirocin is highly protein-bound (>97%), and the effect of wound secretions on the MICs of mupirocin has not been determined.
                        Mupirocin has been shown to be active against susceptible strains of S. aureus and Streptococcus pyogenes, both in vitro and in clinical trials (see INDICATIONS AND USAGE). The following in vitro data are available, 
                              but their clinical significance is unknown
                           . Mupirocin is active against most isolates of Staphylococcus epidermidis.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         