
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  Gonal-f® RFF Pen (follitropin alfa injection) stimulates ovarian follicular growth in women who do not have primary ovarian failure. FSH, the active component of Gonal-f® RFF Pen is the primary hormone responsible for follicular recruitment and development. In order to effect final maturation of the follicle and ovulation in the absence of an endogenous LH surge, human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) must be given following the administration of Gonal-f® RFF Pen when monitoring of the patient indicates that sufficient follicular development has occurred. There is interpatient variability in response to FSH administration.
               
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        Single-dose pharmacokinetics of follitropin alfa were determined following subcutaneous administration of 300 IU Gonal-f® RFF Pen to 21 pre-menopausal healthy female volunteers who were pituitary down-regulated with a GnRH agonist.
                        The descriptive statistics for the pharmacokinetic parameters are presented in Table 1.
                        


                     



                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Absorption
                           
                              The absorption rate of Gonal-f® RFF Pen following subcutaneous administration is slower than the elimination rate. Hence, the pharmacokinetics of Gonal-f® RFF Pen are absorption rate-limited.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Distribution
                           
                              Human tissue or organ distribution of FSH has not been determined for Gonal-f® RFF Pen.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Metabolism/Excretion
                           
                              FSH metabolism and excretion following administration of Gonal-f® RFF Pen have not been studied in humans.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Special populations
                     
                        Safety, efficacy, and pharmacokinetics of Gonal-f® RFF Pen in patients with renal or hepatic insufficiency have not been established.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Drug-Drug Interactions
                     
                        No drug-drug interaction studies have been conducted (see PRECAUTIONS).
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         