
                     
                     
                     Drug Interactions
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Potential Effects of Coadministration of Drugs Highly Bound to Plasma Proteins
                           
                              Because sertraline is tightly bound to plasma protein, the administration of sertraline hydrochloride to a patient taking another drug which is tightly bound to protein (e.g., warfarin, digitoxin) may cause a shift in plasma concentrations potentially resulting in an adverse effect. Conversely, adverse effects may result from displacement of protein bound sertraline by other tightly bound drugs. 
                              In a study comparing prothrombin time AUC(0 to 120 hr) following dosing with warfarin (0.75 mg/kg) before and after 21 days of dosing with either sertraline hydrochloride (50 to 200 mg/day) or placebo, there was a mean increase in prothrombin time of 8% relative to baseline for sertraline compared to a 1% decrease for placebo (p < 0.02). The normalization of prothrombin time for the sertraline group was delayed compared to the placebo group. The clinical significance of this change is unknown. Accordingly, prothrombin time should be carefully monitored when sertraline therapy is initiated or stopped. 
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Cimetidine
                           
                              In a study assessing disposition of sertraline hydrochloride (100 mg) on the second of 8 days of cimetidine administration (800 mg daily), there were significant increases in sertraline mean AUC (50%), Cmax (24%) and half-life (26%) compared to the placebo group. The clinical significance of these changes is unknown. 
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           CNS Active Drugs
                           
                              In a study comparing the disposition of intravenously administered diazepam before and after 21 days of dosing with either sertraline hydrochloride (50 to 200 mg/day escalating dose) or placebo, there was a 32% decrease relative to baseline in diazepam clearance for the sertraline group compared to a 19% decrease relative to baseline for the placebo group (p < 0.03). There was a 23% increase in Tmax for desmethyldiazepam in the sertraline group compared to a 20% decrease in the placebo group (p < 0.03). The clinical significance of these changes is unknown. 
                              In a placebo-controlled trial in normal volunteers, the administration of two doses of sertraline did not significantly alter steady-state lithium levels or the renal clearance of lithium. 
                              Nonetheless, at this time, it is recommended that plasma lithium levels be monitored following initiation of sertraline therapy with appropriate adjustments to the lithium dose. 
                              In a controlled study of a single-dose (2 mg) of pimozide, 200 mg sertraline (q.d.) coadministration to steady-state was associated with a mean increase in pimozide AUC and Cmax of about 40%, but was not associated with any changes in EKG. Since the highest recommended pimozide dose (10 mg) has not been evaluated in combination with sertraline, the effect on QT interval and PK parameters at doses higher than 2 mg at this time are not known. While the mechanism of this interaction is unknown, due to the narrow therapeutic index of pimozide and due to the interaction noted at a low dose of pimozide, concomitant administration of sertraline and pimozide should be contraindicated (see CONTRAINDICATIONS).
                              Results of a placebo-controlled trial in normal volunteers suggest that chronic administration of sertraline 200 mg/day does not produce clinically important inhibition of phenytoin metabolism. Nonetheless, at this time, it is recommended that plasma phenytoin concentrations be monitored following initiation of sertraline therapy with appropriate adjustments to the phenytoin dose, particularly in patients with multiple underlying medical conditions and/or those receiving multiple concomitant medications. 
                              The effect of sertraline on valproate levels has not been evaluated in clinical trials. In the absence of such data, it is recommended that plasma valproate levels be monitored following initiation of sertraline therapy with appropriate adjustments to the valproate dose.
                              The risk of using sertraline in combination with other CNS active drugs has not been systematically evaluated. Consequently, caution is advised if the concomitant administration of sertraline and such drugs is required. 
                              There is limited controlled experience regarding the optimal timing of switching from other drugs effective in the treatment of major depressive disorder, obsessive-compulsive disorder, panic disorder, posttraumatic stress disorder, premenstrual dysphoric disorder and social anxiety disorder to sertraline hydrochloride. Care and prudent medical judgment should be exercised when switching, particularly from long acting agents. The duration of an appropriate washout period which should intervene before switching from one selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor (SSRI) to another has not been established. 
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Monoamine Oxidase Inhibitors
                           
                              See CONTRAINDICATIONS and WARNINGS.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Drugs Metabolized by P450 3A4
                           
                              In three separate in vivo interaction studies, sertraline was coadministered with cytochrome P450 3A4 substrates, terfenadine, carbamazepine or cisapride under steady-state conditions. The results of these studies indicated that sertraline did not increase plasma concentrations of terfenadine, carbamazepine or cisapride. These data indicate that sertraline’s extent of inhibition of P450 3A4 activity is not likely to be of clinical significance. Results of the interaction study with cisapride indicate that sertraline 200 mg (q.d.) induces the metabolism of cisapride (cisapride AUC and Cmax were reduced by about 35%).
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Drugs Metabolized by P450 2D6
                           
                              Many drugs effective in the treatment of major depressive disorder, e.g., the SSRIs, including sertraline, and most tricyclic antidepressant drugs effective in the treatment of major depressive disorder inhibit the biochemical activity of the drug metabolizing isozyme cytochrome P450 2D6 (debrisoquin hydroxylase), and, thus, may increase the plasma concentrations of coadministered drugs that are metabolized by P450 2D6. The drugs for which this potential interaction is of greatest concern are those metabolized primarily by 2D6 and which have a narrow therapeutic index, e.g., the tricyclic antidepressant drugs effective in the treatment of major depressive disorder and the Type 1C antiarrhythmics propafenone and flecainide. The extent to which this interaction is an important clinical problem depends on the extent of the inhibition of P450 2D6 by the antidepressant and the therapeutic index of the coadministered drug. There is variability among the drugs effective in the treatment of major depressive disorder in the extent of clinically important 2D6 inhibition, and in fact sertraline at lower doses has a less prominent inhibitory effect on 2D6 than some others in the class. Nevertheless, even sertraline has the potential for clinically important 2D6 inhibition. Consequently, concomitant use of a drug metabolized by P450 2D6 with sertraline may require lower doses than usually prescribed for the other drug. Furthermore, whenever sertraline is withdrawn from cotherapy, an increased dose of the coadministered drug may be required (see PRECAUTIONS: Drug Interactions: Tricyclic Antidepressant Drugs Effective in the Treatment of Major Depressive Disorder). 
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Serotonergic Drugs
                           
                              Based on the mechanism of action of SNRIs and SSRIs, including sertraline hydrochloride, and the potential for serotonin syndrome, caution is advised when SNRIs and SSRIs, including sertraline hydrochloride, are coadministered with other drugs that may affect the serotonergic neutrotransmitter systems, such as triptans, linezolid (an antibiotic which is a reversible non-selective MAOI), lithium, tramadol or St. John’s Wort (see WARNINGS: Serotonin Syndrome). The concomitant use of sertraline hydrochloride with other SSRIs, SNRIs or tryptophan is not recommended (see PRECAUTIONS: Drug Interactions).
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Triptans
                           
                              There have been rare post-marketing reports of serotonin syndrome with use of an SNRI or an SSRI and a triptan. If concomitant treatment of SNRIs and SSRIs, including sertraline hydrochloride, with a triptan is clinically warranted, careful observation of the patient is advised, particularly during treatment initiation and dose increases (see WARNINGS: Serotonin Syndrome).
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Sumatriptan
                                 
                                    There have been rare post-marketing reports describing patients with weakness, hyperreflexia and incoordination following the use of a selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor (SSRI) and sumatriptan. If concomitant treatment with sumatriptan and an SSRI (e.g., citalopram, fluoxetine, fluvoxamine, paroxetine, sertraline) is clinically warranted, appropriate observation of the patient is advised. 
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Tricyclic Antidepressant Drugs Effective in the Treatment of Major Depressive Disorder (TCAs)
                           
                              The extent to which SSRI-TCA interactions may pose clinical problems will depend on the degree of inhibition and the pharmacokinetics of the SSRI involved. Nevertheless, caution is indicated in the coadministration of TCAs with sertraline, because sertraline may inhibit TCA metabolism. Plasma TCA concentrations may need to be monitored, and the dose of TCA may need to be reduced, if a TCA is coadministered with sertraline (see PRECAUTIONS: Drug Interactions: Drugs Metabolized by P450 2D6). 
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Hypoglycemic Drugs
                           
                              In a placebo-controlled trial in normal volunteers, administration of sertraline hydrochloride for 22 days (including 200 mg/day for the final 13 days) caused a statistically significant 16% decrease from baseline in the clearance of tolbutamide following an intravenous 1000 mg dose. Sertraline administration did not noticeably change either the plasma protein binding or the apparent volume of distribution of tolbutamide, suggesting that the decreased clearance was due to a change in the metabolism of the drug. The clinical significance of this decrease in tolbutamide clearance is unknown. 
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Atenolol
                           
                              Sertraline hydrochloride (100 mg) when administered to ten healthy male subjects had no effect on the beta-adrenergic blocking ability of atenolol. 
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Digoxin
                           
                              In a placebo-controlled trial in normal volunteers, administration of sertraline hydrochloride for 17 days (including 200 mg/day for the last 10 days) did not change serum digoxin levels or digoxin renal clearance. 
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Microsomal Enzyme Induction
                           
                              Preclinical studies have shown sertraline to induce hepatic microsomal enzymes. In clinical studies, sertraline was shown to induce hepatic enzymes minimally as determined by a small (5%) but statistically significant decrease in antipyrine half-life following administration of 200 mg/day for 21 days. This small change in antipyrine half-life reflects a clinically insignificant change in hepatic metabolism. 
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Drugs that Interfere with Hemostasis (Nonselective NSAIDs, Aspirin, Warfarin, etc.)
                           
                              Serotonin release by platelets plays an important role in hemostasis. Epidemiological studies of the case control and cohort design that have demonstrated an association between use of psychotropic drugs that interfere with serotonin reuptake and the occurrence of upper gastrointestinal bleeding have also shown that concurrent use of an NSAID or aspirin may potentiate this risk of bleeding. These studies have also shown that concurrent use of an NSAID or aspirin may potentiate this risk of bleeding. Altered anticoagulant effects, including increased bleeding, have been reported when SSRIs or SNRIs are coadministered with warfarin. Patients receiving warfarin therapy should be carefully monitored when sertraline is initiated or discontinued.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               