
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  

                  

                  The triamterene/hydrochlorothiazide capsules are a 
diuretic/antihypertensive drug product that combines natriuretic and 
antikaliuretic effects. Each component complements the action of the other.
                  The triamterene component of triamterene/ hydrochlorothiazide capsules exerts 
its diuretic effect on the distal renal tubule to inhibit the reabsorption of 
sodium in exchange for potassium and hydrogen ions. Its natriuretic activity is 
limited by the amount of sodium reaching its site of action. Although it blocks 
the increase in this exchange that is stimulated by mineralocorticoids (chiefly 
aldosterone) it is not a competitive antagonist of aldosterone and its activity 
can be demonstrated in adrenalectomized rats and patients with Addison’s 
disease. As a result, the dose of triamterene required is not proportionally 
related to the level of mineralocorticoid activity, but is dictated by the 
response of the individual patients, and the kaliuretic effect of concomitantly 
administered drugs. By inhibiting the distal tubular exchange mechanism, 
triamterene maintains or increases the sodium excretion and reduces the excess 
loss of potassium, hydrogen and chloride ions induced by hydrochlorothiazide. As 
with hydrochlorothiazide, triamterene may reduce glomerular filtration and renal 
plasma flow. Via this mechanism it may reduce uric acid excretion although it 
has no tubular effect on uric acid reabsorption or secretion. Triamterene does 
not affect calcium excretion. No predictable antihypertensive effect has been 
demonstrated for triamterene.
                  The hydrochlorothiazide component blocks the reabsorption of sodium and 
chloride ions, and thereby increases the quantity of sodium traversing the 
distal tubule and the volume of water excreted. A portion of the additional 
sodium presented to the distal tubule is exchanged there for potassium and 
hydrogen ions. With continued use of hydrochlorothiazide and depletion of 
sodium, compensatory mechanisms tend to increase this exchange and may produce 
excessive loss of potassium, hydrogen and chloride ions. Hydrochlorothiazide 
also decreases the excretion of calcium and uric acid, may increase the 
excretion of iodide and may reduce glomerular filtration rate. The exact 
mechanism of the antihypertensive effect of hydrochlorothiazide is not 
known.
                  Duration of diuretic activity and effective dosage range of the 
hydrochlorothiazide and triamterene components of 
triamterene/hydrochlorothiazide capsules are similar. Onset of diuresis with 
triamterene/hydrochlorothiazide capsules takes place within 1 hour, peaks at 2 
to 3 hours and tapers off during the subsequent 7 to 9 hours.
                  The triamterene/hydrochlorothiazide capsules are well absorbed.
                  Upon administration of a single oral dose to fasted normal male volunteers, 
the following mean pharmacokinetic parameters were determined: 
                  
                  


                  


where AUC(0-48), Cmax, Tmax and 
Ae represent area under the plasma concentration versus time plot, maximum 
plasma concentration, time to reach Cmax and amount 
excreted in urine over 48 hours.
                  One triamterene/hydrochlorothiazide capsules is bioequivalent to a 
single-entity 37.5 mg triamterene capsule and 25 mg hydrochlorothiazide tablet 
used in the double-blind clinical trial below. (See Clinical Trials.)
                  In a limited study involving 12 subjects, coadministration of a marketed 
brand of triamterene and hydrochlorothiazide capsules with a high-fat meal 
resulted in: (1) an increase in the mean bioavailability of triamterene by about 
67% (90% confidence interval = 0.99, 1.90), p-hydroxytriamterene sulfate by 
about 50% (90% confidence interval = 1.06, 1.77), hydrochlorothiazide by about 
17% (90% confidence interval = 0.90, 1.34); (2) increases in the peak 
concentrations of triamterene and p-hydroxytriamterene; and (3) a delay of up to 
2 hours in the absorption of the active constituents.
                  
                  
                  Clinical TrialsA placebo-controlled, double-blind trial was conducted to 
evaluate the efficacy of triamterene/hydrochlorothiazide capsules. This trial 
demonstrated that 37.5 mg triamterene/25 mg hydrochlorothiazide was effective in 
controlling blood pressure while reducing the incidence of 
hydrochlorothiazide-induced hypokalemia. This trial involved 636 patients with 
mild to moderate hypertension controlled by hydrochlorothiazide 25 mg daily and 
who had hypokalemia (serum potassium greater then 3.5 mEq/L) secondary to the 
hydrochlorothiazide. Patients were randomly assigned to 4 weeks’ treatment with 
once-daily regimens of 25 mg hydrochlorothiazide plus placebo, or 25 mg 
hydrochlorothiazide combined with one of the following doses of triamterene: 25 
mg, 37.5 mg, 50 mg or 75 mg.
                  Blood pressure and serum potassium were monitored at baseline and throughout 
the trial. All five treatment groups had similar mean blood pressure and serum 
potassium concentrations at baseline (mean systolic blood pressure range: 137±14 
mmHg to 140±16 mmHg; mean diastolic blood pressure range: 86±9 mmHg to 88±8 
mmHg; mean serum potassium range: 2.3 to 3.4 mEq/L with the majority of patients 
having values between 3.1 and 3.4 mEq/L).
                  While all triamterene regimens reversed hypokalemia, at week 4 the 37.5 mg 
regimen proved optimal compared with the other tested regimens. On this regimen, 
81% of the patients had a significant (p greater then 0.05) reversal of hypokalemia vs. 
59% of patients on the placebo/hydrochlorothiazide regimen. The mean serum 
potassium concentration on 37.5 mg triamterene went from 3.2±0.2 mEq/L at 
baseline to 3.7±0.3 mEq/L at week 4, a significantly greater (p greater then 0.05) 
improvement than that achieved with placebo/hydrochlorothiazide (i.e., 3.2 ±0.2 
mEq/L at baseline and 3.5±0.4 mEq/L at week 4). Also, 51% of patients in the 
37.5 mg triamterene group had an increase in serum potassium of less then0.5 mEq/L at 
week 4 vs. 33% in the placebo group. The 37.5 mg triamterene/25 mg 
hydrochlorothiazide regimen also maintained control of blood pressure; mean 
supine systolic blood pressure at week 4 was 138±21 mmHg while mean supine 
diastolic blood pressure was 87±13 mmHg.
                  

               
               
            
         