
               
               
               DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
                  

                  

                  Angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors: Potassium-sparing agents should be used with caution in 
conjunction with angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors due to an 
increased risk of hyperkalemia.
                  
                  
                  Oral hypoglycemic drugs: Concurrent use with chlorpropamide may increase the risk of 
severe hyponatremia.
                  
                  
                  Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs: A possible interaction resulting in acute renal failure has been 
reported in a few patients on triamterene/hydrochlorothiazide capsules when 
treated with indomethacin, a nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory agent. Caution is 
advised in administering nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory agents with 
triamterene/hydrochlorothiazide capsules.
                  
                  
                  Lithium: Lithium generally should not be given with diuretics because 
they reduce its renal clearance and increase the risk of lithium toxicity. Read 
circulars for lithium preparations before use of such concomitant therapy with 
triamterene/ hydrochlorothiazide capsules.
                  
                  
                  Surgical considerations: Thiazides have been shown to decrease arterial responsiveness to 
norepinephrine (an effect attributed to loss of sodium). This diminution is not 
sufficient to preclude effectiveness of the pressor agent for therapeutic use. 
Thiazides have also been shown to increase the paralyzing effect of 
nondepolarizing muscle relaxants such as tubocurarine (an effect attributed to 
potassium loss); consequently caution should be observed in patients undergoing 
surgery.
                  
                  
                  Other Considerations: Concurrent use of hydrochlorothiazide with amphotericin B or 
corticosteroids or corticotropin (ACTH) may intensify electrolyte imbalance, 
particularly hypokalemia, although the presence of triamterene minimizes the 
hypokalemic effect.
                  Thiazides may add to or potentiate the action of other antihypertensive 
drugs. See INDICATIONS AND 
USAGE for concomitant use with other antihypertensive drugs.
                  The effect of oral anticoagulants may be decreased when used concurrently 
with hydrochlorothiazide; dosage adjustment may be necessary.
                  Triamterene/hydrochlorothiazide capsules may raise the level of blood uric 
acid; dosage adjustments of antigout medication may be necessary to control 
hyperuricemia and gout.
                  The following agents given together with triamterene may promote serum 
potassium accumulation and possibly result in hyperkalemia because of the 
potassiumsparing nature of triamterene, especially in patients with renal 
insufficiency: blood from blood bank (may contain up to 30 mEq of potassium per 
liter of plasma or up to 65 mEq per liter of whole blood when stored for more 
than 10 days); lowsalt milk (may contain up to 60 mEq of potassium per liter); 
potassium-containing medications (such as parenteral penicillin G potassium); 
salt substitutes (most contain substantial amounts of potassium).
                  Exchange resins, such as sodium polystyrene sulfonate, whether administered 
orally or rectally, reduce serum potassium levels by sodium replacement of the 
potassium; fluid retention may occur in some patients because of the increased 
sodium intake.
                  Chronic or overuse of laxatives may reduce serum potassium levels by 
promoting excessive potassium loss from the intestinal tract; laxatives may 
interfere with the potassium-retaining effects of triamterene.
                  The effectiveness of methenamine may be decreased when used concurrently with 
hydrochlorothiazide because of alkalinization of the urine.
                  
                  
                  Drug/Laboratory Test InteractionsTriamterene and quinidine have similar fluorescence spectra; 
thus, triamterene/ hydrochlorothiazide capsules will interfere with the 
fluorescent measurement of quinidine.
                  
                  
                  Carcinogenesis, Mutagenesis, Impairment of 
Fertility
                  
                  CarcinogenesisLong-term studies have not been conducted with the 
triamterene/hydrochlorothiazide combination, or with triamterene alone.
                  
                  
                  Hydrochlorothiazide: Two-year feeding studies in mice and rats, conducted under the 
auspices of the National Toxicology Program (NTP), treated mice and rats with 
doses of hydrochlorothiazide up to 600 and 100 mg/kg/day, respectively. On a 
body-weight basis, these doses are 600 times (in mice) and 100 times (in rats) 
the Maximum Recommended Human Dose (MRHD) for the hydrochlorothiazide component 
of triamterene/hydrochlorothiazide capsules at 50 mg/day (or 1 mg/kg/day based 
on 50 kg individuals). On the basis of body-surface area, these doses are 56 
times (in mice) and 21 times (in rats) the MRHD. These studies uncovered no 
evidence of carcinogenic potential of hydrochlorothiazide in rats or female 
mice, but there was equivocal evidence of hepatocarcinogenicity in male 
mice.
                  
                  
                  MutagenesisStudies of the mutagenic potential of the 
triamterene/hydrochlorothiazide combination, or of triamterene alone have not 
been performed.
                  
                  
                  Hydrochlorothiazide:Hydrochlorothiazide was not genotoxic in in 
vitro assays using strains TA 98, TA 100, TA 1535, TA 1537 and TA 1538 of 
Salmonella typhimurium (the Ames test); in the 
Chinese Hamster Ovary (CHO) test for chromosomal aberrations; or in in vivo assays using mouse germinal cell chromosomes, 
Chinese hamster bone marrow chromosomes, and the Drosophila 
sex-linked recessive lethal trait gene. Positive test results were 
obtained in the in vitro CHO Sister Chromatid 
Exchange (clastogenicity) test, and in the mouse Lymphoma Cell (mutagenicity) 
assays, using concentrations of hydrochlorothiazide of 43 to 1300 mcg/mL. 
Positive test results were also obtained in the Aspergillus 
nidulans nondisjunction assay, using an unspecified concentration of 
hydrochlorothiazide.
                  
                  
                  Impairment of FertilityStudies of the effects of the triamterene/hydrochlorothiazide 
combination, or of triamterene alone on animal reproductive function have not 
been conducted.
                  
                  
                  Hydrochlorothiazide:Hydrochlorothiazide had no adverse effects on the fertility of 
mice and rats of either sex in studies wherein these species were exposed, via 
their diet, to doses of up to 100 and 4 mg/kg/day, respectively, prior to mating 
and throughout gestation. Corresponding multiples of the MRHD are 100 (mice) and 
4 (rats) on the basis of body-weight and 9.4 (mice) and 0.8 (rats) on the basis 
of body surface area.
                  

               
               
            
         