
               
               
               DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
                  
                  
                     Concomitant diuretic therapy:
                     
As with other ACE inhibitors, patients 
on diuretics, especially those on recently instituted diuretic therapy, may 
experience an excessive reduction of blood pressure after initiation of therapy 
with trandolapril. The possibility of exacerbation of hypotensive effects with 
trandolapril may be minimized by either discontinuing the diuretic or cautiously 
increasing salt intake prior to initiation of treatment with trandolapril. If it 
is not possible to discontinue the diuretic, the starting dose of trandolapril 
should be reduced. (See 
                        DOSAGE AND 
ADMINISTRATION.
                     )
                  
                     Agents increasing serum potassium:
                     
Trandolapril 
can attenuate potassium loss caused by thiazide diuretics and increase serum 
potassium when used alone. Use of potassium-sparing diuretics (spironolactone, 
triamterene, or amiloride), potassium supplements, or potassium-containing salt 
substitutes concomitantly with ACE inhibitors can increase the risk of 
hyperkalemia. If concomitant use of such agents is indicated, they should be 
used with caution and with appropriate monitoring of serum potassium. (See 
                        PRECAUTIONS.
                     ) 
                  
                     Lithium:
                     
Increased serum lithium levels and 
symptoms of lithium toxicity have been reported in patients receiving 
concomitant lithium and ACE inhibitor therapy. These drugs should be 
coadministered with caution, and frequent monitoring of serum lithium levels is 
recommended. If a diuretic is also used, the risk of lithium toxicity may be 
increased. 
                  
                     Other:
                     
No clinically significant interaction has 
been found between trandolaprilat and food, cimetidine, digoxin, or furosemide. 
The anticoagulant effect of warfarin was not significantly changed by 
trandolapril. 
                  
                     Carcinogenesis, Mutagenesis, Impairment of Fertility:
                     
Long-term studies were conducted with oral trandolapril administered by 
gavage to mice (78 weeks) and rats (104 and 106 weeks). No evidence of 
carcinogenic potential was seen in mice dosed up to 25 mg/kg/day (85 mg/m2/day) or rats dosed up to 8 mg/kg/day (60 mg/m2/day). These doses are 313 and 32 times (mice), and 100 and 23 
times (rats) the maximum recommended human daily dose (MRHDD) of 4 mg based on 
body-weight and body-surface-area, respectively assuming a 50 kg individual. The 
genotoxic potential of trandolapril was evaluated in the microbial mutagenicity 
(Ames) test, the point mutation and chromosome aberration assays in Chinese 
hamster V79 cells, and the micronucleus test in mice. There was no evidence of 
mutagenic or clastogenic potential in these in vitro 
and in vivo assays.
                  Reproduction studies in rats did not show any impairment of fertility at 
doses up to 100 mg/kg/day (710 mg/m2/day) of 
trandolapril, or 1250 and 260 times the MRHDD on the basis of body-weight and 
body-surface-area, respectively.
                  
                  
                     Pregnancy 
Pregnancy Categories C (first 
trimester) and D (second and third trimesters): (See WARNINGS, Fetal Neonatal Morbidity and Mortality 
)
                  
                  
                     Nursing Mothers:
                     
Radiolabeled trandolapril or its 
metabolites are secreted in rat milk. Trandolapril should not be administered to 
nursing mothers.
                  
                     Geriatric Use:
                     
In placebo-controlled studies of 
trandolapril, 31.1% of patients were 60 years and older, 20.1% were 65 years and 
older, and 2.3% were 75 years and older. No overall differences in effectiveness 
or safety were observed between these patients and younger patients. (Greater 
sensitivity of some older individual patients cannot be ruled out).
                  
                     Pediatric Use:
                     
The safety and effectiveness of 
trandolapril in pediatric patients have not been established.
               
               
            
         