
               
               
               
                   CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY

               
               
                  Ipratropium Bromide and Albuterol Sulfate Inhalation Solution is a combination of the β2-adrenergic bronchodilator, albuterol sulfate, and the anticholinergic bronchodilator, ipratropium bromide.
               
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        Mechanism of Action

                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                              Albuterol sulfate

                           
                           
                              The prime action of β-adrenergic drugs is to stimulate adenyl cyclase, the enzyme that catalyzes the formation of cyclic-3’,5’-adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) from adenosine triphosphate (ATP). The cAMP thus formed mediates the cellular responses. In vitro studies and in vivo pharmacologic studies have demonstrated that albuterol has a preferential effect on β2-adrenergic receptors compared with isoproterenol. While it is recognized that β2-adrenergic receptors are the predominant receptors in bronchial smooth muscle, recent data indicated that 10% to 50% of the β-receptors in the human heart may be β2-receptors. The precise function of these receptors, however, is not yet established. Albuterol has been shown in most controlled clinical trials to have more effect on the respiratory tract, in the form of bronchial smooth muscle relaxation, than isoproterenol at comparable doses while producing fewer cardiovascular effects. Controlled clinical studies and other clinical experience have shown that inhaled albuterol, like other β-adrenergic agonist drugs, can produce a significant cardiovascular effect in some patients.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                              Ipratropium bromide

                           
                           
                              Ipratropium bromide is an anticholinergic (parasympatholytic) agent, which blocks the muscarinic receptors of acetylcholine, and, based on animal studies, appears to inhibit vagally mediated reflexes by antagonizing the action of acetylcholine, the transmitter agent released from the vagus nerve. Anticholinergics prevent the increases in intracellular concentration of cyclic guanosine monophosphate (cGMP), resulting from the interaction of acetylcholine with the muscarinic receptors of bronchial smooth muscle.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                              Ipratropium Bromide and Albuterol Sulfate Inhalation Solution

                           
                           
                              Ipratropium Bromide and Albuterol Sulfate Inhalation Solution is expected to maximize the response to treatment in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) by reducing bronchospasm through two distinctly different mechanisms: sympathomimetic (albuterol sulfate) and anticholinergic / parasympatholytic (ipratropium bromide). Simultaneous administration of both an anticholinergic and a β2-sympathomimetic is designed to produce greater bronchodilation effects than when either drug is utilized alone at its recommended dosage.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                         Pharmacokinetics

                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                              Albuterol sulfate

                           
                           
                              Albuterol sulfate is longer acting than isoproterenol in most patients by any route of administration, because it is not a substrate for the cellular uptake processes for catecholamines nor for the metabolism of catechol-O-methyl transferase. Instead the drug is conjugatively metabolized to albuterol 4’-O-sulfate.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                              Ipratropium bromide

                           
                           
                              The bronchodilation following inhalation of ipratropium is primarily a local, site-specific effect, not a systemic one. Much of an inhaled dose is swallowed as shown by fecal excretion studies. Following nebulization of a 1 mg dose to healthy volunteers, a mean of 4% of the dose was excreted unchanged in the urine.
                              Ipratropium bromide is minimally (0% to 9% in vitro) bound to plasma albumin and α1–acid glycoproteins. It is partially metabolized to inactive ester hydrolysis products. Following intravenous administration, approximately one-half is excreted unchanged in the urine. The half-life of elimination is about 1.6 hours after intravenous administration. Ipratropium bromide that reaches the systemic circulation is reportedly removed by the kidneys rapidly at a rate that exceeds the glomerular filtration rate. The pharmacokinetics of Ipratropium Bromide and Albuterol Sulfate Inhalation Solution or ipratropium bromide have not been studied in the elderly and in patients with hepatic or renal insufficiency (see PRECAUTIONS).
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                              Ipratropium Bromide and Albuterol Sulfate Inhalation Solution

                           
                           
                              In a double-blind, double period, crossover study, 15 male and female subjects were administered single doses of Ipratropium Bromide and Albuterol Sulfate Inhalation Solution or albuterol sulfate inhalation solution at two times the recommended single doses as two inhalations separated by 15 minutes. The total nebulized dose of albuterol sulfate from both treatments was 6.0 mg and the total dose of ipratropium bromide from Ipratropium Bromide and Albuterol Sulfate Inhalation Solution was 1.0 mg. Peak albuterol plasma concentrations occurred at 0.8 hours after dosing for both treatments. The mean peak albuterol concentration following administration of albuterol sulfate alone was 4.86 (± 2.65) ng/mL and it was 4.65 (± 2.92) ng/mL for Ipratropium Bromide and Albuterol Sulfate Inhalation Solution. Mean AUC values for the two treatments were 26.6 (± 15.2) ng•hr/mL (albuterol sulfate alone) versus 24.2 (± 14.5) ng•hr/mL (Ipratropium Bromide and Albuterol Sulfate Inhalation Solution). The mean t1/2 values were 7.2 (± 1.3) hours (albuterol sulfate alone) and 6.7 (± 1.7) hours (Ipratropium Bromide and Albuterol Sulfate Inhalation Solution). A mean of 8.4 (± 8.9)% of the albuterol dose was excreted unchanged in urine following administration of two vials of Ipratropium Bromide and Albuterol Sulfate Inhalation Solution which is similar to 8.8 (± 7.3)% that was obtained from albuterol sulfate inhalation solution. There were no statistically significant differences in the pharmacokinetics of albuterol between the two treatments. For ipratropium, a mean of 3.9 (± 5.1)% of the ipratropium bromide dose was excreted unchanged in the urine following two vials of Ipratropium Bromide and Albuterol Sulfate Inhalation Solution, which is comparable with previously reported data.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         