
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  Aminosyn-PF 7% Sulfite-Free, (an amino acid injection — pediatric formula) contains a mixture of essential and nonessential amino acids as well as taurine. The amino acid composition has been specifically formulated to provide a well-tolerated nitrogen source for nutritional support and therapy for infants and young children. When administered in conjunction with a cysteine hydrochloride additive, Aminosyn-PF 7% results in plasma amino acid concentrations approximating a profile consistent with that of a breast-fed infant. 
                  The rationale for Aminosyn-PF 7% is based on the observation of inadequate levels of essential amino acids in the plasma of infants receiving total parenteral nutrition (TPN) using conventional amino acid solutions. 
                  Clinical studies in infants who required TPN therapy showed that infusion of Aminosyn-PF 7% resulted in plasma amino acid concentrations approximating those of normal breast or formula fed infants. In addition, weight gains, nitrogen balance, and serum protein concentrations were consistent with an improving nutritional status.
                  When infused with hypertonic dextrose as a calorie source, supplemented with cysteine hydrochloride, electrolytes, vitamins, and minerals, Aminosyn-PF 7% provides TPN for infants and young children, with the exception of essential fatty acids. 
                  It is thought that the acetate from lysine acetate under the conditions of parenteral nutrition, does not impact net acid-base balance when renal and respiratory functions are normal. Clinical evidence seems to support this thinking; however, confirmatory experimental evidence is not available. The amounts of sodium and acetate in Aminosyn-PF 7% are not of clinical significance. 
                  The addition of a cysteine hydrochloride additive will contribute to the chloride load. 
                  The electrolyte content of any additives that are introduced should be carefully considered and included in input computations. 
                  The human newborn conjugates bile with taurine which becomes the primary method of biliary excretion. Taurine deficiency because of its effect on bile salt conjugation and, therefore, on bile salt flow may be of major importance in the genesis of cholestasis. Taurine has also been shown to play a role in central nervous system development.
               
               
            
         