
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS

               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           Avoid concurrent use of doxorubicin HCl with inhibitors and inducers of CYP3A4, CYP2D6, and/or P-gp (7.1).

                           Do not administer doxorubicin HCl in combination with trastuzumab due to increased risk of cardiac dysfunction (5.1, 7.2).

                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 Effect of CYP3A4 Inhibitors, Inducers and P-gp

                     
                        Doxorubicin is a major substrate of cytochrome P450 CYP3A4 and CYP2D6, and P-glycoprotein (P-gp). Clinically significant interactions have been reported with inhibitors of CYP3A4, CYP2D6, and/or P-gp (e.g., verapamil), resulting in increased concentration and clinical effect of doxorubicin. Inducers of CYP3A4 (e.g., phenobarbital, phenytoin, St. John's Wort) and P-gp inducers may decrease the concentration of doxorubicin. Avoid concurrent use of doxorubicin HCl with inhibitors and inducers of CYP3A4, CYP2D6, or P-gp.

                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 Trastuzumab

                     
                        Concurrent use of trastuzumab and doxorubicin HCl results in an increased risk of cardiac dysfunction. Avoid concurrent administration of doxorubicin and trastuzumab. The appropriate interval for administering doxorubicin following trastuzumab therapy has not been determined [see Warnings and Precautions (5.1)].
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3 Paclitaxel

                     
                        Paclitaxel, when given prior to doxorubicin HCl, increases the plasma-concentrations of doxorubicin and its metabolites. Administer doxorubicin HCl prior to paclitaxel if used concomitantly.

                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4 Dexrazoxane

                     
                        Do not administer dexrazoxane as a cardioprotectant at the initiation of doxorubicin HCl-containing chemotherapy regimens. In a randomized trial in women with metastatic breast cancer, initiation of dexrazoxane with doxorubicin HCl-based chemotherapy resulted in a significantly lower tumor response rate (48% vs. 63%; p=0.007) and shorter time to progression than in women who received doxorubicin HCl-based chemotherapy alone.

                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.5 6-Mercaptopurine

                     
                        Doxorubicin HCl may potentiate 6-mercaptopurine-induced hepatotoxicity. In 11 patients with refractory leukemia treated with 6-mercaptopurine (500 mg/m2 intravenously daily for 5 days per cycle every 2 to 3 weeks) and doxorubicin HCl (50 mg/m2 intravenous once per cycle every 2 to 3 weeks) alone or with vincristine and prednisone, all developed hepatic dysfunction manifested by elevations of total serum bilirubin, alkaline phosphatase and aspartate aminotransferase.

                     
                     
                  
               
            
         