
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1	Mechanism of Action
                     
                        VICTRELIS is a direct acting antiviral drug against the hepatitis C virus [see Microbiology (12.4)].
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Evaluation of Effect of VICTRELIS on QTc Interval
                              
                              The effect of boceprevir 800 mg and 1200 mg on QTc interval was evaluated in a randomized, multiple-dose, placebo-, and active-controlled (moxifloxacin 400 mg) 4-way crossover thorough QT study in 36 healthy subjects. In the study with demonstrated ability to detect small effects, the upper bound of the one-sided 95% confidence interval for the largest placebo-adjusted, baseline-corrected QTc based on individual correction method (QTcI) was below 10 ms, the threshold for regulatory concern. The dose of 1200 mg yields a boceprevir maximum exposure increase of approximately 15% which may not cover exposures due to coadministration with strong CYP3A4 inhibitors or use in patients with severe hepatic impairment.  However, at the doses studied in the thorough QT study, no apparent concentration-QT relationship was identified. Thus, there is no expectation of a QTc effect under a higher exposure scenario.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        VICTRELIS capsules contain a 1:1 mixture of two diastereomers, SCH534128 and SCH534129. In plasma the diastereomer ratio changes to 2:1, favoring the active diastereomer, SCH534128. Plasma concentrations of boceprevir described below consist of both diastereomers SCH534128 and SCH534129, unless otherwise specified.
                        In healthy subjects who received 800 mg three times daily alone, boceprevir drug exposure was characterized by AUC(т) of 5408 ng × hr per mL (n=71), Cmax of 1723 ng per mL (n=71), and Cmin of 88 ng per mL (n=71). Pharmacokinetic results were similar between healthy subjects and HCV-infected subjects.
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Absorption
                              
                              Boceprevir was absorbed following oral administration with a median Tmax of 2 hours. Steady state AUC, Cmax, and Cmin increased in a less-than-dose-proportional manner and individual exposures overlapped substantially at 800 mg and 1200 mg, suggesting diminished absorption at higher doses. Accumulation is minimal (0.8- to 1.5-fold) and pharmacokinetic steady state is achieved after approximately 1 day of three times daily dosing.
                              The absolute bioavailability of boceprevir has not been studied.
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Effects of Food on Oral Absorption
                                    
                                    VICTRELIS should be administered with food. Food enhanced the exposure of boceprevir by up to 65% at the 800 mg three times daily dose, relative to the fasting state. The bioavailability of boceprevir was similar regardless of meal type (e.g., high-fat vs. low-fat) or whether taken 5 minutes prior to eating, during a meal, or immediately following completion of the meal. Therefore, VICTRELIS may be taken without regard to either meal type or timing of the meal.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Distribution
                              
                              Boceprevir has a mean apparent volume of distribution (Vd/F) of approximately 772 L at steady state in healthy subjects. Human plasma protein binding is approximately 75% following a single dose of boceprevir 800 mg. Boceprevir is administered as an approximately equal mixture of two diastereomers, SCH534128 and SCH534129, which rapidly interconvert in plasma. The predominant diastereomer, SCH534128, is pharmacologically active and the other diastereomer is inactive.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Metabolism
                              
                              Studies in vitro indicate that boceprevir primarily undergoes metabolism through the aldo-keto reductase (AKR)-mediated pathway to ketone-reduced metabolites that are inactive against HCV. After a single 800-mg oral dose of 14C-boceprevir, the most abundant circulating metabolites were a diastereomeric mixture of ketone-reduced metabolites with a mean exposure approximately 4-fold greater than that of boceprevir. Boceprevir also undergoes, to a lesser extent, oxidative metabolism mediated by CYP3A4/5.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Drug Interactions
                              
                              Drug interaction studies were performed with boceprevir and drugs likely to be coadministered or drugs commonly used as probes for pharmacokinetic interactions. The effects of coadministration of boceprevir on AUC, Cmax and Cmin are summarized in Table 6 (effects of coadministered drugs on boceprevir) and Table 7 (effects of boceprevir on coadministered drugs).
                              



                           



                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Elimination
                              
                              Boceprevir is eliminated with a mean plasma half-life (t½) of approximately 3.4 hours. Boceprevir has a mean total body clearance (CL/F) of approximately 161 L per hr. Following a single 800 mg oral dose of 14C-boceprevir, approximately 79% and 9% of the dose was excreted in feces and urine, respectively, with approximately 8% and 3% of the dosed radiocarbon eliminated as boceprevir in feces and urine. The data indicate that boceprevir is eliminated primarily by the liver.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Special Populations
                              
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Hepatic Impairment
                                    
                                    The pharmacokinetics of boceprevir was studied in adult non-HCV infected subjects with normal, mild (Child-Pugh score 5 to 6), moderate (Child-Pugh score 7 to 9), and severe (Child-Pugh score 10 to 12) hepatic impairment following a single 400 mg dose of VICTRELIS. The mean AUC of the active diastereomer of boceprevir (SCH534128) was 32% and 45% higher in subjects with moderate and severe hepatic impairment, respectively, relative to subjects with normal hepatic function. Mean Cmax values for SCH534128 were 28% and 62% higher in moderate and severe hepatic impairment, respectively. Subjects with mild hepatic impairment had similar SCH534128 exposure as subjects with normal hepatic function. A similar magnitude of effect is anticipated for boceprevir. No dosage adjustment of VICTRELIS is recommended for patients with hepatic impairment. For additional information in patients with compensated cirrhosis, see Use in Specific Populations (8.7)
                                       . [See the prescribing information for peginterferon alfa for use in patients with hepatic decompensation.]
                                    
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Renal Impairment
                                    
                                    The pharmacokinetics of boceprevir was studied in non-HCV-infected subjects with end-stage renal disease (ESRD) requiring hemodialysis following a single 800 mg dose of VICTRELIS. The mean AUC of boceprevir was 10% lower in subjects with ESRD requiring hemodialysis relative to subjects with normal renal function. Hemodialysis removed less than 1% of the boceprevir dose. No dosage adjustment of VICTRELIS is required in patients with any degree of renal impairment.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Gender
                                    
                                    Population pharmacokinetic analysis of VICTRELIS indicated that gender had no apparent effect on exposure.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Race
                                    
                                    Population pharmacokinetic analysis of VICTRELIS indicated that race had no apparent effect on exposure.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Age
                                    
                                    Population pharmacokinetic analysis of VICTRELIS showed that boceprevir exposure was not different across subjects 19 to 65 years old.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.4 Microbiology
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Mechanism of Action
                              
                              Boceprevir is an inhibitor of the HCV NS3/4A protease that is necessary for the proteolytic cleavage of the HCV encoded polyprotein into mature forms of the NS4A, NS4B, NS5A and NS5B proteins. Boceprevir covalently, yet reversibly, binds to the NS3 protease active site serine (S139) through an (alpha)-ketoamide functional group to inhibit viral replication in HCV-infected host cells. In a biochemical assay, boceprevir inhibited the activity of recombinant HCV genotype 1a and 1b NS3/4A protease enzymes, with Ki values of 14 nM for each subtype.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Activity in Cell Culture
                              
                              The EC50 and EC90 values for boceprevir against an HCV replicon constructed from a single genotype 1b isolate were approximately 200 nM and 400 nM, respectively, in a 72-hour cell culture assay. Boceprevir cell culture anti-HCV activity was approximately 2-fold lower for an HCV replicon derived from a single genotype 1a isolate, relative to the 1b isolate-derived replicon. In replicon assays, boceprevir had approximately 2-fold reduced activity against a genotype 2a isolate relative to genotype 1a and 1b replicon isolates. In a biochemical assay, boceprevir had approximately 3- and 2-fold reduced activity against NS3/4A proteases derived from single isolates representative of HCV genotypes 2 and 3a, respectively, relative to a genotype 1b-derived NS3/4A protease. The presence of 50% human serum reduced the cell culture anti-HCV activity of boceprevir by approximately 3-fold.
                              Evaluation of varying combinations of boceprevir and interferon alfa-2b that produced 90% suppression of replicon RNA in cell culture showed additivity of effect without evidence of antagonism.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Resistance 
                              
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       In HCV Replicon Cell Culture and Biochemical Studies
                                    
                                    The activity of boceprevir against the HCV genotype 1a replicon was reduced (2- to 6-fold) by the following amino acid substitutions in the NS3 protease domain: V36A/L/M, Q41R, T54A/S, V55A, R155K and V158I. A greater than 10-fold reduction in boceprevir susceptibility was conferred by the amino acid substitutions R155T and A156S. The V55I and D168N single substitutions did not reduce sensitivity to boceprevir. The following double amino acid substitutions conferred more than 10-fold reduced sensitivity to boceprevir: V55A+I170V, T54S+R155K, R155K+D168N, R155T+D168N and V36M+R155K.
                                    The activity of boceprevir against the HCV genotype 1b replicon was reduced (2- to 8-fold) by the following amino acid substitutions in the NS3 protease domain: V36A/M, Q41R, F43S, T54A/G/S, V55A/I, R155K, V158I, V170M and M175L. A greater than 10-fold reduction in boceprevir susceptibility was conferred by the amino acid substitutions A156S/T/V, V170A and V36M+R155K. The D168V single substitution did not reduce sensitivity to boceprevir.
                                    Additional NS3 protease domain substitutions that have not been evaluated in the HCV replicon but have been shown to reduce boceprevir activity against the HCV NS3/4A protease in a biochemical assay include F43C and R155G/I/M/Q.
                                    Resistance-associated amino acid substitutions for HCV genotype 1a and 1b observed in clinical trials are presented in Table 8.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       In Clinical Studies
                                    
                                    An as-treated, pooled genotypic resistance analysis was conducted for subjects who received four weeks of PegIntron/REBETOL followed by VICTRELIS 800 mg three times daily in combination with PegIntron/REBETOL in two Phase 3 studies, SPRINT-2 and RESPOND-2. Among subjects treated with VICTRELIS who did not achieve a sustained virologic response, and for whom samples were analyzed, 53% had one or more specific post-baseline, treatment-emergent NS3 protease domain amino acid substitutions detected by a population-based sequencing assay (Table 8). Similar patterns of treatment-emergent substitutions were observed in P06086, a Phase 3 clinical trial in previously untreated CHC subjects with genotype 1 infection comparing the use of ESA to ribavirin dose reduction for initial management of anemia during therapy with VICTRELIS in combination with PegIntron/REBETOL. Nearly all of these substitutions have been shown to reduce boceprevir anti-HCV activity in cell culture or biochemical assays. Among subjects treated with VICTRELIS in SPRINT-2 and RESPOND-2 who did not achieve SVR and for whom post-baseline samples were analyzed, 31% of PegIntron/REBETOL-responsive subjects, as defined by greater than or equal to 1-log10 decline in viral load at Treatment Week 4 (end of 4-week PegIntron/REBETOL lead-in period), had detectable treatment-emergent substitutions, compared to 68% of subjects with less than 1-log10 decline in viral load at Treatment Week 4. Clear patterns of boceprevir treatment-emergent substitutions in the NS3 helicase domain or NS4A coding regions of the HCV genome were not observed.
                                    


                                 



                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Persistence of Resistance-Associated Substitutions
                              
                              Data from an ongoing, long-term follow-up study of subjects who did not achieve SVR in Phase 2 trials with VICTRELIS, with a median duration of follow-up of approximately 2 years, indicate that HCV populations harboring certain post-baseline,  treatment-emergent substitutions may decline in relative abundance over time. However, among those subjects with available data, one or more treatment-emergent substitutions remained detectable with a population-based sequencing assay in 25% of subjects after 2.5 years of follow-up. The most common NS3 substitutions detected after 2.5 years of follow-up were T54S and R155K. The lack of detection of a substitution based on a population-based assay does not necessarily indicate that viral populations carrying that substitution have declined to a background level that may have existed prior to treatment. The long-term clinical impact of the emergence or persistence of boceprevir-resistance-associated substitutions is unknown. No data are available regarding the efficacy of VICTRELIS among subjects who were previously exposed to VICTRELIS, or who previously failed treatment with a regimen containing VICTRELIS.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Effect of Baseline HCV Polymorphisms on Treatment Response
                              
                              A pooled analysis was conducted to explore the association between the detection of baseline NS3/4A amino acid polymorphisms and treatment outcome in the two Phase 3 studies, SPRINT-2 and RESPOND-2.
                              Baseline resistance associated polymorphisms were detected in 7% of subjects by a population-based sequencing method. Overall, the presence of these polymorphisms alone did not impact SVR rates in subjects treated with VICTRELIS. However, among subjects with a relatively poor response to PegIntron/REBETOL during the 4-week lead-in period, the efficacy of VICTRELIS appeared to be reduced for those who had V36M, T54A, T54S, V55A or R155K detected at baseline. Subjects with these baseline polymorphisms and reduced response to PegIntron/REBETOL represented approximately 1% of the total number of subjects treated with VICTRELIS.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Cross-Resistance
                              
                              Many of the treatment-emergent NS3 amino acid substitutions detected in subjects treated with VICTRELIS who did not achieve SVR in the Phase 3 clinical trials have been demonstrated to reduce the anti-HCV activity of other HCV NS3/4A protease inhibitors. The impact of prior exposure to VICTRELIS or treatment failure on the efficacy of other HCV NS3/4A protease inhibitors has not been studied. The efficacy of VICTRELIS has not been established for patients with a history of exposure to other NS3/4A protease inhibitors. Cross-resistance is not expected between VICTRELIS and interferons, or VICTRELIS and ribavirin.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.5	Pharmacogenomics
                     
                        A genetic variant near the gene encoding interferon-lambda-3 (IL28B rs12979860, a C to T change) is a strong predictor of response to PegIntron/REBETOL. IL28B rs12979860 was genotyped in 653 of 1048 (62%) subjects in SPRINT-2 (previously untreated) and 259 of 394 (66%) subjects in RESPOND-2 (previous partial responders and relapsers) [see Clinical Studies (14) for trial descriptions]. Among subjects that received at least one dose of placebo or VICTRELIS (Modified-Intent-to-Treat population), SVR rates tended to be lower in subjects with the C/T and T/T genotypes compared to those with the C/C genotype, particularly among previously untreated subjects receiving 48 weeks of PegIntron and REBETOL (see Table 9). Among previous treatment failures, subjects of all genotypes appeared to have higher SVR rates with regimens containing VICTRELIS. The results of this retrospective subgroup analysis should be viewed with caution because of the small sample size and potential differences in demographic or clinical characteristics of the substudy population relative to the overall trial population.
                        


