
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  Intravascular injection of a radiopaque diagnostic agent opacifies
those vessels in the path of flow of the contrast medium, permitting
radiographic visualization of the internal structures of the human
body until significant hemodilution occurs.
                  Following intravascular injection, radiopaque diagnostic
agents are immediately diluted in the circulating plasma. Calculations
of apparent volume of distribution at steady-state indicate that iopamidol
is distributed between the circulating blood volume and other extracellular
fluid; there appears to be no significant deposition of iopamidol
in tissues. Uniform distribution of iopamidol in extracellular fluid
is reflected by its demonstrated utility in contrast enhancement of
computed tomographic imaging of the head and body following intravenous
administration.
                  The pharmacokinetics
of intravenously administered iopamidol in normal subjects conform
to an open two-compartment model with first order elimination (a rapid
alpha phase for drug distribution and a slow beta phase for drug elimination).
The elimination serum or plasma half-life is approximately two hours;
the half-life is not dose dependent. No significant metabolism, deiodination,
or biotransformation occurs.
                  Iopamidol
is excreted mainly through the kidneys following intravascular administration.
In patients with impaired renal function, the elimination half-life
is prolonged dependent upon the degree of impairment. In the absence
of renal dysfunction, the cumulative urinary excretion for Iopamidol,
expressed as a percentage of administered intravenous dose is approximately
35 to 40 percent at 60 minutes, 80 to 90 percent at 8 hours, and 90
percent or more in the 72- to 96-hour period after administration.
In normal subjects, approximately one percent or less of the administered
dose appears in cumulative 72- to 96-hour fecal specimens.
                  ISOVUE may be visualized in the renal parenchyma
within 30-60 seconds following rapid intravenous administration. Opacification
of the calyces and pelves in patients with normal renal function becomes
apparent within 1 to 3 minutes, with optimum contrast occurring between
5 and 15 minutes. In patients with renal impairment, contrast visualization
may be delayed.
                  Iopamidol displays
little tendency to bind to serum or plasma proteins.
                  No evidence of in vivo complement activation has been found
in normal subjects.
                  Animal studies
indicate that iopamidol does not cross the blood-brain barrier to
any significant extent following intravascular administration.
                  ISOVUE (lopamidol Injection) enhances
computed tomographic brain imaging through augmentation of radiographic
efficiency. The degree of enhancement of visualization of tissue density
is directly related to the iodine content in an administered dose;
peak iodine blood levels occur immediately following rapid injection
of the dose. These levels fall rapidly within five to ten minutes.
This can be accounted for by the dilution in the vascular and extracellular
fluid compartments which causes an initial sharp fall in plasma concentration.
Equilibration with the extracellular compartments is reached in about
ten minutes, thereafter the fall becomes exponential. Maximum contrast
enhancement frequently occurs after peak blood iodine levels are reached.
The delay in maximum contrast enhancement can range from five to forty
minutes depending on the peak iodine levels achieved and the cell
type of the lesion. This lag suggests that radiographic contrast enhancement
is at least in part dependent on the accumulation of iodine within
the lesion and outside the blood pool, although the mechanism by which
this occurs is not clear. The radiographic enhancement of nontumoral
lesions, such as arteriovenous malformations and aneurysms, is probably
dependent on the iodine content of the circulating blood pool.
                  In CECT head imaging, ISOVUE (lopamidol
Injection) does not accumulate in normal brain tissue due to the presence
of the blood-brain barrier. The increase in x-ray absorption in normal
brain is due to the presence of contrast agent within the blood pool.
A break in the blood-brain barrier such as occurs in malignant tumors
of the brain allows the accumulation of the contrast medium within
the interstitial tissue of the tumor. Adjacent normal brain tissue
does not contain the contrast medium.
                  In nonneural tissues (during computed tomography of
the body), iopamidol diffuses rapidly from the vascular into the extravascular
space. Increase in x-ray absorption is related to blood flow, concentration
of the contrast medium, and extraction of the contrast medium by interstitial
tissue of tumors since no barrier exists. Contrast enhancement is
thus due to the relative differences in extravascular diffusion between
normal and abnormal tissue, quite different from that in the brain.
                  The pharmacokinetics of iopamidol in both
normal and abnormal tissue have been shown to be variable. Contrast
enhancement appears to be greatest soon after administration of the
contrast medium, and following intraarterial rather than intravenous
administration. Thus, greatest enhancement can be detected by a series
of consecutive two- to three-second scans performed just after injection
(within 30 to 90 seconds), i.e., dynamic computed tomographic imaging.
               
               
            
         