
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  CLINOLIPID injection administered intravenously provides biologically utilizable source of calories and essential fatty acids.
               
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Fatty acids serve as an important substrate for energy production. The most common mechanism of action for energy production derived from fatty acid metabolism is beta oxidation. Fatty acids are important for membrane structure and function, precursors for bioactive molecules (such as prostaglandins), and as regulators of gene expression.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        Infused essential fatty acids are synthesized into higher derivative fatty acids. Olive oil contains significant amounts of alpha-tocopherol that contributes to Vitamin E status.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        
                           Metabolism and excretion
                        
                        The fatty acids, phospholipids, and glycerol found in lipid emulsions are metabolized by cells to carbon dioxide and water. The metabolism of these substances results in the generation of energy in the form of adenosine triphosphate (ATP). Some fatty acids are stored in the body in fat tissue, cell membranes, or as intracellular triglycerides. There is constant turn-over of these tissues, with the result that the lipid components are eventually metabolized to carbon dioxide and water. Carbon dioxide is expired through the lungs. Water is excreted through the kidneys or lost through evaporation/expiration through the skin, lungs, and other tissue surfaces. Some lipids (i.e., phospholipids, cholesterol, and bile acids) are excreted through the biliary system.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         