
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
                  Drug interaction studies have not been conducted with TUZISTRA XR.
               
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           Opioids, antihistamines, antipsychotics, anti-anxiety agents, or other CNS depressants: May cause additive CNS depression. (7.1)
                           
                           MAOIs or tricyclic antidepressants: May increase the effect of either the antidepressant or codeine. (7.2)
                           
                           Anticholinergic drugs: Use with caution.  Additive adverse effects resulting from cholinergic blockage (e.g., xerostomia, blurred vision, or constipation) may occur. (7.3)
                           
                           Inhibitors or inducers of metabolic enzymes: Concomitant use of cytochrome P450 2D6 and 3A4 enzyme inhibitors or inducers may result in an altered response to codeine, monitor antitussive activity. Chlorpheniramine may inhibit the hepatic metabolism of phenytoin, monitor phenytoin toxicity.(7.4)
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1   Opioids, Antihistamines, Antipsychotics, Anti-anxiety Agents, or Other CNS Depressants (Including Alcohol)
                     
                        The use of opioids, antihistamines, antipsychotics, anti-anxiety agents, or other CNS depressants (including alcohol) concomitantly with TUZISTRA XR may cause an additive CNS depressant effect and should be avoided.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2   Monoamine Oxidase Inhibitors and Tricyclic Antidepressants
                     
                        Do not prescribe TUZISTRA XR if the patient is taking a monoamine oxidase inhibitor (MAOI) (i.e., certain drugs used for depression, psychiatric or emotional conditions, or Parkinson’s disease), or for 2 weeks after stopping a MAOI drug.  The use of MAOIs or tricyclic antidepressants with codeine preparations may increase the effect of either the antidepressant or codeine.
                        
                            .
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3   Anticholinergic Drugs​
                     
                        Codeine and chlorpheniramine should be administered cautiously to persons receiving other anticholinergic drugs in order to avoid paralytic ileus and excessive anticholinergic effects.
                        Additive adverse effects resulting from cholinergic blockade (e.g., xerostomia, blurred vision, or constipation) may occur when anticholinergic drugs are administered with chlorpheniramine.
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4   Inhibitors or Inducers of Metabolic Enzymes
                     
                        Codeine is metabolized by the CYP2D6 and CYP3A4 isoenzymes [see 
                           
                              Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)]
                           
                           . The concurrent use of drugs that preferentially induce codeine N-demethylation (via CYP3A4) may increase the plasma concentrations of codeine’s inactive metabolite norcodeine.  Drugs that inhibit codeine O-demethylation (via CYP2D6) may decrease the plasma concentration of codeine’s active metabolites, morphine and morphine-6-glucuronide.  The contribution of these active metabolites to the overall antitussive effect of codeine is not known but should be considered.
                        Adverse event reports in the literature suggest a possible drug interaction involving increased serum phenytoin levels and phenytoin toxicity when chlorpheniramine and phenytoin are co-administered.  The exact mechanism for this interaction is not known, however it is believed that chlorpheniramine may inhibit the hepatic metabolism of phenytoin.  Patients should be monitored for evidence of phenytoin toxicity such as ataxia, hyperreflexia, nystagmus and tremor when these two drugs are co-administered.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         