


Drug Interactions




Vasoconstrictors
D.H.E. 45® (dihydroergotamine mesylate) Injection, USP should not be used with peripheral vasoconstrictors because the combination may cause synergistic elevation of blood pressure.® (dihydroergotamine mesylate) Injection, USP should not be used with peripheral vasoconstrictors because the combination may cause synergistic elevation of blood pressure.






Sumatriptan
Sumatriptan has been reported to cause coronary artery vasospasm, and its effect could be additive with D.H.E. 45® (dihydroergotamine mesylate) Injection, USP. Sumatriptan and D.H.E. 45® (dihydroergotamine mesylate) Injection, USP should not be taken within 24 hours of each other. (See CONTRAINDICATIONSCONTRAINDICATIONS.)® (dihydroergotamine mesylate) Injection, USP. Sumatriptan and D.H.E. 45






Beta Blockers
Although the results of a clinical study did not indicate a safety problem associated with the administration of D.H.E. 45® (dihydroergotamine mesylate) Injection, USP to subjects already receiving propranolol, there have been reports that propranolol may potentiate the vasoconstrictive action of ergotamine by blocking the vasodilating property of epinephrine.® (dihydroergotamine mesylate) Injection, USP to subjects already receiving propranolol, there have been reports that propranolol may potentiate the vasoconstrictive action of ergotamine by blocking the vasodilating property of epinephrine.






Nicotine
Nicotine may provoke vasoconstriction in some patients, predisposing to a greater ischemic response to ergot therapy.CYP 3A4 Inhibitors (e.g. Macrolide Antibiotics and Protease Inhibitors) See CONTRAINDICATIONSCONTRAINDICATIONS and WARNINGSWARNINGS.CYP 3A4 Inhibitors (e.g. Macrolide Antibiotics and Protease Inhibitors) See CONTRAINDICATIONSCONTRAINDICATIONS and WARNINGSWARNINGS.






SSRI’s
Weakness, hyperreflexia, and incoordination have been reported rarely when 5-HT1 agonists have been co-administered with SSRI’s (e.g., fluoxetine, fluvoxamine, paroxetine, sertraline). There have been no reported cases from spontaneous reports of drug interaction between SSRI’s and D.H.E. 45® (dihydroergotamine mesylate) Injection, USP.1 agonists have been co-administered with SSRI’s (e.g., fluoxetine, fluvoxamine, paroxetine, sertraline). There have been no reported cases from spontaneous reports of drug interaction between SSRI’s and D.H.E. 45






Oral Contraceptives
The effect of oral contraceptives on the pharmacokinetics of D.H.E. 45® (dihydroergotamine mesylate) Injection, USP has not been studied.® (dihydroergotamine mesylate) Injection, USP has not been studied.




