
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           Drug interactions:
                        
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Concomitant administration of ACE inhibitors with potassium-sparing diuretics has been associated with severe hyperkalemia.
                                            ACE inhibitors:
                              
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Concomitant administration may lead to severe hyperkalemia.
                                            Angiotensin II antagonists, aldosterone blockers, heparin, low molecular weight heparin, and other drugs known to cause hyperkalemia:
                              
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Potentiation of orthostatic hypotension may occur.
                                            Alcohol, barbiturates, or narcotics:
                              
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Intensified electrolyte depletion, particularly hypokalemia, may occur.
                                            Corticosteroids, ACTH:
                              
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Spironolactone reduces the vascular responsiveness to norepinephrine. Therefore, caution should be exercised in the management of patients subjected to regional or general anesthesia while they are being treated with spironolactone.
                                            Pressor amines (e.g., norepinephrine):
                              
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Possible increased responsiveness to the muscle relaxant may result.
                                            Skeletal muscle relaxants, nondepolarizing (e.g., tubocurarine):
                              
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Lithium generally should not be given with diuretics. Diuretic agents reduce the renal clearance of lithium and add a high risk of lithium toxicity.
                                            Lithium:
                              
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              In some patients, the administration of an NSAID can reduce the diuretic, natriuretic, and antihypertensive effect of loop, potassium-sparing, and thiazide diuretics. Combination of NSAIDs, e.g., indomethacin, with potassium-sparing diuretics has been associated with severe hyperkalemia. Therefore, when spironolactone and NSAIDs are used concomitantly, the patient should be observed closely to determine if the desired effect of the diuretic is obtained.
                                            Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs):
                              
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Spironolactone has been shown to increase the half-life of digoxin. This may result in increased serum digoxin levels and subsequent digitalis toxicity. It may be necessary to reduce the maintenance and digitalization doses when spironolactone is administered, and the patient should be carefully monitored to avoid over- or under-digitalization.
                                            Digoxin:
                              
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Hyperkalemic metabolic acidosis has been reported in patients given spironolactone concurrently with cholestyramine
                                            Cholestyramine:
                                 .
                              
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               