
               
               
               
7 DRUG INTERACTIONS

               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           PDE5 inhibitors: potentiation of hypotensive effects of organic nitrates; concomitant use is contraindicated. (4.1, 7.1)
                           Antihypertensives: possible additive hypotensive effects. (7.2)
                           Aspirin: increased nitroglycerin levels. (7.3)
                           Tissue-type Plasminogen Activator (t-PA): decreased thrombolytic effect. (7.4)
                           Heparin: anticoagulant effect of heparin may be reduced. Monitor APTT. (7.5)
                           Ergotamine: increased bioavailability of ergotamine. (7.6)
                           Alcohol: Additive vasodilatory effects to nitroglycerin. Consumption of alcohol should be avoided. (7.7)
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
7.1 PDE5 inhibitors

                     
                        Phosphodiesterase type 5 (PDE5) inhibitors such as sildenafil, vardenafil, and tadalafil have been shown to potentiate the hypotensive effects of organic nitrates.
                        The time course of the interaction appears to be related to the half-life of the PDE5 inhibitor, however, the dose dependence of this interaction has not been studied. Use of RECTIV within a few days of PDE5 inhibitors is contraindicated.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
7.2 Antihypertensives

                     
                        Patients receiving antihypertensive drugs, beta-adrenergic blockers, and other nitrates should be observed for possible additive hypotensive effects when using RECTIV. Marked orthostatic hypotension has been reported when calcium channel blockers and organic nitrates were used concomitantly.
                        Beta-blockers blunt the reflex tachycardia produced by nitroglycerin without preventing its hypotensive effects. If beta-blockers are used with RECTIV in patients with angina pectoris, additional hypotensive effects may occur.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
7.3 Aspirin

                     
                        Coadministration of aspirin (at doses between 500 mg and 1000 mg) and nitroglycerin has been reported to result in increased nitroglycerin maximum concentrations by as much as 67% and AUC by 73% when administered as a single dose. The pharmacological effects of RECTIV may be enhanced by concomitant administration of aspirin.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
7.4 Tissue-type Plasminogen Activator (t-PA)

                     
                        Intravenous administration of nitroglycerin decreases the thrombolytic effect of tissue-type plasminogen activator (t-PA). Plasma levels of t-PA are reduced when coadministered with nitroglycerin. Therefore, caution should be observed in patients receiving RECTIV during t-PA therapy.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
7.5 Heparin

                     
                        Although an interaction has been reported between intravenous heparin and intravenous nitroglycerin (resulting in a decrease in the anticoagulant effect of heparin), the data are not consistent. If patients are to receive intravenous heparin and RECTIV concurrently, the anticoagulation status of the patient must be checked.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
7.6 Ergotamine

                     
                        Oral administration of nitroglycerin markedly decreases the first-pass metabolism of dihydroergotamine and consequently increases its oral bioavailability. Ergotamine is known to precipitate angina pectoris. Therefore the possibility of ergotism in patients receiving RECTIV should be considered.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
7.7 Alcohol

                     
                        The vasodilating effects of nitroglycerin have been shown to be additive to the effects observed with alcohol.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         