
               
               
               12.  CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Kuvan is a synthetic form of BH4, the cofactor for the enzyme phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH). PAH hydroxylates Phe through an oxidative reaction to form tyrosine. In patients with PKU, PAH activity is absent or deficient. Treatment with BH4 can activate residual PAH enzyme activity, improve the normal oxidative metabolism of Phe, and decrease Phe levels in some patients.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        In PKU patients who are responsive to BH4 treatment, blood Phe levels decrease within 24 hours after a single administration of sapropterin dihydrochloride, although maximal effect on Phe level may take up to a month, depending on the patient. A single daily dose of Kuvan is adequate to maintain stable blood Phe levels over a 24-hour period. Twelve patients with blood Phe levels ranging from 516 to 986 μmol/L (mean 747 ± 153 μmol/L) were assessed with 24‑hour blood Phe level monitoring following a daily morning dose of 10 mg/kg per day. The blood Phe level remained stable during a 24‑hour observation period. No substantial increases in blood Phe levels were observed following food intake throughout the 24-hour period.
                        Kuvan dose-response relationship was studied in an open-label, forced titration study at doses of 5 mg/kg per day, then 20 mg/kg per day, and then 10 mg/kg per day (Study 3) [see Clinical Studies (14.1)]. Individual blood Phe levels were highly variable among patients. The mean blood Phe level observed at the end of each 2-week dosing period decreased as the dose of sapropterin dihydrochloride increased, demonstrating an inverse relationship between the dose of sapropterin dihydrochloride and mean blood Phe levels.  
                        
                           Effects of Kuvan on the QTc interval 
                        
                        A thorough QTc study was performed in 56 healthy adults.  This randomized, placebo and active controlled crossover study was conducted to determine if a single supra-therapeutic (100 mg/kg) dose of Kuvan or a single therapeutic dose (20 mg/kg) of Kuvan had an effect on cardiac repolarization. In this study, Kuvan was administered after dissolving tablets in water under fed condition. This study demonstrated a dose-dependent shortening of the QT interval. The maximum placebo-subtracted mean change from baseline of the QTc interval was -3.69 and -8.32 ms (lower bound of 90% CI: -5.3 and -10.6 ms) at 20 and 100 mg/kg, respectively.   
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        Studies in healthy volunteers have shown comparable absorption of sapropterin when tablets are dissolved in water or orange juice and taken under fasted conditions. Administration of dissolved tablets after a high-fat/high-calorie meal resulted in mean increases in Cmax of 84% and AUC of 87% (dissolved in water). However, there was extensive variability in individual subject values for Cmax and AUC across the different modes of administration and meal conditions. In the clinical trials of Kuvan, drug was administered in the morning as a dissolved tablet without regard to meals. The mean elimination half-life in PKU patients was approximately 6.7 hours (range 3.9 to 17 hr), comparable with values seen in healthy subjects (range 3.0 to 5.3 hr).  
                        A study in healthy adults with 10 mg/kg of Kuvan demonstrated the absorption via intact tablet administration was 40% greater than via dissolved tablet administration under fasted conditions based on AUC0-t. The administration of intact tablets under fed conditions resulted in an approximately 43% increase in the extent of absorption compared to fasted conditions based on AUC0-t. 
                        Population pharmacokinetic analysis of sapropterin including patients from 1 month to 49 years of age showed that body weight is the only covariate substantially affecting clearance or distribution volume (see Table 4). Pharmacokinetics in patients >49 years of age have not been studied.
                        
                           Table 4.  Apparent Plasma Clearance by Age 
                        
                        


                        



                           *Evaluated at 20 mg/kg per day dose 
                        
                           †Evaluated at 5, 10, or 20 mg/kg per day doses
                        
                           Metabolism
                        
                        Sapropterin is a synthetic form of tetrahydrobiopterin (BH4) and is expected to be metabolized and recycled by the same endogenous enzymes. In vivo endogenous BH4 is converted to quinoid dihydrobiopterin and is metabolized to dihydrobiopterin and biopterin. The enzymes dihydrofolate reductase and dihydropteridine reductase are responsible for the metabolism and recycling of BH4.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         