


CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY




Pharmacodynamics
Naproxen is a nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID) with analgesic and antipyretic properties. The mechanism of action of the naproxen anion, like that of other NSAIDs, is not completely understood but may be related to prostaglandin synthetase inhibition.






Pharmacokinetics
Naproxen itself is rapidly and completely absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract with an in vivo bioavailability of 95%. The elimination half-life of naproxen ranges from 12 to 17 hours. Steady-state levels of naproxen are reached in 4 to 5 days and the degree of naproxen accumulation is consistent with this half-life.in vivo bioavailability of 95%. The elimination half-life of naproxen ranges from 12 to 17 hours. Steady-state levels of naproxen are reached in 4 to 5 days and the degree of naproxen accumulation is consistent with this half-life.




Absorption
After administration of naproxen tablets, peak plasma levels are attained in 2 to 4 hours.When 500 mg of naproxen tablets were given twice a day to fasted subjects (n=24), the following was observed after 1 week of dosing:











Distribution
Naproxen has a volume of distribution of 0.16 L/kg. At therapeutic levels naproxen is greater than 99% albumin bound. At doses of naproxen greater than 500 mg/day there is less than proportional increase in plasma levels due to an increase in clearance caused by saturation of plasma protein binding at higher doses (average trough Css 36.5, 49.2, and 56.4 mg/L with 500, 1000, and 1500 mg daily doses of naproxen).  The naproxen anion has been found in the milk of lactating women at a concentration equivalent to approximately 1% of maximum naproxen concentration in plasma (see PRECAUTIONS: Nursing Mothers).ss 36.5, 49.2, and 56.4 mg/L with 500, 1000, and 1500 mg daily doses of naproxen).  The naproxen anion has been found in the milk of lactating women at a concentration equivalent to approximately 1% of maximum naproxen concentration in plasma (see 






Metabolism
Naproxen is extensively metabolized to 6-0-desmethyl naproxen and both parent and metabolites do not induce metabolizing enzymes.






Excretion
The clearance of naproxen is 0.13 mL/min/kg. Approximately 95% of the naproxen from any dose is excreted in the urine, primarily as naproxen (less than 1%), 6-0-desmethyl naproxen (less than 1%), or their conjugates (66 - 92%). The plasma half-life of the naproxen anion in humans ranges from 12 to 17 hours. The corresponding half-lives of both naproxen’s metabolites and conjugates are shorter than 12 hours and their rates of excretion have been found to coincide closely with the rate of naproxen disappearance from the plasma. In patients with renal failure metabolites may accumulate (see WARNINGS: Renal Effects).WARNINGS: Renal Effects).






Special Populations
Pediatric Patients: In pediatric patients of 5 to 16 years with arthritis, plasma naproxen levels following a 5 mg/kg single dose of naproxen oral suspension were found to be similar to those found in normal adults following a 500 mg dose. The terminal half-life appears to be similar in pediatric and adult patients. Pharmacokinetic studies of naproxen were not performed in pediatric patients younger than 5 years of age.Pediatric Patients: In pediatric patients of 5 to 16 years with arthritis, plasma naproxen levels following a 5 mg/kg single dose of naproxen oral suspension were found to be similar to those found in normal adults following a 500 mg dose. The terminal half-life appears to be similar in pediatric and adult patients. Pharmacokinetic studies of naproxen were not performed in pediatric patients younger than 5 years of age.Geriatric Patients: Studies indicate that although total plasma concentration of naproxen is unchanged, the unbound plasma fraction of naproxen is increased in the elderly, although the unbound fraction is less than 1% of the total naproxen concentration.  Unbound trough naproxen concentrations in elderly subjects have been reported to range from 0.12% to 0.19% of total naproxen concentration, compared with 0.05% to 0.075% in younger subjects.  The clinical significance of this finding is unclear, although it is possible that the increase in free naproxen concentration could be associated with an increase in the rate of adverse events per a given dosage in some elderly patients.Geriatric Patients: Studies indicate that although total plasma concentration of naproxen is unchanged, the unbound plasma fraction of naproxen is increased in the elderly, although the unbound fraction is less than 1% of the total naproxen concentration.  Unbound trough naproxen concentrations in elderly subjects have been reported to range from 0.12% to 0.19% of total naproxen concentration, compared with 0.05% to 0.075% in younger subjects.  The clinical significance of this finding is unclear, although it is possible that the increase in free naproxen concentration could be associated with an increase in the rate of adverse events per a given dosage in some elderly patients.Race: Pharmacokinetic differences due to race have not been studied.Race: Pharmacokinetic differences due to race have not been studied.Hepatic Insufficiency: Naproxen pharmacokinetics have not been determined in subjects with hepatic insufficiency.Hepatic Insufficiency: Naproxen pharmacokinetics have not been determined in subjects with hepatic insufficiency.Renal Insufficiency: Naproxen pharmacokinetics have not been determined in subjects with renal insufficiency. Given that naproxen, its metabolites, and conjugates are primarily excreted by the kidney, the potential exists for naproxen metabolites to accumulate in the presence of renal insufficiency.   Elimination of naproxen is decreased in patients with severe renal impairment.  Naproxen-containing products are not recommended for use in patients with moderate to severe and severe renal impairment (creatinine < 30 ml/min) (see WARNINGS: Renal Effects).Renal Insufficiency: Naproxen pharmacokinetics have not been determined in subjects with renal insufficiency. Given that naproxen, its metabolites, and conjugates are primarily excreted by the kidney, the potential exists for naproxen metabolites to accumulate in the presence of renal insufficiency.   Elimination of naproxen is decreased in patients with severe renal impairment.  Naproxen-containing products are not recommended for use in patients with moderate to severe and severe renal impairment (creatinine < 30 ml/min) (see 








Clinical Studies




General Information
Naproxen has been studied in patients with rheumatoid arthritis, osteoarthritis, juvenile arthritis, ankylosing spondylitis, tendinitis and bursitis, and acute gout. Improvement in patients treated for rheumatoid arthritis was demonstrated by a reduction in joint swelling, a reduction in duration of morning stiffness, a reduction in disease activity as assessed by both the investigator and patient, and by increased mobility as demonstrated by a reduction in walking time. Generally, response to naproxen has not been found to be dependent on age, sex, severity or duration of rheumatoid arthritis.In patients with osteoarthritis, the therapeutic action of naproxen has been shown by a reduction in joint pain or tenderness, an increase in range of motion in knee joints, increased mobility as demonstrated by a reduction in walking time, and improvement in capacity to perform activities of daily living impaired by the disease.In a clinical trial comparing standard formulations of naproxen 375 mg BID (750 mg a day) versus 750 mg BID (1500 mg a day), 9 patients in the 750 mg group terminated prematurely because of adverse events. Nineteen patients in the 1500 mg group terminated prematurely because of adverse events. Most of these adverse events were gastrointestinal events.In clinical studies in patients with rheumatoid arthritis, osteoarthritis, and juvenile arthritis, naproxen has been shown to be comparable to aspirin and indomethacin in controlling the aforementioned measures of disease activity, but the frequency and severity of the milder gastrointestinal adverse effects (nausea, dyspepsia, heartburn) and nervous system adverse effects (tinnitus, dizziness, lightheadedness) were less in naproxen treated patients than in those treated with aspirin or indomethacin.In patients with ankylosing spondylitis, naproxen has been shown to decrease night pain, morning stiffness and pain at rest. In double-blind studies the drug was shown to be as effective as aspirin, but with fewer side effects.In patients with acute gout, a favorable response to naproxen was shown by significant clearing of inflammatory changes (e.g., decrease in swelling, heat) within 24 to 48 hours, as well as by relief of pain and tenderness.Naproxen has been studied in patients with mild to moderate pain secondary to post-operative, orthopedic, post-partum episiotomy, and uterine contraction pain and dysmenorrhea. Onset of pain relief can begin within one hour in patients taking naproxen. Analgesic effect was shown by such measures as reduction of pain intensity scores, increase in pain relief scores, decrease in numbers of patients requiring additional analgesic medication, and delay in time to remedication. The analgesic effect has been found to last for up to 12 hours.Naproxen may be used safely in combination with gold salts and/or corticosteroids; however, in controlled clinical trials, when added to the regimen of patients receiving corticosteroids it did not appear to cause greater improvement over that seen with corticosteroids alone. Whether naproxen has a “steroid-sparing” effect has not been adequately studied. When added to the regimen of patients receiving gold salts, naproxen did result in greater improvement. Its use in combination with salicylates is not recommended because there is evidence that aspirin increases the rate of excretion of naproxen and data are inadequate to demonstrate that naproxen and aspirin produce greater improvement over that achieved with aspirin alone. In addition, as with other NSAIDS the combination may result in higher frequency of adverse events than demonstrated for either product alone.In 51Cr blood loss and gastroscopy studies with normal volunteers, daily administration of 1000 mg of naproxen has been demonstrated to cause statistically significantly less gastric bleeding and erosion than 3250 mg of aspirin.51Cr blood loss and gastroscopy studies with normal volunteers, daily administration of 1000 mg of naproxen has been demonstrated to cause statistically significantly less gastric bleeding and erosion than 3250 mg of aspirin.






Geriatric Patients
The hepatic and renal tolerability of long-term naproxen administration was studied in two double blind clinical trials involving 586 patients.  Of the patients studied, 98 patients were age 65 and older and 10 of the 98 patients were age 75 and older.  Naproxen was administered at doses of 375 mg twice daily or 750 mg twice daily for up to 6 months.  Transient abnormalities of laboratory tests assessing hepatic and renal function were noted in some patients, although there were no differences noted in the occurrence of abnormal values among different age groups.








Individualization of Dosage
Onset of pain relief can begin within one hour in patients taking naproxen.The recommended strategy for initiating therapy is to choose a formulation and a starting dose likely to be effective for the patient and then adjust the dosage based on observation of benefit and/or adverse events. A lower dose should be considered in patients with renal or hepatic impairment or in elderly patients (see PRECAUTIONS).PRECAUTIONS).Analgesia/Dysmenorrhea/Bursitis and Tendinitis: Because the sodium salt of naproxen is more rapidly absorbed, naproxen sodium is recommended for the management of acute painful conditions when prompt onset of pain relief is desired. Naproxen may also be used for treatment of acute pain and dysmenorrhea. The recommended starting dose of naproxen is 500 mg followed by 500 mg every 12 hours or 250 mg every 6 to 8 hours, as required. The initial dose should not exceed 1250 mg of naproxen. Thereafter, the total daily dose should not exceed 1000 mg.Analgesia/Dysmenorrhea/Bursitis and Tendinitis: Because the sodium salt of naproxen is more rapidly absorbed, naproxen sodium is recommended for the management of acute painful conditions when prompt onset of pain relief is desired. Naproxen may also be used for treatment of acute pain and dysmenorrhea. The recommended starting dose of naproxen is 500 mg followed by 500 mg every 12 hours or 250 mg every 6 to 8 hours, as required. The initial dose should not exceed 1250 mg of naproxen. Thereafter, the total daily dose should not exceed 1000 mg.Acute Gout: The recommended starting dose is 750 mg of naproxen followed by 250 mg every 8 hours until the attack has subsided.Acute Gout: The recommended starting dose is 750 mg of naproxen followed by 250 mg every 8 hours until the attack has subsided.Osteoarthritis/Rheumatoid Arthritis/Ankylosing Spondylitis: The recommended dose of naproxen is 250 mg, 375 mg, or 500 mg taken twice daily (morning and evening). During long-term administration the dose of naproxen may be adjusted up or down depending on the clinical response of the patient. A lower daily dose may suffice for long-term administration. In patients who tolerate lower doses well, the dose may be increased to 1500 mg per day when a higher level of anti-inflammatory/analgesic activity is required. When treating patients with naproxen 1500 mg/day, the physician should observe sufficient increased clinical benefit to offset the potential increased risk. The morning and evening doses do not have to be equal in size and administration of the drug more frequently than twice daily does not generally make a difference in response (see CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY).Osteoarthritis/Rheumatoid Arthritis/Ankylosing Spondylitis: The recommended dose of naproxen is 250 mg, 375 mg, or 500 mg taken twice daily (morning and evening). During long-term administration the dose of naproxen may be adjusted up or down depending on the clinical response of the patient. A lower daily dose may suffice for long-term administration. In patients who tolerate lower doses well, the dose may be increased to 1500 mg per day when a higher level of anti-inflammatory/analgesic activity is required. When treating patients with naproxen 1500 mg/day, the physician should observe sufficient increased clinical benefit to offset the potential increased risk. The morning and evening doses do not have to be equal in size and administration of the drug more frequently than twice daily does not generally make a difference in response (see Juvenile Arthritis: The use of naproxen oral suspension allows for more flexible dose titration. In pediatric patients, doses of 5 mg/kg/day produced plasma levels of naproxen similar to those seen in adults taking 500 mg of naproxen (see CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY).Juvenile Arthritis: The use of naproxen oral suspension allows for more flexible dose titration. In pediatric patients, doses of 5 mg/kg/day produced plasma levels of naproxen similar to those seen in adults taking 500 mg of naproxen (see The recommended total daily dose is approximately 10 mg/kg given in 2 divided doses (i.e., 5 mg/kg given twice a day). (See DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION.)DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION.)




