


CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY





Pharmacodynamics
Fanolesomab is directed against the carbohydrate moiety 3-fucosyl-N-acetyllactosamine that defines the cluster of differentiation 15 (CD15) antigen.  NeutroSpecTM [Technetium (99m Tc) fanolesomab] radiolabels human white blood cells and myeloid precursors.  The CD15 antigen is expressed on the surface of polymorphonuclear neutrophils (PMNs), eosinophils and monocytes.  Monocytes and eosinophils constitute approximately 5% of circulating leukocytes; therefore, most of the circulating blood cellular activity resides on PMNs.  In blood cell fractions isolated from healthy volunteers who had received NeutroSpecTM, radioactivity was associated with PMNs (25%) or plasma (72%) when measured one hour after injection.  The binding of fanolesomab to its antigenic sites on human PMNs has an apparent Kd = 1.6 × 10-11 M.N-acetyllactosamine that defines the cluster of differentiation 15 (CD15) antigen.  NeutroSpecCross-reactivity studies indicate the presence of CD15 antigenic sites on many human tissues.







Pharmacokinetics
In a study of 10 healthy volunteers, following intravenous injection of NeutroSpecTM, blood concentrations of radioactivity decreased rapidly with an initial half-life of 0.3 hours and a second phase half-life of approximately eight hours.  Whole-body scintigraphy at two hours post-injection indicated that the liver had the highest radioactivity uptake and retention (50% of the injected dose), followed by the kidney, spleen and red marrow.  Over the 26–33 hours after injection, 38% of the injected dose of radioactivity was recovered in urine.TM, blood concentrations of radioactivity decreased rapidly with an initial half-life of 0.3 hours and a second phase half-life of approximately eight hours.  Whole-body scintigraphy at two hours post-injection indicated that the liver had the highest radioactivity uptake and retention (50% of the injected dose), followed by the kidney, spleen and red marrow.  Over the 26–33 hours after injection, 38% of the injected dose of radioactivity was recovered in urine.




