
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  
                     Taclonex® Ointment:
                  
                  Taclonex® Ointment combines the pharmacological effects of calcipotriene hydrate and betamethasone dipropionate as described below.
                  In a vasoconstrictor study, the skin blanching response of Taclonex® Ointment was consistent with that of a potent corticosteroid.
                  
                     Calcipotriene
                  
                  
                     Pharmacokinetics:  Calcipotriene metabolism following systemic uptake is rapid and occurs in the liver. The primary metabolites of calcipotriene are less potent than the parent compound.
                  
                     Betamethasone dipropionate
                  
                  Like other topical corticosteroids, betamethasone dipropionate has anti-inflammatory, antipruritic and vasoconstrictive properties. However, while the physiologic, pharmacologic, and clinical effects of the corticosteroids are well known, the exact mechanisms of their actions in psoriasis vulgaris are uncertain.
                  
                     Pharmacokinetics:  The extent of percutaneous absorption of topical corticosteroids is determined by many factors including the vehicle, the integrity of the epidermal barrier, and the use of occlusive dressings. Topical corticosteroids can be absorbed from normal intact skin. Inflammation and/or other disease processes in the skin may increase percutaneous absorption.
                  There are no human data regarding the distribution of corticosteroids to body organs following topical application. Nevertheless, once absorbed through the skin, topical corticosteroids are handled through pharmacokinetic pathways similar to systemically administered corticosteroids. Corticosteroids are metabolized primarily in the liver and are then excreted by the kidneys. In addition, some corticosteroids and their metabolites are also excreted in the bile.
                  Taclonex® Ointment was applied once daily for 4 weeks to adult patients (N = 12) with psoriasis vulgaris to study its effects on the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis. Of eleven patients tested, none demonstrated adrenal suppression as indicated by a 30-minute post-stimulation cortisol level ≤ 18 mcg/dL.
                  However in another clinical study of Taclonex® Ointment, one subject (N = 19) demonstrated adrenal suppression.
               
               
            
         