
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  Sulfamethoxazole and trimethoprim oral suspension is rapidly absorbed following oral administration. Both sulfamethoxazole and trimethoprim exist in the blood as unbound, protein-bound, and metabolized forms; sulfamethoxazole also exists as the conjugated form. The metabolism of sulfamethoxazole occurs predominately by N4-acetylation although the glucuronide conjugate has been identified. The principal metabolites of trimethoprim are the 1- and 3-oxides and the 3'- and 4'-hydroxy derivatives. The free forms of sulfamethoxazole and trimethoprim are considered to be the therapeutically active forms.  Approximately 44% of trimethoprim and 70% of sulfamethoxazole are bound to plasma proteins. The presence of 10 mg percent sulfamethoxazole in plasma decreases the protein binding of trimethoprim by an insignificant degree; trimethoprim does not influence the protein binding of sulfamethoxazole. 
                  Peak blood levels for the individual components occur 1 to 4 hours after oral administration.  The mean serum half-lives of sulfamethoxazole and trimethoprim are 10 and 8 to 10 hours, respectively. However, patients with severely impaired renal function exhibit an increase in the half-lives of both components, requiring dosage regimen adjustment (see 
                        DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION
                     ). Detectable amounts of trimethoprim and sulfamethoxazole are present in the blood 24 hours after drug administration. During administration of 160 mg trimethoprim and 800 mg sulfamethoxazole b.i.d., the mean steady-state plasma concentration of trimethoprim was 1.72 mcg/mL. The steady-state minimal plasma levels of free and total sulfamethoxazole were 57.4 mcg/mL and 68.0 mcg/mL, respectively. These steady-state levels were achieved after 3 days of drug administration.1
                  
                  Excretion of sulfamethoxazole and trimethoprim is primarily by the kidneys through both glomerular filtration and tubular secretion. Urine concentrations of both sulfamethoxazole and trimethoprim are considerably higher than are the concentrations in the blood. The average percentage of the dose recovered in urine from 0 to 72 hours after a single oral dose is  84.5% for total sulfonamide and  66.8% for free trimethoprim. Thirty percent of the total sulfonamide is excreted as free sulfamethoxazole,  with  the remaining  as N4-acetylated  metabolite2. When  administered  together, neither sulfamethoxazole  nor trimethoprim affects  the  urinary excretion pattern of the other. 
                  Both sulfamethoxazole and trimethoprim distribute to sputum, vaginal fluid, and middle ear fluid; trimethoprim also distributes to bronchial secretions, and both pass the placental barrier and are excreted in human milk. 
               
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Geriatric Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        The pharmacokinetics of sulfamethoxazole 800 mg and trimethoprim 160 mg were studied in 6 geriatric subjects (mean age: 78.6 years) and 6 young healthy subjects (mean age: 29.3 years) using a non-U.S. approved formulation. Pharmacokinetic values for sulfamethoxazole in geriatric subjects were similar to those observed in young adult subjects. The mean renal clearance of trimethoprim was significantly lower in geriatric subjects compared with young adult subjects (19 mL/h/kg vs. 55 mL/h/kg). However, after normalizing by body weight, the apparent total body clearance of trimethoprim was an average 19% lower in geriatric subjects compared with young adult subjects.3
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Microbiology
                     
                        Sulfamethoxazole inhibits bacterial synthesis of dihydrofolic acid by competing with para-aminobenzoic acid  (PABA). Trimethoprim blocks the production of tetrahydrofolic acid from dihydrofolic acid by binding to and reversibly inhibiting the required enzyme, dihydrofolate reductase. Thus this combination blocks two consecutive steps in the biosynthesis of nucleic acids and proteins essential to many bacteria. 
                        
                           In vitro studies have shown that bacterial resistance develops more slowly with this combination than with either sulfamethoxazole or trimethoprim alone. 
                        
                           In vitro serial dilution tests have shown that the spectrum of antibacterial activity of sulfamethoxazole and trimethoprim includes the common urinary tract pathogens with the  exception  of Pseudomonas  aeruginosa. The  following organisms  are  usually  susceptible: Escherichia  coli,  Klebsiella species,  Enterobacter  species, Morganella morganii, Proteus mirabilis, and indole-positive Proteus species including Proteus vulgaris. 
                        The usual spectrum of antimicrobial activity of sulfamethoxazole and trimethoprim includes bacterial pathogens isolated from middle ear exudate and from bronchial secretions  (Haemophilus influenzae, including ampicillin-resistant strains, and Streptococcus pneumoniae), and enterotoxigenic strains of Escherichia coli  (ETEC) causing bacterial gastroenteritis. Shigella flexneri and Shigella sonnei are also usually susceptible. 
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Susceptibility Testing
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Dilution techniques
                                 
                                    Quantitative methods are used to determine antimicrobial minimal inhibitory concentrations (MICs). These MICs provide estimates of the susceptibility of bacteria to antimicrobial compounds. The MICs should be determined using a standardized procedure. Standardized procedures are based on a dilution method 5,7 (broth or agar) or equivalent with standardized incoulum concentrations and standardized concentrations of sulfamethoxazole/trimethoprim powder. The MIC values should be interpreted according to the following criteria:
                                    For testing Enterobacteriaceae, Acinetobacter spp., Staphylococcus spp., Burkholderia cepacia, Stenotrophomonas maltophilia, and Vibrio cholerae: 
                                    


                                    


For testing Haemophilus influenzae and Haemophilus parainfluenzae:
                                    


                                    


These interpretative standards are applicable only to broth microdilution susceptibility testing using Haemophilus Test Medium5.
                                    For testing Streptococcus pneumoniae:
                                    


                                    


These interpretive standards are applicable only to broth microdilution susceptibility testing using cation-adjusted Mueller-Hinton broth with 2.5 to 5% lysed horse blood 5.
                                    A report of "Susceptible" indicates that the pathogen is likely to be inhibited if the antimicrobial compound in the blood reaches the concentrations usually achievable. A report of "Intermediate" indicates that the result should be considered equivocal, and, if the microorganism is not fully susceptible to alternative, clinically feasible drugs, the test should be repeated. This category implies possible clinical applicability in body sites where the drug is physiologically concentrated or in situations where high dosage of drug can be used. This category also provides a buffer zone which prevents small uncontrolled technical factors from causing major discrepancies in interpretation. A report of "Resistant" indicates that the pathogen is not likely to be inhibited if the antimicrobial compound in the blood reaches the concentrations usually achievable; other therapy should be selected.
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                       
                                       Quality Control
                                       
                                          Standardized susceptibility test procedures require the use of laboratory control microorganisms to control the technical aspects of the laboratory procedures. Standard sulfamethoxazole/trimethoprim powder should provide the following MIC values:
                                          


                                       



                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Diffusion techniques
                           
                              Quantitative methods that require measurement of zone diameters also provide reproducible estimates of the susceptibility of bacteria to antimicrobial compounds. One such standardized procedure 6,7 requires the use of standard incoculum concentrations. This procedure uses paper disks impregnated with 1.25 mcg/23.75 mcg sulfamethoxazole/trimethoprim to test the susceptibility of microorganism to sulfamethoxazole/trimethoprim.
                              Reports from the laboratory providing results of the standard disk susceptibility test with a 1.25 mcg/23.75 mcg sulfamethoxazole/trimethoprim disk should be interpreted according to the following criteria:
                              For testing Enterobacteriaceae, Acinetobacter spp., Staphylococcus spp., Burkholderia cepacia, Stenotrophomonas maltophilia, and Vibrio cholerae:
                              
                              


                              


For testing Haemophilus influenzae and Haemophilus parainfluenzae:
                              
                              


                              


These zone diameter standards are applicable only to susceptibility testing with Haemophilus species using Haemophilus Test Medium6.
                              For testing Streptococcus pneumoniae:
                              
                              


                              


These interpretative standards are applicable only to disk diffusion testing using Mueller-Hinton agar adjusted with 5% sheep blood 6.
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Quality Control
                                 
                                    As with standardized dilution techniques, diffusion methods require the use of laboratory control microorganisms that are used to control the technical aspects of the laboratory procedures. For the diffusion technique, the 1.25 mcg/23.75 mcg sulfamethoxazole/ trimethoprim diskMueller-Hinton agar should be checked for excessive levels of thymidine. To determine whether Mueller-Hinton medium has sufficiently low levels of thymidine and thymine, an Enterococcus faecalis (ATCC 29212 or ATCC 33186) may be tested with trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole disks. A zone of inhibition ≥ 20 mm that is essentially free of fine colonies indicates a sufficiently low level of thymidine and thymine. should provide the following zone diameters in these laboratory test quality control strains:
                                    


