
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY     
               
                  Monoamine oxidase is a complex enzyme system, widely distributed throughout the body. Drugs that inhibit monoamine oxidase in the laboratory are associated with a number of clinical effects.
                  Thus, it is unknown whether MAO inhibition per se, other pharmacologic actions, or an interaction of both is responsible for the clinical effects observed. Therefore, the physician should become familiar with all the effects produced by drugs of this class.
               
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Pharmacokinetics          
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Absorption     
                           
                              Following a single 30 mg dose of Phenelzine Sulfate Tablets (2 × 15 mg tablets), a mean peak plasma concentration (Cmax) of 19.8 ng/mL occurred at a time (Tmax) of 43 minutes postdose.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Metabolism      
                           
                              Phenelzine Sulfate Tablets is extensively metabolized, primarily by oxidation via monoamine oxidase. After oral administration of 13C6-phenelzine, 73% of the administered dose was recovered in urine as phenylacetic acid and parahydroxyphenylacetic acid within 96 hours.
                              Acetylation to N2-acetylphenelzine is a minor pathway.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Elimination       
                           
                              The mean elimination half-life after a single 30 mg dose is 11.6 hours. Multiple dose pharmacokinetics have not been studied in man.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         