
                     
                     
                     
                        Drug Interactions
                     
                     
                        The hypoglycemic action of sulfonylureas may be potentiated by certain drugs including nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory agents and other drugs that are highly protein bound, salicylates, sulfonamides, chloramphenicol, probenecid, coumarins, monoamine oxidase inhibitors, and beta adrenergic blocking agents. When such drugs are administered to a patient receiving glyburide tablets, the patient should be observed closely for hypoglycemia. When such drugs are withdrawn from a patient receiving glyburide tablets, the patient should be observed closely for loss of control.
                        An increased incidence of elevated liver enzymes was observed in patients receiving glyburide concomitantly with bosentan. Therefore concomitant administration of glyburide tablets and bosentan is contraindicated.
                        A possible interaction between glyburide and ciprofloxacin, a fluoroquinolone antibiotic, has been reported, resulting in a potentiation of the hypoglycemic action of glyburide. The mechanism for this interaction is not known.
                        A potential interaction between oral miconazole and oral hypoglycemic agents leading to severe hypoglycemia has been reported. Whether this interaction also occurs with the intravenous, topical or vaginal preparations of miconazole is not known.
                        Metformin: In a single-dose interaction study in NIDDM subjects, decreases in glyburide AUC and C were observed, but were highly variable. The single-dose nature of this study and the lack of correlation between glyburide blood levels and pharmacodynamic effects, makes the clinical significance of this interaction uncertain. Coadministration of glyburide and metformin did not result in any changes in either metformin pharmacokinetics or pharmacodynamics.
                                    max
                        
                        Colesevelam: Concomitant administration of colesevelam and glyburide resulted in reduction in glyburide AUC and C of 32% and 47%, respectively.The reduction in glyburide AUC and C were 20% and 15%, respectively when administered 1 hour before, and not significantly changed (-7% and 4%, respectively) when administered 4 hours before colesevelam.
                                    max
                           max
                        
                     
                     
                  
               