
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              •Inhibitors of CYP2C8 (e.g., gemfibrozil) may increase rosiglitazone levels. (7.1) 
                           
                              •Inducers of CYP2C8 (e.g., rifampin) may decrease rosiglitazone levels. (7.1)
                           
                              •Inhibitors and inducers of CYP2C9 may affect glycemic control by altering glimepiride plasma concentrations. (7.1)
                           
                              •Certain medications may affect glucose metabolism, requiring glimepiride dose adjustment and close monitoring of blood glucose. (7.2)
                           
                              •Miconazole: Severe hypoglycemia can occur when glimepiride and oral miconazole are used concomitantly. (7.3)
                           
                              •Colesevelam: Coadministration may reduce glimepiride absorption. AVANDARYL should be administered at least 4 hours prior to colesevelam. (2.1, 7.4)
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 Drugs Metabolized by Cytochrome P450
                     
                        
                           Rosiglitazone: An inhibitor of CYP2C8 (e.g., gemfibrozil) may increase the AUC of rosiglitazone and an inducer of CYP2C8 (e.g., rifampin) may decrease the AUC of rosiglitazone. Therefore, if an inhibitor or an inducer of CYP2C8 is started or stopped during treatment with rosiglitazone, changes in diabetes treatment may be needed based upon clinical response. [See Clinical Pharmacology (12.4).]
                        
                        A potential interaction between oral miconazole and oral hypoglycemic agents leading to severe hypoglycemia has been reported. Whether this interaction also occurs with the IV, topical, or vaginal preparations of miconazole is not known. Potential interactions of glimepiride with other drugs metabolized by cytochrome P450 2C9 also include phenytoin, diclofenac, ibuprofen, naproxen, and mefenamic acid. [See Clinical Pharmacology (12.4).]
                        
                        
                           Glimepiride: There may be an interaction between glimepiride and inhibitors (e.g., fluconazole) and inducers (e.g., rifampin) of CYP 2C9. Fluconazole may inhibit the metabolism of glimepiride, causing increased plasma concentrations of glimepiride which may lead to hypoglycemia. Rifampin may induce the metabolism of glimepiride, causing decreased plasma concentrations of glimepiride which may lead to worsening glycemic control.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 Drugs Affecting Glucose Metabolism
                     
                        A number of medications affect glucose metabolism and may require glimepiride dose adjustment and particularly close monitoring for hypoglycemia or worsening glycemic control.
                        The following are examples of medications that may increase the glucose-lowering effect of sulfonylureas including glimepiride, increasing the susceptibility to and/or intensity of hypoglycemia: oral anti-diabetic medications, pramlintide acetate, insulin, angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors, H2 receptor antagonists, fibrates, propoxyphene, pentoxifylline, somatostatin analogs, anabolic steroids and androgens, cyclophosphamide, phenyramidol, guanethidine, fluconazole, sulfinpyrazone, tetracyclines, clarithromycin, disopyramide, quinolones, and those drugs that are highly protein-bound, such as fluoxetine, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, salicylates, sulfonamides, chloramphenicol, coumarins, probenecid, and monoamine oxidase inhibitors. When these medications are administered to a patient receiving AVANDARYL, monitor the patient closely for hypoglycemia. When these medications are withdrawn from a patient receiving AVANDARYL, monitor the patient closely for worsening glycemic control.
                        The following are examples of medications that may reduce the glucose-lowering effect of sulfonylureas including glimepiride, leading to worsening glycemic control: danazol, glucagon, somatropin, protease inhibitors, atypical antipsychotic medications (e.g., olanzapine and clozapine), barbiturates, diazoxide, laxatives, rifampin, thiazides and other diuretics, corticosteroids, phenothiazines, thyroid hormones, estrogens, oral contraceptives, phenytoin, nicotinic acid, sympathomimetics (e.g., epinephrine, albuterol, and terbutaline), and isoniazid. When these medications are administered to a patient receiving AVANDARYL, monitor the patient closely for worsening glycemic control. When these medications are withdrawn from a patient receiving AVANDARYL, monitor the patient closely for hypoglycemia.
                        Beta-blockers, clonidine, and reserpine may lead to either potentiation or weakening of glimepiride’s glucose-lowering effect. 
                        Both acute and chronic alcohol intake may potentiate or weaken the glucose-lowering action of glimepiride in an unpredictable fashion. 
                        The signs of hypoglycemia may be reduced or absent in patients taking sympatholytic drugs such as beta-blockers, clonidine, guanethidine, and reserpine.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3 Miconazole
                     
                        A potential interaction between oral miconazole and sulfonylureas leading to severe hypoglycemia has been reported. Whether this interaction also occurs with other dosage forms of miconazole is not known.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4 Concomitant Administration of Colesevelam
                     
                        Colesevelam can reduce the maximum plasma concentration and total exposure of glimepiride when the two are coadministered. However, absorption is not reduced when glimepiride is administered 4 hours prior to colesevelam. Therefore, AVANDARYL should be administered at least 4 hours prior to colesevelam.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         