
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Endogenous androgens, including testosterone and dihydrotestosterone (DHT), are responsible for the normal growth and development of the male sex organs and for maintenance of secondary sex characteristics.  These effects include the growth and maturation of the prostate, seminal vesicles, penis, and scrotum; the development of male hair distribution, such as facial, pubic, chest, and axillary hair; laryngeal enlargement, vocal cord thickening, alterations in body musculature, and fat distribution.  Testosterone and DHT are necessary for the normal development of secondary sex characteristics.
                        Male hypogonadism, a clinical syndrome resulting from insufficient secretion of testosterone, has two main etiologies.  Primary hypogonadism is caused by defects of the gonads, such as Klinefelter’s syndrome or Leydig cell aplasia, whereas secondary hypogonadism is the failure of the hypothalamus (or pituitary) to produce sufficient gonadotropins (FSH, LH).
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        No specific pharmacodynamic studies were conducted using Natesto.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        
                           
                              A
                           
                           
                              bsorption
                           
                        
                        Natesto delivers physiologic amounts of testosterone, producing circulating concentrations that approximate normal testosterone concentrations (i.e., 300 to 1,050 ng/dL) seen in healthy men. The maximum concentration for Natesto is achieved within approximately 40 minutes of administration and has a half-life ranging from 10 to 100 minutes.
                        Figure 1 summarizes the pharmacokinetic profiles of total testosterone in patients completing 90 days of Natesto treatment administered as 33 mg of testosterone daily (11 mg three times daily).
                        
                           Figure 1:         Mean Serum Total Testosterone Concentrations on Day 90  Following Natesto Administered As 11 mg of Testosterone Three Times Daily (N=69)
                        
                        
                            
                        The average daily testosterone concentration produced by Natesto administered as 11 mg of testosterone three times daily on Day 90 was 421 (± 116) ng/dL.
                        
                           
                              Distribution
                           
                        
                        Circulating testosterone is primarily bound in the serum to sex hormone-binding globulin (SHBG) and albumin.  Approximately 40% of testosterone in plasma is bound to SHBG, 2% remains unbound (free), and the rest is loosely bound to albumin and other proteins.
                        
                           
                              Metabolism
                           
                        
                        Testosterone is metabolized to various 17-keto steroids through 2 different pathways.  The major active metabolites of testosterone are estradiol and dihydrotestosterone (DHT).
                        DHT concentrations increased in parallel with testosterone concentrations during Natesto treatment.  After 90 days of treatment, the mean DHT/testosterone ratio was 0.09 which was within the normal range.
                        
                           
                              E
                           
                           
                              xcretion
                           
                        
                        About 90% of a dose of testosterone given intramuscularly is excreted in the urine as glucuronic and sulfuric acid conjugates of testosterone and its metabolites; about 6% of a dose is excreted in the feces, mostly in the unconjugated form.  Inactivation of testosterone occurs primarily in the liver.
                        
                           
                              Drug Interactions
                           
                        
                        
                           Use in patients with allergic rhinitis and oxymetazoline: The effects of allergic rhinitis and the use of oxymetazoline on the absorption of testosterone were investigated in a 3-way cross-over clinical study.  Eighteen males with seasonal allergic rhinitis received 3 doses of 11 mg of testosterone intranasally (testosterone dose of 33 mg/day) while they were in the asymptomatic, symptomatic, and symptomatic but treated (with oxymetazoline) states using an environmental challenge chamber model.
                        Serum total testosterone concentrations were decreased by 21 to 24% in males with symptomatic allergic rhinitis.  A 2.6% decrease in mean AUC(0-24) and 3.6% decrease in mean Cmax of total testosterone was observed in males with symptomatic seasonal rhinitis when treated with oxymetazoline 30 minutes prior to Natesto compared to when left untreated. Oxymetazoline does not impact the absorption of testosterone when concomitantly administered with Natesto [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3
                           
                           )].  Drug interaction potential with nasally administered drugs other than oxymetazoline has not been studied.
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           Figure 1: Mean Serum Total Testosterone Concentrations on Day 90 Following Natesto Administered As 11 mg of Testosterone Three Times Daily (N=69)
                           
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         