
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  
                     
                        Drugs or herbal products that induce certain enzymes, such as CYP3A4, may decrease the effectiveness of progestin hormonal contraceptives or increase breakthrough bleeding. (7.1)
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1	Changes in Contraceptive Effectiveness Associated With Coadministration of Other Products
                     
                        Drugs or herbal products that induce enzymes, including CYP3A4, that metabolize progestins may decrease the plasma concentrations of progestins, and may decrease the effectiveness of NEXPLANON. In women on long-term treatment with hepatic enzyme inducing drugs, it is recommended to remove the implant and to advise a contraceptive method that is unaffected by the interacting drug.
                        Some of these drugs or herbal products that induce enzymes, including CYP3A4, include:
                        
                            barbiturates
                            bosentan
                            carbamazepine
                            felbamate
                            griseofulvin
                            oxcarbazepine
                            phenytoin
                            rifampin
                            St. John's wort
                            topiramate
                        
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 HIV Antiretrovirals
                              
                              Significant changes (increase or decrease) in the plasma levels of progestin have been noted in some cases of co-administration with HIV protease inhibitors or with non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors. Consult the labeling of all concurrently-used drugs to obtain further information about interactions with hormonal contraceptives or the potential for enzyme alterations.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 Increase in Plasma Concentrations of Etonogestrel Associated With Coadministered Drugs
                     
                        CYP3A4 inhibitors such as itraconazole or ketoconazole may increase plasma concentrations of etonogestrel.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3 Changes in Plasma Concentrations of Coadministered Drugs
                     
                        Hormonal contraceptives may affect the metabolism of other drugs. Consequently, plasma concentrations may either increase (for example, cyclosporin) or decrease (for example, lamotrigine). Consult the labeling of all concurrently-used drugs to obtain further information about interactions with hormonal contraceptives or the potential for enzyme alterations.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         