
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY SECTION
               
                  12.1 Mechanism of Action
                  The mechanism of action of diclofenac is similar to that of other nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs. Diclofenac inhibits the enzyme, cyclooxygenase (COX), an early component of the arachidonic acid cascade, resulting in the reduced formation of prostaglandins, thromboxanes and prostacylin. It is not completely understood how reduced synthesis of these compounds results in therapeutic efficacy. 
                  12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                  Diclofenac, the active component of Voltaren® Gel has anti-inflammatory, anti-nociception, and antipyretic effects.
                  12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                  The pharmacokinetics of Voltaren® Gel were assessed in healthy volunteers following repeated applications during 7 days of Voltaren® Gel to 1 knee (4 x 4 g per day) or to 2 knees and 2 hands (4 x 12 g per day) versus the recommended oral dose of diclofenac sodium for the treatment of osteoarthritis (3 x 50 mg per day). A summary of the pharmacokinetic parameters is presented in Table 2.
                  


                  


      Cmax = maximum plasma concentration; tmax = time of Cmax; AUC0-24 = area
                        under the concentration-time curve; SD = standard deviation; CI = confidence interval.
                  Systemic exposure (area under the concentration-time curve) and maximum plasma concentrations of diclofenac are significantly lower with Voltaren® Gel than with comparable oral treatment of diclofenac sodium.
                  Systemic exposure with recommended use of Voltaren® Gel (4 x 4 g per day applied to 1 knee) is on average 17 times lower than with oral treatment. (Basis: treatment with Voltaren® Gel of 1 knee, 4 times a day versus 50 mg, 3 times a day of oral diclofenac tablets). The amount of diclofenac sodium that is systemically absorbed from Voltaren® Gel is on average 6% of the systemic exposure from an oral form of diclofenac sodium.
                  The average peak plasma concentration with recommended use of Voltaren® Gel (4 x 4 g per day applied to 1 knee) is 158 times lower than with the oral treatment. 
                  The pharmacokinetics of Voltaren® Gel has been tested under conditions of moderate heat (application of a heat patch for 15 minutes prior to gel application) and of moderate exercise (first gel application followed by a 20-minute treadmill exercise). No clinically relevant differences of systemic absorption and of tolerability were found between applications of Voltaren® Gel (4 x 4 g per day on 1 knee) with and under the conditions tested. However, the pharmacokinetics of Voltaren® Gel were not tested under the condition of heat application following gel application. Therefore, concurrent use of Voltaren® Gel and heat is not recommended.
               
               
            
         