
               
               
               DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
                  
                  
                  
 

                  
                  Avoid concomitant use of other short-acting sympathomimetic bronchodilators or epinephrine in patients being treated with Levalbuterol Inhalation Solution. If additional adrenergic drugs are to be administered by any route, they should be used with caution to avoid deleterious cardiovascular effects. 
                  
 

                  
                  Beta-adrenergic receptor blocking agents not only block the pulmonary effect of beta-adrenergic agonists such as Levalbuterol Inhalation Solution, but may produce severe bronchospasm in asthmatic patients. Therefore, patients with asthma should not normally be treated with beta-blockers. However, under certain circumstances, e.g., prophylaxis after myocardial infarction, there may be no acceptable alternatives to the use of beta-adrenergic blocking agents in patients with asthma. In this setting, cardioselective beta-blockers should be considered, although they should be administered with caution. 
                  
 

                  
                  The ECG changes or hypokalemia that may result from the administration of non-potassium sparing diuretics (such as loop and thiazide diuretics) can be acutely worsened by beta-agonists, especially when the recommended dose of the beta-agonist is exceeded. Although the clinical significance of these effects is not known, caution is advised in the coadministration of beta agonists with non-potassium-sparing diuretics. Consider monitoring potassium levels. 
                  
 

                  
                  Mean decreases of 16% and 22% in serum digoxin levels were demonstrated after single-dose intravenous and oral administration of racemic albuterol, respectively, to normal volunteers who had received digoxin for 10 days. The clinical significance of these findings for patients with obstructive airway disease who are receiving Levalbuterol Inhalation Solution and digoxin on a chronic basis is unclear. Nevertheless, it would be prudent to carefully evaluate the serum digoxin levels in patients who are currently receiving digoxin and Levalbuterol Inhalation Solution. 
                  
 

                  
                  Levalbuterol Inhalation Solution should be administered with extreme caution to patients being treated with monoamine oxidase inhibitors or tricyclic antidepressants, or within 2 weeks of discontinuation of such agents, because the action of levalbuterol on the vascular system may be potentiated. Consider alternative therapy in patients taking MAO inhibitors or tricyclic antidepressants. 
                  
 

               
               
            
         