
               
               
               12	CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1	 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Posaconazole is an azole antifungal agent [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.4)].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Exposure Response Relationship: In clinical studies of neutropenic patients who were receiving cytotoxic chemotherapy for acute myelogenous leukemia (AML) or myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS) or hematopoietic stem cell transplant (HSCT) recipients with Graft versus Host Disease (GVHD), a wide range of plasma exposures to posaconazole was noted following administration of Noxafil oral suspension. A pharmacokinetic-pharmacodynamic analysis of patient data revealed an apparent association between average posaconazole concentrations (Cavg) and prophylactic efficacy (Table 10). A lower Cavg may be associated with an increased risk of treatment failure, defined as treatment discontinuation, use of empiric systemic antifungal therapy (SAF), or occurrence of breakthrough invasive fungal infections.
                              


                           



                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 General Pharmacokinetic Characteristics
                              
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Posaconazole Injection
                                    
                                    Posaconazole injection exhibits dose proportional pharmacokinetics after single doses between 200 and 300 mg in healthy volunteers and patients. The mean pharmacokinetic parameters after single doses with posaconazole injection in healthy volunteers and patients are shown in Table 11.
                                    


                                    



                                       Table 12 displays the pharmacokinetic parameters of posaconazole in patients following administration of posaconazole injection 300 mg taken once a day for 10 or 14 days following BID dosing on Day 1.
                                    


                                 



                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Posaconazole Delayed-Release Tablets
                                    
                                    Noxafil delayed-release tablets exhibit dose proportional pharmacokinetics after single and multiple dosing up to 300 mg. The mean pharmacokinetic parameters of posaconazole at steady state following administration of Noxafil delayed-release tablets 300 mg twice daily (BID) on Day 1, then 300 mg once daily (QD) thereafter in healthy volunteers and in neutropenic patients who are receiving cytotoxic chemotherapy for AML or MDS or HSCT recipients with GVHD are shown in Table 13.
                                    


                                 



                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Posaconazole Oral Suspension
                                    
                                    Dose-proportional increases in plasma exposure (AUC) to posaconazole oral suspension were observed following single oral doses from 50 mg to 800 mg and following multiple-dose administration from 50 mg BID to 400 mg BID in healthy volunteers. No further increases in exposure were observed when the dose of the oral suspension increased from 400 mg BID to 600 mg BID in febrile neutropenic patients or those with refractory invasive fungal infections.
                                    The mean (%CV) [min-max] posaconazole oral suspension average steady-state plasma concentrations (Cavg) and steady-state pharmacokinetic parameters in patients following administration of 200 mg TID and 400 mg BID of the oral suspension are provided in Table 14.
                                    
                                    


                                 



                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Absorption: 
                              
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Posaconazole Delayed-Release Tablets
                                    
                                    When given orally in healthy volunteers, posaconazole delayed-release tablets are absorbed with a median Tmax of 4 to 5 hours. Steady-state plasma concentrations are attained by Day 6 at the 300 mg dose (QD after BID loading dose at Day 1). The absolute bioavailability of the oral delayed-release tablet is approximately 54% under fasted conditions. The Cmax and AUC of posaconazole following administration of posaconazole delayed-release tablets is increased 16% and 51%, respectively, when given with a high fat meal compared to a fasted state (see 
                                          Table 15
                                       ). In order to enhance the oral absorption of posaconazole and optimize plasma concentrations, posaconazole delayed-release tablets should be administered with food.
                                    


                                    


Concomitant administration of posaconazole delayed-release tablets with drugs affecting gastric pH or gastric motility did not demonstrate any significant effects on posaconazole pharmacokinetic exposure (see 
                                          Table 16
                                       ).
                                    


                                 



                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Posaconazole Oral Suspension
                                    
                                    Posaconazole oral suspension is absorbed with a median Tmax of ~3 to 5 hours. Steady-state plasma concentrations are attained at 7 to 10 days following multiple-dose administration.
                                    Following single-dose administration of 200 mg, the mean AUC and Cmax of posaconazole are approximately 3-times higher when the oral suspension is administered with a nonfat meal and approximately 4-times higher when administered with a high-fat meal (~50 gm fat) relative to the fasted state. Following single-dose administration of posaconazole oral suspension 400 mg, the mean AUC and Cmax of posaconazole are approximately 3-times higher when administered with a liquid nutritional supplement (14 gm fat) relative to the fasted state (see 
                                          Table 17
                                       ). In addition, the effects of varying gastric administration conditions on the Cmax and AUC of posaconazole oral suspension in healthy volunteers have been investigated and are shown in Table 18.
                                    In order to assure attainment of adequate plasma concentrations, it is recommended to administer Noxafil oral suspension during or immediately following a full meal. In patients who cannot eat a full meal, Noxafil oral suspension should be taken with a liquid nutritional supplement or an acidic carbonated beverage (e.g., ginger ale).
                                    



                                    


Concomitant administration of posaconazole oral suspension with drugs affecting gastric pH or gastric motility results in lower posaconazole exposure. (See 
                                          Table 19.)
                                    


                                 



                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Distribution:
                              
                              The mean volume of distribution of posaconazole after intravenous solution administration was 261 L and ranged from 226-295 L between studies and dose levels.
                              Posaconazole is highly bound to human plasma proteins (>98%), predominantly to albumin.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Metabolism:
                              
                              Posaconazole primarily circulates as the parent compound in plasma. Of the circulating metabolites, the majority are glucuronide conjugates formed via UDP glucuronidation (phase 2 enzymes). Posaconazole does not have any major circulating oxidative (CYP450 mediated) metabolites. The excreted metabolites in urine and feces account for ~17% of the administered radiolabeled dose.
                              Posaconazole is primarily metabolized via UDP glucuronidation (phase 2 enzymes) and is a substrate for p-glycoprotein (P-gp) efflux. Therefore, inhibitors or inducers of these clearance pathways may affect posaconazole plasma concentrations. A summary of drugs studied clinically with the oral suspension or an early tablet formulation, which affect posaconazole concentrations, is provided in Table 20.
                              
                              


                              



                                 In vitro studies with human hepatic microsomes and clinical studies indicate that posaconazole is an inhibitor primarily of CYP3A4. A clinical study in healthy volunteers also indicates that posaconazole is a strong CYP3A4 inhibitor as evidenced by a >5-fold increase in midazolam AUC. Therefore, plasma concentrations of drugs predominantly metabolized by CYP3A4 may be increased by posaconazole. A summary of the drugs studied clinically, for which plasma concentrations were affected by posaconazole, is provided in Table 21
                                  [see Contraindications (4)
                                  and 
                                    Drug Interactions (7.1) including recommendations].
                              


                              


Additional clinical studies demonstrated that no clinically significant effects on zidovudine, lamivudine, indinavir, or caffeine were observed when administered with posaconazole 200 mg QD; therefore, no dose adjustments are required for these coadministered drugs when coadministered with posaconazole 200 mg QD.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Excretion:
                              
                              Following administration of Noxafil oral suspension, posaconazole is predominantly eliminated in the feces (71% of the radiolabeled dose up to 120 hours) with the major component eliminated as parent drug (66% of the radiolabeled dose). Renal clearance is a minor elimination pathway, with 13% of the radiolabeled dose excreted in urine up to 120 hours (<0.2% of the radiolabeled dose is parent drug).
                              Posaconazole injection is eliminated with a mean terminal half-life (t½) of 27 hours and a total body clearance (CL) of 7.3 L/h.
                              Posaconazole delayed-release tablet is eliminated with a mean half-life (t½) ranging between 26 to 31 hours.
                              Posaconazole oral suspension is eliminated with a mean half-life (t½) of 35 hours (range: 20-66 hours).
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.4 Microbiology
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Mechanism of Action:
                              
                              Posaconazole blocks the synthesis of ergosterol, a key component of the fungal cell membrane, through the inhibition of cytochrome P-450 dependent enzyme lanosterol 14α-demethylase responsible for the conversion of lanosterol to ergosterol in the fungal cell membrane. This results in an accumulation of methylated sterol precursors and a depletion of ergosterol within the cell membrane thus weakening the structure and function of the fungal cell membrane. This may be responsible for the antifungal activity of posaconazole.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Activity in vitro: 
                              
                              Posaconazole has in vitro activity against Aspergillus fumigatus and Candida albicans, including Candida albicans isolates from patients refractory to itraconazole or fluconazole or both drugs [see Clinical Studies (14), Indications and Usage (1) and Dosage and Administration (2)]. However, correlation between the results of susceptibility tests and clinical outcome has not been established. Posaconazole interpretive criteria (breakpoints) have not been established for any fungus.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Drug Resistance:
                              
                              Clinical isolates of Candida albicans and Candida glabrata with decreased susceptibility to posaconazole were observed in oral swish samples taken during prophylaxis with posaconazole and fluconazole, suggesting a potential for development of resistance. These isolates also showed reduced susceptibility to other azoles, suggesting cross-resistance between azoles. The clinical significance of this finding is not known.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         