
               
               
               7	DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
                  Posaconazole is primarily metabolized via UDP glucuronosyltransferase and is a substrate of p-glycoprotein (P-gp) efflux. Therefore, inhibitors or inducers of these clearance pathways may affect posaconazole plasma concentrations. Coadministration of drugs that can decrease the plasma concentrations of posaconazole should generally be avoided unless the benefit outweighs the risk. If such drugs are necessary, patients should be monitored closely for breakthrough fungal infections.
                  Posaconazole is also a strong inhibitor of CYP3A4. Therefore, plasma concentrations of drugs predominantly metabolized by CYP3A4 may be increased by posaconazole [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                  The following information was derived from data with posaconazole oral suspension or early tablet formulation. All drug interactions with posaconazole oral suspension, except for those that affect the absorption of posaconazole (via gastric pH and motility) are considered relevant to posaconazole injection as well [see Drug Interactions (7.9) and (7.13)].
               
               
               
                  
                     
                        


                     



                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 Immunosuppressants Metabolized by CYP3A4
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Sirolimus: Concomitant administration of posaconazole with sirolimus increases the sirolimus blood concentrations by approximately 9-fold and can result in sirolimus toxicity. Therefore, posaconazole is contraindicated with sirolimus [see Contraindications (4.2) and Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Tacrolimus: Posaconazole has been shown to significantly increase the Cmax and AUC of tacrolimus. At initiation of posaconazole treatment, reduce the tacrolimus dose to approximately one-third of the original dose. Frequent monitoring of tacrolimus whole blood trough concentrations should be performed during and at discontinuation of posaconazole treatment and the tacrolimus dose adjusted accordingly [see Warnings and Precautions (5.1) and Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Cyclosporine: Posaconazole has been shown to increase cyclosporine whole blood concentrations in heart transplant patients upon initiation of posaconazole treatment. It is recommended to reduce cyclosporine dose to approximately three-fourths of the original dose upon initiation of posaconazole treatment. Frequent monitoring of cyclosporine whole blood trough concentrations should be performed during and at discontinuation of posaconazole treatment and the cyclosporine dose adjusted accordingly [see Warnings and Precautions (5.1) and Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 CYP3A4 Substrates
                     
                        Concomitant administration of posaconazole with CYP3A4 substrates such as pimozide and quinidine may result in increased plasma concentrations of these drugs, leading to QTc prolongation and cases of torsades de pointes. Therefore, posaconazole is contraindicated with these drugs [see Contraindications (4.3) and Warnings and Precautions (5.2)].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3 HMG-CoA Reductase Inhibitors (Statins) Primarily Metabolized Through CYP3A4
                     
                        Concomitant administration of posaconazole with simvastatin increases the simvastatin plasma concentrations by approximately 10-fold. Therefore, posaconazole is contraindicated with HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors primarily metabolized through CYP3A4 [see Contraindications (4.4) and Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4 Ergot Alkaloids
                     
                        Most of the ergot alkaloids are substrates of CYP3A4. Posaconazole may increase the plasma concentrations of ergot alkaloids (ergotamine and dihydroergotamine) which may lead to ergotism. Therefore, posaconazole is contraindicated with ergot alkaloids [see Contraindications (4.5)].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.5 Benzodiazepines Metabolized by CYP3A4
                     
                        Concomitant administration of posaconazole with midazolam increases the midazolam plasma concentrations by approximately 5-fold. Increased plasma midazolam concentrations could potentiate and prolong hypnotic and sedative effects. Concomitant use of posaconazole and other benzodiazepines metabolized by CYP3A4 (e.g., alprazolam, triazolam) could result in increased plasma concentrations of these benzodiazepines. Patients must be monitored closely for adverse effects associated with high plasma concentrations of benzodiazepines metabolized by CYP3A4 and benzodiazepine receptor antagonists must be available to reverse these effects [see Warnings and Precautions (5.5) and Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.6 Anti-HIV Drugs
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Efavirenz: Efavirenz induces UDP-glucuronidase and significantly decreases posaconazole plasma concentrations [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)]. It is recommended to avoid concomitant use of efavirenz with posaconazole unless the benefit outweighs the risks.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Ritonavir and Atazanavir: Ritonavir and atazanavir are metabolized by CYP3A4 and posaconazole increases plasma concentrations of these drugs [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)]. Frequent monitoring of adverse effects and toxicity of ritonavir and atazanavir should be performed during coadministration with posaconazole.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Fosamprenavir: Combining fosamprenavir with posaconazole may lead to decreased posaconazole plasma concentrations. If concomitant administration is required, close monitoring for breakthrough fungal infections is recommended [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                              
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.7 Rifabutin
                     
                        Rifabutin induces UDP-glucuronidase and decreases posaconazole plasma concentrations. Rifabutin is also metabolized by CYP3A4. Therefore, coadministration of rifabutin with posaconazole increases rifabutin plasma concentrations [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)]. Concomitant use of posaconazole and rifabutin should be avoided unless the benefit to the patient outweighs the risk. However, if concomitant administration is required, close monitoring for breakthrough fungal infections as well as frequent monitoring of full blood counts and adverse reactions due to increased rifabutin plasma concentrations (e.g., uveitis, leukopenia) are recommended.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.8 Phenytoin
                     
                        Phenytoin induces UDP-glucuronidase and decreases posaconazole plasma concentrations. Phenytoin is also metabolized by CYP3A4. Therefore, coadministration of phenytoin with posaconazole increases phenytoin plasma concentrations [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)]. Concomitant use of posaconazole and phenytoin should be avoided unless the benefit to the patient outweighs the risk. However, if concomitant administration is required, close monitoring for breakthrough fungal infections is recommended and frequent monitoring of phenytoin concentrations should be performed while coadministered with posaconazole and dose reduction of phenytoin should be considered.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.9 Gastric Acid Suppressors/Neutralizers
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Posaconazole Delayed-Release Tablet:
                              
                              No clinically relevant effects on the pharmacokinetics of posaconazole were observed when posaconazole delayed-release tablets are concomitantly used with antacids, H2-receptor antagonists and proton pump inhibitors [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)]. No dosage adjustment of posaconazole delayed-release tablets is required when posaconazole delayed-release tablets are concomitantly used with antacids, H2-receptor antagonists and proton pump inhibitors.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Posaconazole Oral Suspension:
                              
                              Cimetidine (an H2-receptor antagonist) and esomeprazole (a proton pump inhibitor) when given with posaconazole oral suspension results in decreased posaconazole plasma concentrations [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)]. It is recommended to avoid concomitant use of cimetidine and esomeprazole with posaconazole oral suspension unless the benefit outweighs the risks. However, if concomitant administration is required, close monitoring for breakthrough fungal infections is recommended.
                              No clinically relevant effects were observed when posaconazole oral suspension is concomitantly used with antacids and H2-receptor antagonists other than cimetidine. No dosage adjustment of posaconazole oral suspension is required when posaconazole oral suspension is concomitantly used with antacids and H2-receptor antagonists other than cimetidine.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.10 Vinca Alkaloids
                     
                        Most of the vinca alkaloids are substrates of CYP3A4. Posaconazole may increase the plasma concentrations of vinca alkaloids (e.g., vincristine and vinblastine) which may lead to neurotoxicity. Therefore, it is recommended that dose adjustment of the vinca alkaloid be considered.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.11 Calcium Channel Blockers Metabolized by CYP3A4
                     
                        Posaconazole may increase the plasma concentrations of calcium channel blockers metabolized by CYP3A4 (e.g., verapamil, diltiazem, nifedipine, nicardipine, felodipine). Frequent monitoring for adverse reactions and toxicity related to calcium channel blockers is recommended during coadministration. Dose reduction of calcium channel blockers may be needed.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.12 Digoxin
                     
                        Increased plasma concentrations of digoxin have been reported in patients receiving digoxin and posaconazole. Therefore, monitoring of digoxin plasma concentrations is recommended during coadministration.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.13 Gastrointestinal Motility Agents
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Posaconazole Delayed-Release Tablet:
                              
                              Concomitant administration of metoclopramide with posaconazole delayed-release tablets did not affect the pharmacokinetics of posaconazole [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)]. No dosage adjustment of posaconazole delayed-release tablets is required when given concomitantly with metoclopramide.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Posaconazole Oral Suspension:
                              
                              Metoclopramide, when given with posaconazole oral suspension, decreases posaconazole plasma concentrations [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)]. If metoclopramide is concomitantly administered with posaconazole oral suspension, it is recommended to closely monitor for breakthrough fungal infections.
                              Loperamide does not affect posaconazole plasma concentrations after posaconazole oral suspension administration [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)]. No dosage adjustment of posaconazole is required when loperamide and posaconazole are used concomitantly.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.14 Glipizide
                     
                        Although no dosage adjustment of glipizide is required, it is recommended to monitor glucose concentrations when posaconazole and glipizide are concomitantly used.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         