
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        The mechanism of action of loxapine in the treatment of agitation associated with schizophrenia is unknown. However, its efficacy could be mediated through a combination of antagonism of central dopamine D2 and serotonin 5-HT2A receptors. The mechanism of action of loxapine in the treatment of agitation associated with bipolar I disorder is unknown.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        Loxapine acts as an antagonist at central serotonin and dopamine receptors, with high affinity for serotonin 5-HT2A and dopamine D1, D2, D3, and D4 receptors (Ki values of 2 nM, 18 nM, 10 nM, 21 nM, 9 nM, respectively). Some of the adverse effects of loxapine may be related to the antagonism of histamine H1 (somnolence), muscarinic M1 (anticholinergic), and adrenergic α2 (orthostatic hypotension) receptors (Ki values of 15 nM, 117 nM and 250 nM, respectively).
                        
                           
                              Thorough QTc Study
                           
                        
                        ADASUVE did not prolong the QTc interval. The effect of ADASUVE on QTc prolongation was evaluated in a randomized, double-blinded, positive- (moxifloxacin 400 mg) and placebo-controlled parallel study in healthy subjects. A total of 48 healthy subjects were administered ADASUVE 10 mg. In this study with a demonstrated ability to detect small effects, the upper bound of the 90% confidence interval (CI) for the largest placebo-adjusted, baseline-corrected QTc based on individual correction method was below 10 milliseconds, the threshold for regulatory concern.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        
                           
                              Absorption: The single-dose pharmacokinetic parameters of loxapine following administration of single doses of ADASUVE 10 mg in healthy adult subjects are presented in Table 3 and Figure 8.
                        Administration of ADASUVE resulted in rapid absorption of loxapine, with a median time of maximum plasma concentration (Tmax) of 2 minutes. Loxapine exposure in the first 2 hours after administration (AUC0-2h) was 66.7 ng•h/mL for the 10 mg dose. As a consequence of the very rapid absorption of loxapine after oral inhalation, there is substantial variability in the early plasma concentrations of loxapine. The mean plasma loxapine concentrations following administration of ADASUVE were linear over the clinical dose range. AUC0-2h, AUCinf, and Cmax increased in a dose-dependent manner.
                        


                        



                           Figure 8. Mean Plasma Concentrations of Loxapine following Single-Dose Administration ADASUVE 10 mg in Healthy Subjects
                        
                        
                        
                           
                              Distribution:
                            Loxapine is removed rapidly from the plasma and distributed in tissues. Animal studies following oral administration suggest an initial preferential distribution in the lungs, brain, spleen, heart, and kidney. Loxapine is 96.6% bound to human plasma proteins.
                        
                           
                              Metabolism:
                            Loxapine is metabolized extensively in the liver following oral administration, with multiple metabolites formed. The main metabolic pathways include: 1) hydroxylation to form 8-OH-loxapine by CYP1A2 and 7-OH-loxapine by CYP3A4 and CYP2D6, 2) N-oxidation to form loxapine N-oxide by flavanoid monoamine oxidases (FMOs), and 3) de-methylation to form amoxapine. Because there are multiple metabolic pathways, the risk of metabolic interactions caused by an effect on an individual isoform is minimal. For ADASUVE, the order of metabolites observed in humans (based on systemic exposure) was 8-OH-loxapine >> loxapine N-oxide, 7-OH-loxapine > amoxapine. Plasma levels of 8-OH-loxapine are similar to those of the parent compound.
                        
                           
                              Excretion:
                            Excretion occurs mainly in the first 24 hours. Metabolites are excreted in the urine in the form of conjugates and in the feces unconjugated. The terminal elimination half-life (T1/2) ranged from 6 to 8 hours.
                        
                           
                              Transporter Interaction: In vitro studies indicated that loxapine was not a substrate for p-glycoprotein (P-gp): however, loxapine inhibited P-gp. 
                        
                           
                              Special Populations:
                           
                        
                        
                           
                              Pharmacokinetics in Smokers:
                            Loxapine exposures in nonsmokers and smokers are similar, with geometric mean ratios of 92%, 85%, and 99% for AUC0-2h, AUCinf, and Cmax respectively. No dosage adjustment is recommended based on smoking status.
                        
                           
                              Demographic Effects:
                            There were no clinically significant differences in loxapine pharmacokinetics following administration of ADASUVE in subgroups based on age, weight, body mass index, gender, or race.
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           Figure 8
                           
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         