
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  Tetracyclines are readily absorbed and are bound to plasma proteins in varying degree.  They are concentrated by the liver in the bile, and excreted in the urine and feces at high concentrations and in a biologically active form.
                  Following a single 100 mg dose administered in a concentration of 0.4 mg/mL in a one-hour infusion, normal adult volunteers averaged a peak of 2.5 mcg/mL, while 200 mg of a concentration of 0.4 mg/mL administered over two hours averaged a peak of 3.6 mcg/mL.
                  Excretion of doxycycline by the kidney is about 40 percent/72 hours in individuals with normal function (creatinine clearance about 75 mL/min).  This percentage of excretion may fall as low as 1 to 5 percent/72 hours in individuals with severe renal insufficiency (creatinine clearance below 10 mL/min).  Studies have shown no significant difference in serum half-life of doxycycline (range 18 to 22 hours) in individuals with normal and severely impaired renal function.
                  Hemodialysis does not alter this serum half-life of doxycycline.
                  
                     
                        
                           Microbiology
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Mechanism of Action
                     
                  
                  Doxycycline inhibits bacterial protein synthesis by binding to the 30S ribosomal subunit.  Doxycycline has bacteriostatic activity against a broad range of Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria.  Cross resistance with other tetracyclines is common.
                  Doxycycline has been shown to be active against most isolates of the following bacteria, both 
                        in vitro 
                     and in clinical infections (see 
                        INDICATIONS AND USAGE
                     ).
                  
                     
                        Gram-Negative Bacteria
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Acinetobacter 
                     species
                  
                     
                        Bartonella bacilliformis
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Brucella 
                     species
                  
                     
                        Cal
                     
                     
                        ymmatobacterium
                      
                        granulomatis
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Campylobacter fetus
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Enterobacter aerogenes
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Escherichia coli
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Francisella tularensis
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Haemophilus ducreyi
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Haemophilus influenzae
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Klebsiella 
                     species
                  
                     
                        Neisseria gonorrhoeae
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Shigella 
                     species
                  
                     
                        Vibrio cholerae
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Yersinia pestis
                      
                  
                     
                        Gram-Positive Bacteria
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Bacillus anthracis
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Streptococcus pneumoniae
                      
                  
                     
                        Anaerobes
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Clostridium 
                     species
                  
                     
                        Fusobacterium fusiforme
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Propionibacterium acnes
                      
                  
                     
                        Other Bacteria
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Actinomyces 
                     species
                  
                     
                        Borrelia recurrentis
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Chlamydophila psittaci
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Chlamydia trachomatis
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Mycoplasma pneumoniae
                     
                  
                  Rickettsiae
                  
                     
                        Treponema pallidum
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Treponema pertenue
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Ureaplasma urealyticum 

                        
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Parasites
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Balantidium coli
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Entamoeba 
                     species
                  
                     
                        Plasmodium falciparum
                     *
                  *Doxycycline has been found to be active against the asexual erythrocytic forms of 
                        Plasmodium falciparum 
                     but not against the gametocytes of 
                        P. falciparum.
                       The precise mechanism of action of the drug is not known.
                  
                     
                        
                           Susceptibility Test Methods
                        
                     
                  
                  When available, the clinical microbiology laboratory should provide the results of 
                        in vitro 
                     susceptibility test results for antimicrobial drugs used in resident hospitals to the physician as periodic reports that describe the susceptibility profile of nosocomial and community-acquired pathogens.  These reports should aid the physician in selecting the most effective antimicrobial. 
                  
                     
                        Dilution Techniques
                     
                  
                  Quantitative methods are used to determine antimicrobial minimum inhibitory concentrations (MICs).  These MICs provide estimates of the susceptibility of bacteria to antimicrobial compounds.  The MICs should be determined using a standardized test method (broth and/or agar).1,2,4  The MIC values should be interpreted according to the criteria provided in Table 1.
                         

                        
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Diffusion Techniques
                     
                  
                  Quantitative methods that require measurement of zone diameters can also provide reproducible estimates of the susceptibility of bacteria to antimicrobial compounds.  Zone size provides an estimate of the susceptibility of bacteria to antimicrobial compounds.  The zone size should be determined using a standard test method.1,3,4  This procedure uses paper disks impregnated with 30 mcg doxycycline to test the susceptibility of bacteria to doxycycline.  The disk diffusion interpretive criteria are provided in Table 1.
                         

                        
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Anaerobic Techniques
                     
                  
                  For anaerobic bacteria, the susceptibility to doxycycline can be determined by a standardized test method5.  The MIC values obtained should be interpreted according to the criteria provided in Table l.
                  


                  


A report of 
                        Susceptible 
                     (S) indicates that antimicrobial is likely to inhibit growth of the pathogen if the antimicrobial compound reaches the concentrations at the infection site necessary to inhibit growth of the pathogen.  A report of 
                        Intermediate 
                     (I) indicates that the result should be considered equivocal, and, if the bacteria is not fully susceptible to alternative, clinically feasible drugs, the test should be repeated. This category implies possible clinical applicability in body sites where the drug product is physiologically concentrated or in situations where high dosage of drug can be used. This category also provides a buffer zone that prevents small uncontrolled technical factors from causing major discrepancies interpretation.  A report of 
                        Resistant 
                     (R) indicates that the pathogen is not likely to inhibit growth of the pathogen if the antimicrobial compound reaches the concentrations usually achievable at the infection site: other therapy should be selected. 
                  
                     
                        
                           Quality Control
                        
                     
                  
                  Standardized susceptibility test procedures require the use of laboratory controls to monitor and ensure the accuracy and precision of supplies and reagents used in the assay, and the techniques of the individuals performing the test1,2,3,4,5,6,7.  Standard doxycycline and tetracycline powders should provide the following range of MIC values noted in Table 2.  For the diffusion technique using the 30 mcg doxycycline disk the criteria in Table 2 should be achieved.
                  


