
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              •CYP2B6 inducers:  Dose increase may be necessary if coadministered with CYP2B6 inducers (e.g., ritonavir, lopinavir, efavirenz, carbamazepine, phenobarbital and phenytoin) based on clinical response, but should not exceed the maximum recommended dose. (7.1)
                           
                              •Drugs metabolized by CYP2D6:  Bupropion inhibits CYP2D6 and can increase concentrations of: antidepressants (e.g., venlafaxine, nortriptyline, imipramine, desipramine, paroxetine, fluoxetine, sertraline), antipsychotics (e.g., haloperidol, risperidone, thioridazine), beta-blockers (e.g., metoprolol), and Type 1C antiarrhythmics (e.g., propafenone, flecainide).  Consider dose reduction when using with bupropion. (7.2)
                           
                              •Drugs that lower seizure threshold: Dose Bupropion Hydrochloride Extended-Release Tablets, USP (SR) with caution. (5.3, 7.3)
                           
                              •Dopaminergic drugs (levodopa and amantadine): CNS toxicity can occur when used concomitantly with Bupropion Hydrochloride Extended-Release Tablets, USP (SR). (7.4)
                           
                              •MAOIs:  Increased risk of hypertensive reactions can occur when used concomitantly with Bupropion Hydrochloride Extended-Release Tablets, USP (SR). (7.6)
                           
                              •Drug-laboratory test interactions:  Bupropion Hydrochloride Extended-Release Tablets, USP (SR) can cause false-positive urine test results for amphetamines. (7.8)
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 Potential for Other Drugs to Affect Bupropion Hydrochloride Extended-Release Tablets, USP (SR)
                     
                     
                        Bupropion is primarily metabolized to hydroxybupropion by CYP2B6.  Therefore, the potential exists for drug interactions between Bupropion Hydrochloride Extended-Release Tablets, USP (SR) and drugs that are inhibitors or inducers of CYP2B6.
                        
                           
                              Inhibitors of CYP2B6
                           
                        
                        
                           Ticlopidine and Clopidogrel
                        
                        Concomitant treatment with these drugs can increase bupropion exposure but decrease hydroxybupropion exposure.  Based on clinical response, dosage adjustment of Bupropion Hydrochloride Extended-Release Tablets, USP (SR) may be necessary when coadministered with CYP2B6 inhibitors (e.g., ticlopidine or clopidogrel) [see CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY (12.3)]
                        
                           
                              Inducers of CYP2B6
                           
                        
                        
                           Ritonavir, Lopinavir, and Efavirenz
                        
                        Concomitant treatment with these drugs can decrease bupropion and hydroxybupropion exposure.  Dosage increase of Bupropion Hydrochloride Extended-Release Tablets, USP (SR) may be necessary when coadministered with ritonavir, lopinavir, or efavirenz [see CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY (12.3)] but should not exceed the maximum recommended dose. 
                        
                           Carbamazepine, Phenobarbital, Phenytoin
                        
                        While not systematically studied, these drugs may induce the metabolism of bupropion and may decrease bupropion exposure [see CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY (12.3)].  If bupropion is used concomitantly with a CYP inducer, it may be necessary to increase the dose of bupropion, but the maximum recommended dose should not be exceeded.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 Potential for Bupropion Hydrochloride Extended-Release Tablets, USP (SR) to Affect Other Drugs
                     
                        
                           
                              Drugs Metabolized by CYP2D6
                           
                        
                        Bupropion and its metabolites (erythrohydrobupropion, threohydrobupropion, hydroxybupropion) are CYP2D6 inhibitors.  Therefore, coadministration of Bupropion Hydrochloride Extended-Release Tablets, USP (SR) with drugs that are metabolized by CYP2D6 can increase the exposures of drugs that are substrates of CYP2D6.  Such drugs include certain antidepressants (e.g. venlafaxine, nortriptyline, imipramine, desipramine, paroxetine, fluoxetine, and sertraline), antipsychotics (e.g., haloperidol, risperidone, thioridazine), beta-blockers (e.g., metoprolol), and Type 1C antiarrhythmics (e.g., propafenone and flecainide).  When used concomitantly with Bupropion Hydrochloride Extended-Release Tablets, USP (SR), it may be necessary to decrease the dose of these CYP2D6 substrates, particularly for drugs with a narrow therapeutic index. 
                        Drugs that require metabolic activation by CYP2D6 to be effective (e.g., tamoxifen) theoretically could have reduced efficacy when administered concomitantly with inhibitors of CYP2D6 such as bupropion.  Patients treated concomitantly with Bupropion Hydrochloride Extended-Release Tablets, USP (SR) and such drugs may require increased doses of the drug [see CLNICAL PHARMACOLOGY (12.3)].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3 Drugs that Lower Seizure Threshold
                     
                        Use extreme caution when coadministering Bupropion Hydrochloride Extended-Release Tablets, USP (SR) with other drugs that lower seizure threshold (e.g., other bupropion products, antipsychotics, antidepressants, theophylline, or systemic corticosteroids).  Use low initial doses and increase the dose gradually [see CONTRAINDICATIONS (4) and WARNINGS AND PRECAUTIONS (5.3)].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4 Dopaminergic Drugs (Levodopa and Amantadine)
                     
                        Bupropion, levodopa, and amantadine have dopamine agonist effects.  CNS toxicity has been reported when bupropion was coadministered with levodopa or amantadine.  Adverse reactions have included restlessness, agitation, tremor, ataxia, gait disturbance, vertigo, and dizziness.  It is presumed that the toxicity results from cumulative dopamine agonist effects.  Use caution when administering Bupropion Hydrochloride Extended-Release Tablets, USP (SR) concomitantly with these drugs.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.5 Use With Alcohol
                     
                        In postmarketing experience, there have been rare reports of adverse neuropsychiatric events or reduced alcohol tolerance in patients who were drinking alcohol during treatment with Bupropion Hydrochloride Extended-Release Tablets, USP (SR).  The consumption of alcohol during treatment with Bupropion Hydrochloride Extended-Release Tablets, USP (SR) should be minimized or avoided.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.6 MAO Inhibitors
                     
                        Bupropion inhibits the reuptake of dopamine and norepinephrine.  Concomitant use of MAOIs and bupropion is contraindicated because there is an increased risk of hypertensive reactions if bupropion is used concomitantly with MAOIs.  Studies in animals demonstrate that the acute toxicity of bupropion is enhanced by the MAO inhibitor phenelzine.  At least 14 days should elapse between discontinuation of an MAOI and initiation of treatment with Bupropion Hydrochloride Extended-Release Tablets, USP (SR).  Conversely, at least 14 days should be allowed after stopping Bupropion Hydrochloride Extended-Release Tablets, USP (SR) before starting an MAOI intended to treat psychiatric disorders [see DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION (2.8)] and CONTRAINDICATIONS (4)].
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.7 Smoking Cessation
                     
                        Physiological changes resulting from smoking cessation, with or without treatment with Bupropion Hydrochloride Extended-Release Tablets, USP (SR), may alter the pharmacokinetics or pharmacodynamics of certain drugs (e.g., theophylline, warfarin, insulin) for which dosage adjustment may be necessary.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.8 Drug-Laboratory Test Interactions
                     
                        False-positive urine immunoassay screening tests for amphetamines have been reported in patients taking bupropion.  This is due to lack of specificity of some screening tests. False-positive test results may result even following discontinuation of bupropion therapy.  Confirmatory tests, such as gas chromatography/mass spectrometry, will distinguish bupropion from amphetamines.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         