
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           Pressor effects of catecholamines and Vasostrict are expected to be additive. (7.1)
                           Indomethacin may prolong effects of Vasostrict. (7.2)
                           Co-administration of ganglionic blockers or drugs causing SIADH may increase the pressor response. (7.3, 7.5)
                           Co-administration of drugs causing diabetes insipidus may decrease the pressor  response. (7.6)
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1       Catecholamines
                     
                        Use with catecholamines is expected to result in an additive effect on mean arterial blood pressure and other hemodynamic parameters.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2       Indomethacin
                     
                        Use with indomethacin may prolong the effect of Vasostrict on cardiac index and systemic vascular resistance [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3       Ganglionic Blocking Agents
                     
                        Use with ganglionic blocking agents may increase the effect of Vasostrict on mean arterial blood pressure [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4       Furosemide
                     
                        Use with furosemide increases the effect of Vasostrict on osmolar clearance and urine flow [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.5       Drugs Suspected of Causing SIADH
                     
                        Use with drugs suspected of causing SIADH (e.g., SSRIs, tricyclic antidepressants, haloperidol, chlorpropamide, enalapril, methyldopa, pentamidine, vincristine, cyclophosphamide, ifosfamide, felbamate) may increase the pressor effect in addition to the antidiuretic effect of Vasostrict.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.6       Drugs Suspected of Causing Diabetes Insipidus
                     
                        Use with drugs suspected of causing diabetes insipidus (e.g., demeclocycline, lithium, foscarnet, clozapine) may decrease the pressor effect in addition to the antidiuretic effect of Vasostrict.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         