
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1	Mechanism of Action
                     
                        The vasoconstrictive effects of vasopressin are mediated by vascular V1 receptors. Vascular V1 receptors are directly coupled to phopholipase C, resulting in release of calcium, leading to vasoconstriction.  In addition, vasopressin stimulates antidiuresis via stimulation of V2 receptors which are coupled to adenyl cyclase.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        At therapeutic doses exogenous vasopressin elicits a vasoconstrictive effect in most vascular beds including the splanchnic, renal and cutaneous circulation. In addition, vasopressin at pressor doses triggers contractions of smooth muscles in the gastrointestinal tract mediated by muscular V1-receptors and release of prolactin and ACTH via V3 receptors. At lower concentrations typical for the antidiuretic hormone vasopressin inhibits water diuresis via renal V2 receptors.
                        In patients with vasodilatory shock vasopressin in therapeutic doses increases systemic vascular resistance and mean arterial blood pressure and reduces the dose requirements for norepinephrine. Vasopressin tends to decrease heart rate and cardiac output. The pressor effect is proportional to the infusion rate of exogenous vasopressin. Onset of the pressor effect of vasopressin is rapid, and the peak effect occurs within 15 minutes. After stopping the infusion the pressor effect fades within 20 minutes. There is no evidence for tachyphylaxis or tolerance to the pressor effect of vasopressin in patients.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        At infusion rates used in vasodilatory shock (0.01-0.1 units/minute) the clearance of vasopressin is 9 to 25 mL/min/kg in patients with vasodilatory shock. The apparent t1/2 of vasopressin at these levels is ≤10 minutes. Vasopressin is predominantly metabolized and only about 6% of the dose is excreted unchanged in urine. Animal experiments suggest that the metabolism of vasopressin is primarily by liver and kidney. Serine protease, carboxipeptidase and disulfide oxido-reductase cleave vasopressin at sites relevant for the pharmacological activity of the hormone. Thus, the generated metabolites are not expected to retain important pharmacological activity.
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Drug-Drug Interactions
                              
                              Indomethacin more than doubles the time to offset for vasopressin's effect on peripheral vascular resistance and cardiac output in healthy subjects [see Drug Interactions (7.2)]
                              
                              The ganglionic blocking agent tetra-ethylammonium increases the pressor effect of vasopressin by 20% in healthy subjects [see Drug Interactions (7.3)].
                              
                              Furosemide increases osmolar clearance 4-fold and urine flow 9-fold when co-administered with exogenous vasopressin in healthy subjects [see Drug Interactions (7.4)].
                              
                              Halothane, morphine, fentanyl, alfentanyl and sufentanyl do not impact exposure to endogenous vasopressin.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Special Populations
                              
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Pregnancy: Because of a spillover into blood of placental vasopressinase the clearance of exogenous and endogenous vasopressin increases gradually over the course of a pregnancy. During the first trimester of pregnancy the clearance is only slightly increased. However, by the third trimester the clearance of vasopressin is increased about 4-fold and at term up to 5-fold. After delivery the clearance of vasopressin returns to pre-conception baseline within two weeks.
                                    
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         