
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Mechanism of Action

                     
                     
                        Sumatriptan has been demonstrated to be a selective agonist for a vascular 5-hydroxytryptamine1 receptor subtype (probably a member of the 5-HT1D family) with no significant affinity (as measured using standard radioligand binding assays) or pharmacological activity at 5-HT2, 5-HT3 receptor subtypes or at alpha1-, alpha2-, or beta-adrenergic; dopamine1; dopamine2; muscarinic; or benzodiazepine receptors.
                        The vascular 5-HT1 receptor subtype to which sumatriptan binds selectively, and through which it presumably exerts its antimigrainous effect, has been shown to be present on cranial arteries in both dog and primate, on the human basilar artery, and in the vasculature of the isolated dura mater of humans.  In these tissues, sumatriptan activates this receptor to cause vasoconstriction, an action in humans correlating with the relief of migraine and cluster headache.  In the anesthetized dog, sumatriptan selectively reduces the carotid arterial blood flow with little or no effect on arterial blood pressure or total peripheral resistance.  In the cat, sumatriptan selectively constricts the carotid arteriovenous anastomoses while having little effect on blood flow or resistance in cerebral or extracerebral tissues.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Corneal Opacities

                     
                     
                        Dogs receiving oral sumatriptan developed corneal opacities and defects in the corneal epithelium.  Corneal opacities were seen at the lowest dosage tested, 2 mg/kg/day, and were present after 1 month of treatment.  Defects in the corneal epithelium were noted in a 60-week study.  Earlier examinations for these toxicities were not conducted and no-effect doses were not established; however, the relative exposure at the lowest dose tested was approximately 5 times the human exposure after a 100-mg oral dose or 3 times the human exposure after a 6-mg subcutaneous dose.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Melanin Binding

                     
                     
                        In rats with a single subcutaneous dose (0.5 mg/kg) of radiolabeled sumatriptan, the elimination half-life of radioactivity from the eye was 15 days, suggesting that sumatriptan and its metabolites bind to the melanin of the eye.  The clinical significance of this binding is unknown.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        Pharmacokinetic parameters following a 6-mg subcutaneous injection into the deltoid area of the arm in 9 males (mean age, 33 years; mean weight, 77 kg) were systemic clearance: 1,194 ± 149 mL/min (mean ± S.D.), distribution half-life: 15 ± 2 minutes, terminal half-life: 115 ± 19 minutes, and volume of distribution central compartment: 50 ± 8 liters.  Of this dose, 22% ± 4% was excreted in the urine as unchanged sumatriptan and 38% ± 7% as the indole acetic acid metabolite.
                        After a single 6-mg subcutaneous manual injection into the deltoid area of the arm in 18 healthy males (age, 24 ± 6 years; weight, 70 kg), the maximum serum concentration (Cmax) was (mean ± standard deviation) 74 ± 15 ng/mL and the time to peak concentration (Tmax) was 12 minutes after injection (range, 5 to 20 minutes)
                              .  
                           In this study, the same dose injected subcutaneously in the thigh gave a Cmax of 61 ± 15 ng/mL by manual injection versus 52 ± 15 ng/mL by autoinjector techniques.  The Tmax or amount absorbed was not significantly altered by either the site or technique of injection.
                        The bioavailability of sumatriptan via subcutaneous site injection to 18 healthy male subjects was 97% ± 16% of that obtained following intravenous injection.  Protein binding, determined by equilibrium dialysis over the concentration range of 10 to 1,000 ng/mL, is low, approximately 14% to 21%.  The effect of sumatriptan on the protein binding of other drugs has not been evaluated.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Special Populations

                     
                     
                        
                           
                              Renal Impairment
                           
                        
                        The effect of renal impairment on the pharmacokinetics of sumatriptan has not been examined, but little clinical effect would be expected as sumatriptan is largely metabolized to an inactive substance.
                        
                           
                              Hepatic Impairment
                           
                        
                        The effect of hepatic disease on the pharmacokinetics of subcutaneously and orally administered sumatriptan has been evaluated.  There were no statistically significant differences in the pharmacokinetics of subcutaneously administered sumatriptan in hepatically impaired patients compared to healthy controls.  However, the liver plays an important role in the presystemic clearance of orally administered sumatriptan.  Accordingly, the bioavailability of sumatriptan following oral administration may be markedly increased in patients with liver disease.  In one small study of hepatically impaired patients (N = 8) matched for sex, age, and weight with healthy subjects, the hepatically impaired patients had an approximately 70% increase in AUC and Cmax and a Tmax 40 minutes earlier compared to the healthy subjects.
                        
                           
                              Age
                           
                        
                        The pharmacokinetics of sumatriptan in the elderly (mean age, 72 years, 2 males and 4 females) and in patients with migraine (mean age, 38 years, 25 males and 155 females) were similar to that in healthy male subjects (mean age, 30 years) (see 
                              
                                 PRECAUTIONS
                              
                           
                           :
                           
                              
                                  Geriatric Use
                              
                           )
                              . 

                              
                           
                        
                        
                           
                              Race
                           
                        
                        The systemic clearance and Cmax of sumatriptan were similar in black (n = 34) and Caucasian (n = 38) healthy male subjects.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Drug Interactions

                     
                     
                        
                           
                              Monoamine Oxidase Inhibitors
                           
                        
                        
                           
                              In vitro
                            studies with human microsomes suggest that sumatriptan is metabolized by monoamine oxidase (MAO), predominantly the A isoenzyme.  In a study of 14 healthy females, pretreatment with MAO-A inhibitor decreased the clearance of sumatriptan.  Under the conditions of this experiment, the result was a 2-fold increase in the area under the sumatriptan plasma concentration x time curve (AUC), corresponding to a 40% increase in elimination half-life.  No significant effect was seen with an MAO-B inhibitor.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        
                           
                              Typical Physiologic Responses
                           
                        
                        Blood Pressure:  (see
                              
                                  WARNINGS
                              
                           
                           :
                           
                              
                                  Increase in Blood Pressure
                              
                           ).
                        Peripheral (small) Arteries:  In healthy volunteers (N = 18), a study evaluating the effects of sumatriptan on peripheral (small vessel) arterial reactivity failed to detect a clinically significant increase in peripheral resistance.
                        Heart Rate:  Transient increases in blood pressure observed in some patients in clinical studies carried out during sumatriptan’s development as a treatment for migraine were not accompanied by any clinically significant changes in heart rate.
                        Respiratory Rate:  Experience gained during the clinical development of sumatriptan as a treatment for migraine failed to detect an effect of the drug on respiratory rate.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         