
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           NSAIDS: Increased risk of renal impairment and loss of antihypertensive effect (7)
                           If simvastatin is co-administered with amlodipine, do not exceed doses greater than 20 mg daily of simvastatin (7)
                           Do not co-administer aliskiren with telmisartan and amlodipine tablets in patients with diabetes (7.2)
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     7.1 Drug Interactions with Telmisartan and Amlodipine Tablets
                     
                        The pharmacokinetics of amlodipine and telmisartan are not altered when the drugs are co-administered. 
                        No drug interaction studies have been conducted with telmisartan and amlodipine tablets and other drugs, although studies have been conducted with the individual amlodipine and telmisartan components of telmisartan and amlodipine tablets, as described below: 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     7.2 Drug Interactions with Telmisartan
                     
                        
                           Aliskiren: Do not co-administer aliskiren with telmisartan and amlodipine tablets in patients with diabetes. Avoid use of aliskiren with telmisartan and amlodipine tablets in patients with renal impairment (GFR <60 mL/min).
                        
                           Digoxin: When telmisartan was co-administered with digoxin, median increases in digoxin peak plasma concentration (49%) and in trough concentration (20%) were observed. Therefore, monitor digoxin levels when initiating, adjusting, and discontinuing telmisartani for the purpose of keeping the digoxin level within the therapeutic range. 
                        
                           Lithium: Reversible increases in serum lithium concentrations and toxicity have been reported during concomitant administration of lithium with angiotensin II receptor antagonists including telmisartan. Therefore, monitor serum lithium levels during concomitant use. 
                        
                           Non-Steroidal Anti-Inflammatory Agents including Selective Cyclooxygenase-2 Inhibitors (COX-2 Inhibitors): In patients who are elderly, volume-depleted (including those on diuretic therapy), or with compromised renal function, co-administration of NSAIDs, including selective COX-2 inhibitors, with angiotensin II receptor antagonists, including telmisartan, may result in deterioration of renal function, including possible acute renal failure. These effects are usually reversible. Monitor renal function periodically in patients receiving telmisartan and NSAID therapy. 
                        The antihypertensive effect of angiotensin II receptor antagonists, including telmisartan may be attenuated by NSAIDs including selective COX-2 inhibitors.
                        
                           Ramipril and Ramiprilat: Co-administration of telmisartan 80 mg once daily and ramipril 10 mg once daily to healthy subjects increases steady-state Cmax and AUC of ramipril 2.3- and 2.1-fold, respectively, and Cmax and AUC of ramiprilat 2.4- and 1.5-fold, respectively. In contrast, Cmax and AUC of telmisartan decrease by 31% and 16%, respectively. When co-administering telmisartan and ramipril, the response may be greater because of the possibly additive pharmacodynamic effects of the combined drugs, and also because of the increased exposure to ramipril and ramiprilat in the presence of telmisartan. Co-administration of telmisartan and ramipril is not recommended. 
                        
                           Other Drugs: Co-administration of telmisartan did not result in a clinically significant interaction with acetaminophen, amlodipine, glyburide, simvastatin, hydrochlorothiazide, warfarin, or ibuprofen. Telmisartan is not metabolized by the cytochrome P450 system and had no effects in vitro on cytochrome P450 enzymes, except for some inhibition of CYP2C19. Telmisartan is not expected to interact with drugs that inhibit cytochrome P450 enzymes; it is also not expected to interact with drugs metabolized by cytochrome P450 enzymes, except for possible inhibition of the metabolism of drugs metabolized by CYP2C19. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     7.3 Drug Interactions with Amlodipine
                     
                        In clinical trials, amlodipine has been safely administered with thiazide diuretics, beta-blockers, angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors, long-acting nitrates, sublingual nitroglycerin, digoxin, warfarin, non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, antibiotics, and oral hypoglycemic drugs. 
                        
                           Simvastatin: Co-administration of multiple doses of 10 mg of amlodipine with 80 mg simvastatin resulted in a 77% increase in exposure to simvastatin compared to simvastatin alone. Limit the dose of simvastatin in patients on amlodipine to 20 mg daily.
                        The following have no clinically relevant effects on the pharmacokinetics of amlodipine: cimetidine, grapefruit juice, magnesium and aluminum hydroxide antacid, sildenafil. 
                        Amlodipine has no clinically relevant effects on the pharmacokinetics or pharmacodynamics of the following: atorvastatin, digoxin, warfarin. 
                        
                           CYP3A4 Inhibitors 
                        
                        Co-administration of a 180 mg daily dose of diltiazem with 5 mg amlodipine in elderly hypertensive patients resulted in a 60% increase in amlodipine systemic exposure. Erythromycin co-administration in healthy volunteers did not significantly change amlodipine systemic exposure. However, strong inhibitors of CYP3A4 (e.g., ketoconazole, itraconazole, ritonavir) may increase the plasma concentrations of amlodipine to a greater extent. Monitor for symptoms of hypotension and edema when amlodipine is co-administered with CYP3A4 inhibitors. 
                        
                           CYP3A4 Inducers 
                        
                        No information is available on the quantitative effects of CYP3A4 inducers (e.g., carbamazepine, phenobarbital, phenytoin, fosphenytoin, primidone, rifampicin, St. John's Wort) on amlodipine. Patients should be monitored for adequate clinical effect when amlodipine is co-administered with CYP3A4 inducers.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         