
               
               
                12	CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY 
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                      12.1	Mechanism of Action 
                     
                        Brimonidine Tartrate Ophthalmic Solution, 0.15% is an alpha-2 adrenergic receptor agonist.  Fluorophotometric studies in animals and humans suggest that brimonidine tartrate has a dual mechanism of action by reducing aqueous humor production and increasing uveoscleral outflow.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                      12.2	Pharmacodynamics 
                     
                        Brimonidine Tartrate Ophthalmic Solution, 0.15% has a peak ocular hypotensive effect occurring at two hours post-dosing. 
                        Elevated IOP presents a major risk factor in glaucomatous field loss.  The higher the level of IOP, the greater the likelihood of optic nerve damage and visual field loss.  Brimonidine tartrate has the action of lowering intraocular pressure with minimal effect on cardiovascular and pulmonary parameters.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                      12.3	Pharmacokinetics 
                     
                        
                           Absorption
                        
                        In a pharmacokinetic study, 14 healthy subjects (4 males and 10 females) received a single topical ocular administration of Brimonidine Tartrate Ophthalmic Solution, 0.15%, one drop per eye.  The peak plasma concentrations (Cmax) and AUC0-inf were 73 ± 19 pg/mL and 375 ± 89 pg•hr/mL, respectively.  Tmax was 1.7 ± 0.7 hours after dosing.  The systemic half-life was approximately 2.1 hours.
                        
                           Metabolism
                        
                        Brimonidine is metabolized primarily by the liver.  In vitro metabolism data from human microsomal fractions and liver slices indicate that brimonidine undergoes extensive hepatic metabolism.
                        
                           Excretion
                        
                        Urinary excretion is the major route of elimination of brimonidine and its metabolites.  Approximately 87% of an orally administered radioactive dose of brimonidine was eliminated within 120 hours, with 74% of the radioactivity recovered in the urine.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         