
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
                  Renagel has been studied in human drug-drug interaction studies with
              ciprofloxacin, digoxin, warfarin, enalapril, metoprolol and iron.
               
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                            Decreases the bioavailability of ciprofloxacin by approximately
                    50%. (7.1) 
                            In normal volunteer studies, sevelamer hydrochloride did not alter the
                    pharmacokinetics of a single dose of digoxin, warfarin, enalapril, metoprolol,
                    and iron. (7) 
                            When administering an oral medication where a reduction in the
                    bioavailability of that medication would have a clinically significant effect on
                    its safety or efficacy, the drug should be administered at least one
                    hour before or three hours after Renagel, or the physician should consider
                    monitoring blood levels of the drug. (7.7) 
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 Ciprofloxacin
                     
                        In a study of 15 healthy subjects, a co-administered single dose of 7
                  Renagel capsules (approximately 2.8 g) decreased the bioavailability of
                  ciprofloxacin by approximately 50%.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 Digoxin
                     
                        In 19 healthy subjects receiving 6 Renagel capsules three times a day
                  with meals for 2 days, Renagel did not alter the pharmacokinetics of a single dose
                  of digoxin.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3 Warfarin
                     
                        In 14 healthy subjects receiving 6 Renagel capsules three times a day
                  with meals for 2 days, Renagel did not alter the pharmacokinetics of a single dose
                  of warfarin.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4 Enalapril
                     
                        In 28 healthy subjects a single dose of 6 Renagel capsules did not alter
                  the pharmacokinetics of a single dose of enalapril.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.5 Metoprolol
                     
                        In 31 healthy subjects a single dose of 6 Renagel capsules did not alter
                  the pharmacokinetics of a single dose of metoprolol.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.6 Iron
                     
                        In 23 healthy subjects, a single dose of 7 Renagel capsules did not alter
                  the absorption of a single oral dose of iron as 200 mg exsiccated ferrous sulfate
                  tablet.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.7 Other Concomitant Drug Therapy
                     
                         There are no empirical data on avoiding drug interactions between
                    Renagel® and most concomitant drugs. During postmarketing
                  experience, very rare cases of increased thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH) levels
                  have been reported in patients co-administered sevelamer hydrochloride and
                  levothyroxine. Closer monitoring of TSH levels is therefore recommended in
                  patients receiving both medications. 
                        When administering an oral medication where a reduction in the
                  bioavailability of that medication would have a clinically significant effect on
                  its safety or efficacy, the drug should be administered at least one hour before
                  or three hours after Renagel, or the physician should consider monitoring blood
                  levels of the drug. Patients taking anti-arrhythmic medications for the control of
                  arrhythmias and anti-seizure medications for the control of seizure disorders were
                  excluded from the clinical trials. Special precautions should be taken when
                  prescribing Renagel to patients also taking these medications.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         