
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Enoxaparin is a low molecular weight heparin which has antithrombotic properties.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        In humans, enoxaparin given at a dose of 1.5 mg/kg subcutaneously (SC) is characterized by a higher ratio of anti-Factor Xa to anti-Factor IIa activity (mean ± SD, 14.0 ± 3.1) (based on areas under anti-Factor activity versus time curves) compared to the ratios observed for heparin (mean±SD, 1.22 ± 0.13). Increases of up to 1.8 times the control values were seen in the thrombin time (TT) and the activated partial thromboplastin time (aPTT). Enoxaparin at a 1 mg/kg dose (100 mg/mL concentration), administered SC every 12 hours to patients in a large clinical trial resulted in aPTT values of 45 seconds or less in the majority of patients (n = 1607). A 30 mg IV bolus immediately followed by a 1 mg/kg SC administration resulted in aPTT post-injection values of 50 seconds. The average aPTT prolongation value on Day 1 was about 16% higher than on Day 4.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                    Absorption:
                                  Pharmacokinetic trials were conducted using the 100 mg/mL formulation. Maximum anti-Factor Xa and anti-thrombin (anti-Factor IIa) activities occur 3 to 5 hours after SC injection of enoxaparin. Mean peak anti-Factor Xa activity was 0.16 IU/mL (1.58 mcg/mL) and 0.38 IU/mL (3.83 mcg/mL) after the 20 mg and the 40 mg clinically tested SC doses, respectively. Mean (n = 46) peak anti-Factor Xa activity was 1.1 IU/mL at steady state in patients with unstable angina receiving 1 mg/kg SC every 12 hours for 14 days. Mean absolute bioavailability of enoxaparin, after 1.5 mg/kg given SC, based on anti-Factor Xa activity is approximately 100% in healthy subjects.
                              A 30 mg IV bolus immediately followed by a 1 mg/kg SC every 12 hours provided initial peak anti-Factor Xa levels of 1.16 IU/mL (n=16) and average exposure corresponding to 84% of steady-state levels. Steady state is achieved on the second day of treatment.
                              Enoxaparin pharmacokinetics appear to be linear over the recommended dosage ranges [see
                                     Dosage and Administration (2)
                                 ]. After repeated subcutaneous administration of 40 mg once daily and 1.5 mg/kg once-daily regimens in healthy volunteers, the steady state is reached on day 2 with an average exposure ratio about 15% higher than after a single dose. Steady-state enoxaparin activity levels are well predicted by single-dose pharmacokinetics. After repeated subcutaneous administration of the 1 mg/kg twice daily regimen, the steady state is reached from day 4 with mean exposure about 65% higher than after a single dose and mean peak and trough levels of about 1.2 and 0.52 IU/mL, respectively. Based on enoxaparin sodium pharmacokinetics, this difference in steady state is expected and within the therapeutic range.
                              Although not studied clinically, the 150 mg/mL concentration of enoxaparin sodium is projected to result in anticoagulant activities similar to those of 100 mg/mL and 200 mg/mL concentrations at the same enoxaparin dose. When a daily 1.5 mg/kg SC injection of enoxaparin sodium was given to 25 healthy male and female subjects using a 100 mg/mL or a 200 mg/mL concentration the following pharmacokinetic profiles were obtained [see Table 13].
                              


                              


a) Means ± SD at Day 5 and 90% Confidence Interval (CI) of the ratio
                              b) Median (range)
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                    Distribution: The volume of distribution of anti-Factor Xa activity is about 4.3 L.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                    Elimination:
                                  Following intravenous (IV) dosing, the total body clearance of enoxaparin is 26 mL/min. After IV dosing of enoxaparin labeled with the gamma-emitter, 99mTc, 40% of radioactivity and 8 to 20% of anti-Factor Xa activity were recovered in urine in 24 hours. Elimination half-life based on anti-Factor Xa activity was 4.5 hours after a single SC dose to about 7 hours after repeated dosing. Significant anti-Factor Xa activity persists in plasma for about 12 hours following a 40 mg SC once a day dose.
                              Following SC dosing, the apparent clearance (CL/F) of enoxaparin is approximately 15 mL/min.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                    Metabolism:
                                  Enoxaparin sodium is primarily metabolized in the liver by desulfation and/or depolymerization to lower molecular weight species with much reduced biological potency. Renal clearance of active fragments represents about 10% of the administered dose and total renal excretion of active and non-active fragments 40% of the dose.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                    Special Populations
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Gender: Apparent clearance and Amax derived from anti-Factor Xa values following single SC dosing (40 mg and 60 mg) were slightly higher in males than in females. The source of the gender difference in these parameters has not been conclusively identified; however, body weight may be a contributing factor.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Geriatric: Apparent clearance and Amax derived from anti-Factor Xa values following single and multiple SC dosing in geriatric subjects were close to those observed in young subjects. Following once a day SC dosing of 40 mg enoxaparin, the Day 10 mean area under anti-Factor Xa activity versus time curve (AUC) was approximately 15% greater than the mean Day 1 AUC value [see
                                           Dosage and Administration (2.3)
                                        and
                                           Use in Specific Populations (8.5)
                                       ].
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Renal Impairment: A linear relationship between anti-Factor Xa plasma clearance and creatinine clearance at steady state has been observed, which indicates decreased clearance of enoxaparin sodium in patients with reduced renal function. Anti-Factor Xa exposure represented by AUC, at steady state, is marginally increased in mild (creatinine clearance 50–80 mL/min) and moderate (creatinine clearance 30–50 mL/min) renal impairment after repeated subcutaneous 40 mg once-daily doses. In patients with severe renal impairment (creatinine clearance <30 mL/min), the AUC at steady state is significantly increased on average by 65% after repeated subcutaneous 40 mg once-daily doses [see
                                           Dosage and Administration (2.2)
                                        and
                                           Use in Specific Populations (8.7)
                                       ].
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Hemodialysis: In a single study, elimination rate appeared similar but AUC was two-fold higher than control population, after a single 0.25 or 0.5 mg/kg intravenous dose.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Hepatic Impairment: Studies with enoxaparin in patients with hepatic impairment have not been conducted and the impact of hepatic impairment on the exposure to enoxaparin is unknown [see 
                                          Use in Specific Populations (8.8)
                                       ].
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Weight: After repeated subcutaneous 1.5 mg/kg once daily dosing, mean AUC of anti-Factor Xa activity is marginally higher at steady state in obese healthy volunteers (BMI 30–48 kg/m2) compared to non-obese control subjects, while Amax is not increased.
                                    When non-weight adjusted dosing was administered, it was found after a single-subcutaneous 40 mg dose, that anti-Factor Xa exposure is 52% higher in low-weight women (<45 kg) and 27% higher in low-weight men (<57 kg) when compared to normal weight control subjects [see 
                                          Use in Specific Populations (8.9)
                                       ].
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                          Pharmacokinetic interaction:
                                        No pharmacokinetic interaction was observed between enoxaparin and thrombolytics when administered concomitantly.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         