
               
               
               DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
                  
                  Renagel has been studied in human drug-drug interaction studies with
ciprofloxacin, digoxin, warfarin, enalapril, metoprolol and iron.
                  
 

                  
                  In a study of 15 healthy subjects, a co-administered single dose of 7
Renagel capsules (approximately 2.8 g) decreased the bioavailability of
ciprofloxacin by approximately 50%.
                  
 

                  
                  In 19 healthy subjects receiving 6 Renagel capsules three times a day
with meals for 2 days, Renagel did not alter the pharmacokinetics of a single dose
of digoxin.
                  
 

                  
                  In 14 healthy subjects receiving 6 Renagel capsules three times a day
with meals for 2 days, Renagel did not alter the pharmacokinetics of a single dose
of warfarin.
                  
 

                  
                  In 28 healthy subjects a single dose of 6 Renagel capsules did not alter
the pharmacokinetics of a single dose of enalapril.
                  
 

                  
                  In 31 healthy subjects a single dose of 6 Renagel capsules did not alter
the pharmacokinetics of a single dose of metoprolol.
                  
 

                  
                  In 23 healthy subjects, a single dose of 7 Renagel capsules did not alter
the absorption of a single oral dose of iron as 200 mg exsiccated ferrous sulfate
tablet.
                  
 

                  
                   There are no empirical data on avoiding drug interactions between
Renagel® and most concomitant drugs. During postmarketing
experience, very rare cases of increased thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH) levels
have been reported in patients co-administered sevelamer hydrochloride and
levothyroxine. Closer monitoring of TSH levels is therefore recommended in
patients receiving both medications. 
                  When administering an oral medication where a reduction in the
bioavailability of that medication would have a clinically significant effect on
its safety or efficacy, the drug should be administered at least one hour before
or three hours after Renagel, or the physician should consider monitoring blood
levels of the drug. Patients taking anti-arrhythmic medications for the control of
arrhythmias and anti-seizure medications for the control of seizure disorders were
excluded from the clinical trials. Special precautions should be taken when
prescribing Renagel to patients also taking these medications.
                  
 

               
               
            
         