
               
               
               12  CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1  Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Angiotensin II is formed from angiotensin I in a reaction catalyzed by angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE, kininase II).  Angiotensin II is the principal pressor agent of the renin-angiotensin system, with effects that include vasoconstriction, stimulation of synthesis and release of aldosterone, cardiac stimulation and renal reabsorption of sodium.  Olmesartan blocks the vasoconstrictor effects of angiotensin II by selectively blocking the binding of angiotensin II to the AT receptor in vascular smooth muscle.  Its action is, therefore, independent of the pathways for angiotensin II synthesis.
                                    1
                        
                        An AT receptor is found also in many tissues, but this receptor is not known to be associated with cardiovascular homeostasis.  Olmesartan has more than a 12,500-fold greater affinity for the AT receptor than for the AT receptor.
                                    2
                           1
                           2
                        
                        Blockade of the renin-angiotensin system with ACE inhibitors, which inhibit the biosynthesis of angiotensin II from angiotensin I, is a mechanism of many drugs used to treat hypertension.  ACE inhibitors also inhibit the degradation of bradykinin, a reaction also catalyzed by ACE.  Because olmesartan medoxomil does not inhibit ACE (kininase II), it does not affect the response to bradykinin.  Whether this difference has clinical relevance is not yet known.
                        Blockade of the angiotensin II receptor inhibits the negative regulatory feedback of angiotensin II on renin secretion, but the resulting increased plasma renin activity and circulating angiotensin II levels do not overcome the effect of olmesartan on blood pressure.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2  Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        Benicar doses of 2.5 mg to 40 mg inhibit the pressor effects of angiotensin I infusion.  The duration of the inhibitory effect was related to dose, with doses of Benicar >40 mg giving >90% inhibition at 24 hours.
                        Plasma concentrations of angiotensin I and angiotensin II and plasma renin activity (PRA) increase after single and repeated administration of Benicar to healthy subjects and hypertensive patients.  Repeated administration of up to 80 mg Benicar had minimal influence on aldosterone levels and no effect on serum potassium.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3  Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        Olmesartan medoxomil is rapidly and completely bioactivated by ester hydrolysis to olmesartan during absorption from the gastrointestinal tract.
                                    Absorption
                           

                        
                        Benicar tablets and the suspension formulation prepared from Benicar tablets are bioequivalent .
                                    [see Dosage and Administration ]
                                        (2.2)
                           
                        
                        The absolute bioavailability of olmesartan is approximately 26%.  After oral administration, the peak plasma concentration (C ) of olmesartan is reached after 1 to 2 hours.  Food does not affect the bioavailability of olmesartan.
                                    max
                        
                        The volume of distribution of olmesartan is approximately 17 L.  Olmesartan is highly bound to plasma proteins (99%) and does not penetrate red blood cells.  The protein binding is constant at plasma olmesartan concentrations well above the range achieved with recommended doses.
                                    Distribution
                           

                        
                        In rats, olmesartan crossed the blood-brain barrier poorly, if at all.  Olmesartan passed across the placental barrier in rats and was distributed to the fetus.  Olmesartan was distributed to milk at low levels in rats.
                        Following the rapid and complete conversion of olmesartan medoxomil to olmesartan during absorption, there is virtually no further metabolism of olmesartan.  Total plasma clearance of olmesartan is 1.3 L/h, with a renal clearance of 0.6 L/h.  Approximately 35% to 50% of the absorbed dose is recovered in urine while the remainder is eliminated in feces via the bile.
                                    Metabolism and Excretion
                           

                        
                        Olmesartan appears to be eliminated in a biphasic manner with a terminal elimination half-life of approximately 13 hours.  Olmesartan shows linear pharmacokinetics following single oral doses of up to 320 mg and multiple oral doses of up to 80 mg.  Steady-state levels of olmesartan are achieved within 3 to 5 days and no accumulation in plasma occurs with once-daily dosing.
                        The pharmacokinetics of olmesartan were studied in the elderly (≥65 years).  Overall, maximum plasma concentrations of olmesartan were similar in young adults and the elderly.  Modest accumulation of olmesartan was observed in the elderly with repeated dosing; AUC , was 33% higher in elderly patients, corresponding to an approximate 30% reduction in CL .
                                    Geriatric
                           

                           ss
                           τ
                           R
                           [see Dosage and Administration and Use in Specific Populations ]
                                        (2.1)
                              (8.5)
                           
                        
                        The pharmacokinetics of olmesartan were studied in pediatric hypertensive patients aged 1 to16 years.  The clearance of olmesartan in pediatric patients was similar to that in adult patients when adjusted by the body weight .
                                    Pediatric
                           

                           [see Use in Specific Populations ]
                                        (8.4)
                           
                        
                        Olmesartan pharmacokinetics have not been investigated in pediatric patients less than 1 year of age .
                                    [see Warnings and Precautions and Use in Specific Populations ]
                                        (5.2)
                              (8.4)
                           
                        
                        Minor differences were observed in the pharmacokinetics of olmesartan in women compared to men.  AUC and C were 10-15% higher in women than in men.
                                    Gender
                           

                           max
                        
                        Increases in AUC and C were observed in patients with moderate hepatic impairment compared to those in matched controls, with an increase in AUC of about 60% .
                                    Hepatic Insufficiency
                           

                           0-∞
                           max
                           [see Dosage and Administration and Use in Specific Populations ]
                                        (2.1)
                              (8.6)
                           
                        
                        In patients with renal insufficiency, serum concentrations of olmesartan were elevated compared to subjects with normal renal function.  After repeated dosing, the AUC was approximately tripled in patients with severe renal impairment (creatinine clearance <20 mL/min).  The pharmacokinetics of olmesartan in patients undergoing hemodialysis has not been studied .
                                    Renal Insufficiency
                           

                           [see Dosage and Administration , Warnings and Precautions and Use in Specific Populations ]
                                        (2.1)
                              (5.4)
                              (8.7)
                           
                        
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Drug Interactions
                           
                           
                              
                                 acid sequestering agent colesevelam
                                                Bile
                                 
                              
                              Concomitant administration of 40 mg olmesartan medoxomil and 3750 mg colesevelam hydrochloride in healthy subjects resulted in 28% reduction in Cmax and 39% reduction in AUC of olmesartan. Lesser effects, 4% and 15% reduction in Cmax and AUC respectively, were observed when olmesartan m edoxomil was administered 4 hours prior to colesevelam hydrochloride
                                            [see Drug Interactions ].
                                                (7)
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         