
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  Tazarotene is a retinoid prodrug which is converted to its active 
form, the cognate carboxylic acid of tazarotene (AGN 190299), by rapid 
deesterification in animals and man. AGN 190299 (“tazarotenic acid”) binds to 
all three members of the retinoic acid receptor (RAR) family: RARα, RARβ, and 
RARγ but shows relative selectivity for RARβ, and RARγ and may modify gene 
expression. The clinical significance of these findings is unknown.
                  
                  
                     Psoriasis: The mechanism of tazarotene 
action in psoriasis is not defined. Topical tazarotene blocks induction of mouse 
epidermal ornithine decarboxylase (ODC) activity, which is associated with cell 
proliferation and hyperplasia. In cell culture and in 
vitro models of skin, tazarotene suppresses expression of MRP8, a marker 
of inflammation present in the epidermis of psoriasis patients at high levels. 
In human keratinocyte cultures, it inhibits cornified envelope formation, whose 
build-up is an element of the psoriatic scale. Tazarotene also induces the 
expression of a gene which may be a growth suppressor in human keratinocytes and 
which may inhibit epidermal hyperproliferation in treated plaques. However, the 
clinical significance of these findings is unknown.
                  
                  
                     Acne: The mechanism of tazarotene action 
in acne vulgaris is not defined. However, the basis of tazarotene's therapeutic 
effect in acne may be due to its anti-hyperproliferative, 
normalizing-of-differentiation and anti-inflammatory effects. Tazarotene 
inhibited corneocyte accumulation in rhino mouse skin and cross-linked envelope 
formation in cultured human keratinocytes. The clinical significance of these 
findings is unknown.
                  
                  Pharmacokinetics:Following topical application, tazarotene undergoes esterase 
hydrolysis to form its active metabolite, tazarotenic acid. Little parent 
compound could be detected in the plasma. Tazarotenic acid was highly bound to 
plasma proteins (>99%). Tazarotene and tazarotenic acid were metabolized to 
sulfoxides, sulfones and other polar metabolites which were eliminated through 
urinary and fecal pathways. The half-life of tazarotenic acid was approximately 
18 hours, following topical application of tazarotene to normal, acne or 
psoriatic skin.
                  The human in vivo studies described below were 
conducted with tazarotene gel applied topically at approximately 2 mg/cm2 and left on the skin for 10 to 12 hours. Both the peak plasma 
concentration (Cmax) and area under the plasma concentration time curve (AUC) 
refer to the active metabolite only.
                  Two single, topical dose studies were conducted using 14C-tazarotene gel. Systemic absorption, as determined from 
radioactivity in the excreta, was less than 1% of the applied dose (without 
occlusion) in six psoriatic patients and approximately 5% of the applied dose 
(under occlusion) in six healthy subjects. One non-radiolabeled single-dose 
study comparing the 0.05% gel to the 0.1% gel in healthy subjects indicated that 
the Cmax and AUC were 40% higher for the 0.1% gel.
                  After 7 days of topical dosing with measured doses of tazarotene 0.1% gel on 
20% of the total body surface without occlusion in 24 healthy subjects, the Cmax 
for tazarotenic acid was 0.72 ± 0.58 ng/mL (mean ± SD) occurring 9 hours after 
the last dose, and the AUC0-24hr for tazarotenic acid was 
10.1 ± 7.2 ng·hr/mL. Systemic absorption was 0.91 ± 0.67% of the applied 
dose.
                  In a 14-day study in five psoriatic patients, measured doses of tazarotene 
0.1% gel were applied daily by nursing staff to involved skin without occlusion 
(8 to 18% of total body surface area; mean ± SD: 13 ± 5%). The Cmax for 
tazarotenic acid was 12.0 ± 7.6 ng/mL occurring 6 hours after the final dose, 
and the AUC0-24hr for tazarotenic acid was 
105 ± 55 ng·hr/mL. Systemic absorption was 14.8 ± 7.6% of the applied dose. 
Extrapolation of these results to represent dosing on 20% of total body surface 
yielded estimates for tazarotenic acid with Cmax of 18.9 ± 10.6 ng/mL and 
AUC0-24hr of 172 ± 88 ng·hr/mL.
                  An in vitro percutaneous absorption study, using 
radiolabeled drug and freshly excised human skin or human cadaver skin, 
indicated that approximately 4 to 5% of the applied dose was in the stratum 
corneum (tazarotene: tazarotenic acid= 5:1) and 2 to 4% was in the viable 
epidermis-dermis layer (tazarotene: tazarotenic acid= 2:1) 24 hours after 
topical application of the gel.
               
               
            
         