
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  Tetracyclines are readily absorbed and are bound to plasma proteins in varying degree. They are concentrated by the liver in the bile, and excreted in the urine and feces at high concentrations and in a biologically active form. Doxycycline is virtually completely absorbed after oral administration.
                  Following a 200 mg dose, normal adult volunteers averaged peak serum levels of
2.6 mcg/mL of doxycycline at 2 hours, decreasing to 1.45 mcg/mL at 24 hours. Excretion of doxycycline by the kidney is about 40%/72 hours in individuals with normal function (creatinine clearance about 75 mL/min.). This percentage excretion may fall as low as
1 to 5%/72 hours in individuals with severe renal insufficiency (creatinine clearance below 10 mL/min.). Studies have shown no significant difference in serum half-life of doxycycline (range 18 to 22 hours) in individuals with normal and severely impaired renal function.
                  Hemodialysis does not alter serum half-life.
                  Results of animal studies indicate that tetracyclines cross the placenta and are found in fetal tissues.
                  Microbiology
                  The tetracyclines are primarily bacteriostatic and are thought to exert their antimicrobial effect by the inhibition of protein synthesis. The tetracyclines, including doxycycline, have a similar antimicrobial spectrum of activity against a wide range of gram-positive and gram-negative organisms. Cross-resistance of these organisms to tetracyclines is common.
                  Gram-Negative Bacteria
                  Neisseria gonorrhoeae
Calymmatobacterium granulomatis
Haemophilus ducreyi
Haemophilus influenzae
Yersinia pestis (formerly Pasteurella pestis)
Francisella tularensis (formerly Pasteurella tularensis)
Vibrio cholerae (formerly Vibrio comma)
Bartonella bacilliformis
Brucella species
                  Because many strains of the following groups of gram-negative microorganisms have been shown to be resistant to tetracyclines, culture and susceptibility testing are recommended:
                  Escherichia coli
Klebsiella species
Enterobacter aerogenes
Shigella species
Acinetobacter species (formerly Mima species and Herellea species)
Bacteroides species
                  Gram-Positive Bacteria
                  Because many strains of the following groups of gram-positive microorganisms have been shown to be resistant to tetracycline, culture and susceptibility testing are recommended. Up to 44 percent of strains of Streptococcus pyogenes and 74 percent of Streptococcus faecalis have been found to be resistant to tetracycline drugs. Therefore, tetracycline should not be used for streptococcal disease unless the organism has been demonstrated to be susceptible.
                  Streptococcus pyogenes
Streptococcus pneumoniae
Enterococcus group (Streptococcus faecalis and Streptococcus faecium)
Alpha-hemolytic streptococci (viridans group)
                  Other Microorganisms
                  Rickettsiae
Chlamydia psittaci
Chlamydia trachomatis
Mycoplasma pneumoniae
Ureaplasma urealyticum
Borrelia recurrentis
Treponema pallidum
Treponema pertenue
Clostridium species
Fusobacterium fusiforme
Actinomyces species
Bacillus anthracis
Propionibacterium acnes
Entamoeba species
Balantidium coli
Plasmodium falciparum
                  Doxycycline has been found to be active against the asexual erythrocytic forms of Plasmodium falciparum, but not against the gametocytes of P. falciparum. The precise mechanism of action of the drug is not known.
                  Susceptibility tests:
                  Diffusion techniques:
                  Quantitative methods that require measurement of zone diameters give the most precise estimate of the susceptibility of bacteria to antimicrobial agents. One such standard procedure1 which has been recommended for use with disks to test susceptibility of organisms to doxycycline uses the 30-mcg tetracycline-class disk or the 30-mcg doxycycline disk. Interpretation involves the correlation of the diameter obtained in the disk test with the minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) for tetracycline or doxycycline, respectively.
                  
                  Please review the manufacturer's complete drug information  at the FDA site here:
                  http://dailymed.nlm.nih.gov/dailymed/drugInfo.cfm?setid=a569ba80-ffea-40b2-9fbe-a42810b1fccb&CFID;=19698&CFTOKEN;=609ac8b08c4f1e1e-30173D7B-F4DA-D75D-F59581A3FE4C3FFD
               
               
            
         