
               
               
               12	CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1	Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Flutemetamol F 18 binds to β-amyloid plaques in the brain and the F-18 isotope produces a positron signal that is detected by a PET scanner. In in vitro binding studies using postmortem human brain homogenates containing fibrillar β-amyloid, the dissociation constant (Kd) for flutemetamol was 6.7 nM.
                        Selectivity of [3H]flutemetamol binding in post-mortem human brain sections was demonstrated using autoradiography, silver-stained protein, and immunohistochemistry (monoclonal antibody to β-amyloid) correlation studies.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2	Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        Following intravenous injection, flutemetamol F 18 diffuses across the human blood-brain barrier and produces a radioactivity signal detectable throughout the brain. Subsequently, cerebral perfusion decreases the brain flutemetamol F 18 content, with differential retention of the drug in cortical areas that contain β-amyloid aggregates compared to areas that lack the aggregates. The time-activity curves for flutemetamol F 18 in the brain of subjects with positive scans shows continual signal increases from time zero through 30 minutes post administration, with stable values thereafter up to at least 120 minutes post-injection. Differences in signal intensity between brain regions that specifically retain flutemetamol F 18 and brain regions with nonspecific retention of the drug form the basis of image interpretation methods [see Dosage and Administration (2.5)
                           ].
                        The test-retest distribution of flutemetamol F 18 was evaluated in 5 subjects with probable AD who underwent two administrations of flutemetamol F 18 (followed by PET scans) separated by a time period of 1 to 4 weeks. Images were reproducible when evaluated semi-quantitatively using an automated assessment of SUV in pre-specified cortical regions of brain.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3	Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        Following intravenous injection of 185 MBq (5 mCi) of Vizamyl in humans, flutemetamol F 18 plasma concentrations declined by approximately 75% in the first 20 minutes post-injection, and by approximately 90% in the first 180 minutes. The F 18 in circulation during the 30-120 minutes imaging window in plasma was principally associated with flutemetamol metabolites. Excretion was approximately 37% renal (28-45%; n=6) and 52% hepatobiliary (40-65%; n=6).
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         