
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Ipratropium bromide is an anticholinergic (parasympatholytic) agent which, based on animal studies, appears to inhibit vagally-mediated reflexes by antagonizing the action of acetylcholine, the transmitter agent released at the neuromuscular junctions in the lung. Anticholinergics prevent the increases in intracellular concentration of Ca++ which is caused by interaction of acetylcholine with the muscarinic receptors on bronchial smooth muscle.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Pharmacodynamic Properties
                     
                        Controlled clinical studies have demonstrated that Atrovent® (ipratropium bromide) Inhalation Aerosol CFC does not alter either mucociliary clearance or the volume or viscosity of respiratory secretions.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        Most of an administered dose is swallowed as shown by fecal excretion studies. Ipratropium bromide is a quaternary amine.  It is not readily absorbed into the systemic circulation either from the surface of the lung or from the gastrointestinal tract as confirmed by blood level and renal excretion studies.
                        Autoradiographic studies in rats have shown that ipratropium bromide does not penetrate the blood-brain barrier. The half-life of elimination is about 2 hours after inhalation or intravenous administration. Ipratropium bromide is minimally bound (0 to 9% 
                              in vitro
                           ) to plasma albumin and α1-acid glycoprotein.  It is partially metabolized to inactive ester hydrolysis products.  Following intravenous administration, approximately one-half of the dose is excreted unchanged in the urine.
                        A pharmacokinetic study with 29 chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) patients (48-79 years of age) demonstrated that mean peak plasma ipratropium concentrations of 59±20 pg/mL were obtained following a single administration of 4 inhalations of ATROVENT HFA Inhalation Aerosol (84 mcg).  Plasma ipratropium concentrations rapidly declined to 24±15 pg/mL by six hours.  When these patients were administered 4 inhalations QID (16 inhalations/day=336 mcg) for one week, the mean peak plasma ipratropium concentration increased to 82±39 pg/mL with a trough (6 hour) concentration of 28±12 pg/mL at steady state.  
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Special Populations
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Geriatric Patients
                              
                           
                           
                              In the pharmacokinetic study with 29 COPD patients, a subset of 14 patients were > 65 years of age. Mean peak plasma ipratropium concentrations of 56±24 pg/mL were obtained following a single administration of 4 inhalations (21 mcg/puff) of Atrovent® HFA (ipratropium bromide HFA) Inhalation Aerosol (84 mcg). When these 14 patients were administered 4 inhalations QID (16 inhalations/day) for one week, the mean peak plasma ipratropium concentration only increased to 84±50 pg/mL indicating that the pharmacokinetic behavior of ipratropium bromide in the geriatric population is consistent with younger patients.
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Renally Impaired Patients
                              
                           
                           
                              The pharmacokinetics of ATROVENT HFA Inhalation Aerosol have not been studied in patients with renal insufficiency.
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Hepatically Impaired Patients
                              
                           
                           
                              The pharmacokinetics of ATROVENT HFA Inhalation Aerosol have not been studied in patients with hepatic insufficiency.
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         