
                     
                     
                     CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
                     
                        
                           Mechanism of Action:  
                           Synera applied to 
intact skin provides local dermal analgesia by the release of lidocaine and 
tetracaine from the patch into the skin.  Lidocaine is an amide-type local 
anesthetic agent and tetracaine is an ester-type local anesthetic agent.  Both 
lidocaine and tetracaine block sodium ion channels required for the initiation 
and conduction of neuronal impulses, resulting in local anesthesia.
                        
                        
                           
                              Pharmacokinetics:
                           
                           
                        
                        
                           
                              Absorption
                           
                           
                              :  The amount of 
lidocaine and tetracaine systemically absorbed from Synera is thought to be 
directly related to the duration of application.  However, this was not clearly 
demonstrated in clinical trials.  Application of one Synera patch for 30 minutes 
in adults produced peak plasma concentrations of lidocaine less than 5 ng/mL 
while plasma levels of tetracaine were below the limit of quantitation 
(
                              <0.9 ng/mL) in all subjects tested (n = 12, see Table 1).  Synera 
application up to 60 minutes did not significantly increase plasma levels of 
lidocaine or tetracaine compared to a 30-minute application.
                           
                        
                        
                           Table 1
                        
                        
                           Absorption of Lidocaine and Tetracaine from Synera
                        
                        
                           Normal Adult Volunteers (n = 12)
                        
                        


                        



                           *Estimated absorbed dose was calculated by subtracting the residual amount of drug in each patch from the labeled claim.
                        
                        
                           na = not applicable
                        
                        
                           The surface area of application was 10 cm2 per Synera patch.

                           
                        
                        
                           Application of Synera to broken or inflamed skin, or simultaneous or 
sequential application of multiple Synera patches could result in higher plasma 
levels of local anesthetic that could, in susceptible individuals, produce 
systemic toxicity.
                        
                        
                           In general, application of multiple Synera patches either 
simultaneously or sequentially is not recommended.  However, plasma levels of 
lidocaine and tetracaine have been determined in clinical pharmacology studies 
following multiple successive and simultaneous applications of Synera patches on 
intact skin.
                        
                        
                           Maximum plasma levels of lidocaine after the application of a) four 
successive Synera patches for 30 minutes each with a 30-minute interval between 
each patch application, and b) three Synera patches for 60 minutes each with a 
60-minute interval between each application were less than 12 ng/mL and 8 ng/mL, 
respectively.  Tetracaine was not detected in plasma following either 
treatment.
                        
                        
                           Simultaneous application of two or four Synera patches for 60 minutes 
produced peak plasma concentrations of lidocaine of less than 9 ng/mL, while 
tetracaine plasma concentrations were not detectable in all subjects (n=22).  
Sequential 30-minute applications of four Synera patches at 60-minute intervals 
produced peak plasma concentrations of lidocaine of less than 12 ng/mL, while 
tetracaine plasma concentrations were below the limit of quantitation 
(n=11).
                        
                        
                           
                              Distribution
                           
                           
                              :  When lidocaine is 
administered intravenously to healthy volunteers, the steady-state volume of 
distribution is approximately 0.8 to 1.3 L/kg.  At lidocaine concentrations 
observed following the recommended product application, approximately 75% of 
lidocaine is bound to plasma proteins, primarily alpha-1-acid glycoprotein.  At 
much higher plasma concentrations (1 to 4 mcg/mL of free base) the plasma 
protein binding of lidocaine is concentration dependent.  Lidocaine crosses the 
placental and blood brain barriers, presumably by passive diffusion.  CNS 
toxicity may typically be observed around 5000 ng/mL of lidocaine; however a 
small number of patients reportedly may show signs of toxicity at approximately 
1000 ng/mL.
                           
                        
                        
                           Volume of distribution and protein binding have not been determined 
for tetracaine due to rapid hydrolysis in plasma.
                        
                        
                           
                              Metabolism
                           
                           
                              :  It is not known if 
lidocaine or tetracaine is metabolized in the skin.  Lidocaine is metabolized 
rapidly by the liver to a number of metabolites including 
monoethylglycinexylidide (MEGX) and glycinexylidide (GX), both of which have 
pharmacologic activity similar to, but less potent than that of lidocaine.  The 
major metabolic pathway of lidocaine, sequential N-deethylation to 
monoethylglycinexylidide (MEGX) and glycinexylidide (GX), is primarily mediated 
by CYP1A2 with a minor role of CYP3A4. The metabolite, 2,6-xylidine, 
has unknown pharmacologic activity.  Following intravenous administration of 
lidocaine, MEGX and GX concentrations in serum range from 11% to 36% and from 5% 
to 11% of lidocaine concentrations, respectively.  Serum concentrations of MEGX 
were about one-third the serum lidocaine concentrations. 
                           
                        
                        
                           Tetracaine undergoes rapid hydrolysis by plasma esterases. Primary 
metabolites of tetracaine include para-aminobenzoic acid and 
diethylaminoethanol, both of which have an unspecified activity.
                        
                        
                           
                              Elimination
                           
                           
                              :  The half-life of 
lidocaine elimination from the plasma following intravenous administration is 
approximately 1.8 hr.  Lidocaine and its metabolites are excreted by the 
kidneys.  More than 98% of an absorbed dose of lidocaine can be recovered in the 
urine as metabolites or parent drug.  Less than 10% of lidocaine is excreted 
unchanged in adults, and approximately 20% is excreted unchanged in neonates.  
The systemic clearance is approximately 8-10 mL/min/kg.  During intravenous 
studies, the elimination half-life of lidocaine was statistically significantly 
longer in elderly patients (2.5 hours) than in younger patients (1.5 
hours).
                           
                        
                        
                           The half-life and clearance for tetracaine have not been established 
for humans, but hydrolysis in the plasma is rapid.
                        
                        
                           
                              Special Populations
                           
                           
                        
                        
                           
                              Pediatrics
                           
                           
                              :  Application of one 
Synera patch for up to 30 minutes in children 4 months to 12 years of age (n=18) 
produced maximum peak plasma concentrations of lidocaine and tetracaine of 63 
ng/mL and 65 ng/mL, respectively.  Application of two Synera patches for up to 
30 minutes to children 4 months to 12 years of age (n=19) produced peak 
lidocaine levels of up to 331 ng/mL and tetracaine levels of less than 5 
ng/mL.
                           
                        
                        
                           
                              Elderly
                           
                           
                              :  After application 
of one Synera patch for 20 minutes, plasma levels of lidocaine and tetracaine 
were not detectable in elderly subjects (> 65 years of age, mean 72.0 

                              ±
                              4.3 years, n=10).  
After simultaneous application of two Synera patches for 60 minutes to elderly 
subjects (> 65 years of age, mean 69.5 
                              ±
                              3.7 years, n=12), the 
maximum peak lidocaine concentration was 6 ng/mL and tetracaine was not 
detectable.  During intravenous studies, the elimination half-life of lidocaine 
was statistically significantly longer in elderly patients (2.5 hours) than in 
younger patients (1.5 hours).
                           
                        
                        
                           
                              Cardiac, Renal and Hepatic Impairment
                           
                           
                              :  No specific 
pharmacokinetic studies were conducted.  The half-life of lidocaine may be 
increased in cardiac or hepatic dysfunction.  There is no established half-life 
for tetracaine due to rapid hydrolysis in the plasma.
                           
                        
                     
                  
               