
                     
                     
                     Drug Interactions
                     
                        Drug interaction studies with mycophenolate mofetil have been conducted with acyclovir, antacids, cholestyramine, cyclosporine, ganciclovir, oral contraceptives, sevelamer, trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole, norfloxacin, and metronidazole. Drug interaction studies have not been conducted with other drugs that may be commonly administered to renal, cardiac or hepatic transplant patients. Mycophenolate mofetil has not been administered concomitantly with azathioprine.
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Acyclovir
                           
                              Coadministration of mycophenolate mofetil (1 g) and acyclovir (800 mg) to 12 healthy volunteers resulted in no significant change in MPA AUC and Cmax. However, MPAG and acyclovir plasma AUCs were increased 10.6% and 21.9%, respectively. Because MPAG plasma concentrations are increased in the presence of renal impairment, as are acyclovir concentrations, the potential exists for mycophenolate and acyclovir or its prodrug (e.g., valacyclovir) to compete for tubular secretion, further increasing the concentrations of both drugs.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Antacids With Magnesium and Aluminum Hydroxides
                           
                              Absorption of a single dose of mycophenolate mofetil (2 g) was decreased when administered to ten rheumatoid arthritis patients also taking Maalox® TC (10 mL qid). The Cmax and AUC(0-24h) for MPA were 33% and 17% lower, respectively, than when mycophenolate mofetil was administered alone under fasting conditions. Mycophenolate mofetil may be administered to patients who are also taking antacids containing magnesium and aluminum hydroxides; however, it is recommended that mycophenolate mofetil and the antacid not be administered simultaneously.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           ProtonPumpInhibitors (PPIs)
                           
                              Coadministration of PPIs (e.g., lansoprazole, pantoprazole) in single doses to healthy volunteers and multiple doses to transplant patients receiving mycophenolate mofetil has been reported to reduce the exposure to mycophenolic acid (MPA). An approximate reduction of 30 to 70% in the Cmax and 25% to 35% in the AUC of MPA has been observed, possibly due to a decrease in MPA solubility at an increased gastric pH. The clinical impact of reduced MPA exposure on organ rejection has not been established in transplant patients receiving PPIs and mycophenolate mofetil. Because clinical relevance has not been established, PPIs should be used with caution when coadministered to transplant patients being treated with mycophenolate mofetil.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Cholestyramine
                           
                              Following single-dose administration of 1.5 g mycophenolate mofetil to 12 healthy volunteers pretreated with 4 g tid of cholestyramine for 4 days, MPA AUC decreased approximately 40%. This decrease is consistent with interruption of enterohepatic recirculation which may be due to binding of recirculating MPAG with cholestyramine in the intestine. Some degree of enterohepatic recirculation is also anticipated following intravenous administration of mycophenolate mofetil. Therefore, mycophenolate mofetil is not recommended to be given with cholestyramine or other agents that may interfere with enterohepatic recirculation.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Cyclosporine
                           
                              Cyclosporine (Sandimmune®) pharmacokinetics (at doses of 275 to 415 mg/day) were unaffected by single and multiple doses of 1.5 g bid of mycophenolate mofetil in 10 stable renal transplant patients. The mean (± SD) AUC(0-12h) and Cmax of cyclosporine after 14 days of multiple doses of mycophenolate mofetil were 3290 (± 822) ng•h/mL and 753 (± 161) ng/mL, respectively, compared to 3245 (± 1088) ng•h/mL and 700 (± 246) ng/mL, respectively, 1 week before administration of mycophenolate mofetil. 
                              Cyclosporine A interferes with MPA enterohepatic recirculation. In renal transplant patients, mean MPA exposure (AUC0-12h) was approximately 30 to 50% greater when mycophenolate mofetil is administered without cyclosporine compared with when mycophenolate mofetil is coadministered with cyclosporine. This interaction is due to cyclosporine inhibition of multidrug-resistance-associated protein 2 (MRP-2) transporter in the biliary tract, thereby preventing the excretion of MPAG into the bile that would lead to enterohepatic recirculation of MPA. This information should be taken into consideration when MMF is used without cyclosporine; changes in MPA exposure should be expected when switching patients from cyclosporine A to one of the immunosuppressants which do not interfere with MPA’s enterohepatic cycle (e.g., tacrolimus; belatacept).
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Telmisartan
                           
                              Concomitant administration of telmisartan and mycophenolate mofetil resulted in an approximately 30% decrease in mycophenolic acid (MPA) concentrations. Telmisartan changes MPA’s elimination by enhancing PPAR gamma (peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma) expression, which in turn results in an enhanced UGT1A9 expression and activity.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Ganciclovir
                           
                              Following single-dose administration to 12 stable renal transplant patients, no pharmacokinetic interaction was observed between mycophenolate mofetil (1.5 g) and intravenous ganciclovir (5 mg/kg). Mean (± SD) ganciclovir AUC and Cmax (n = 10) were 54.3 (± 19) mcg•h/mL and 11.5 (± 1.8) mcg/mL, respectively, after coadministration of the two drugs, compared to 51 (± 17) mcg•h/mL and 10.6 (± 2) mcg/mL, respectively, after administration of intravenous ganciclovir alone. The mean (± SD) AUC and Cmax of MPA (n = 12) after coadministration were 80.9 (± 21.6) mcg•h/mL and 27.8 (± 13.9) mcg/mL, respectively, compared to values of 80.3 (± 16.4) mcg•h/mL and 30.9 (± 11.2) mcg/mL, respectively, after administration of mycophenolate mofetil alone. Because MPAG plasma concentrations are increased in the presence of renal impairment, as are ganciclovir concentrations, the two drugs will compete for tubular secretion and thus further increases in concentrations of both drugs may occur. In patients with renal impairment in which MMF and ganciclovir or its prodrug (e.g., valganciclovir) are coadministered, patients should be monitored carefully.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Oral Contraceptives
                           
                              A study of coadministration of mycophenolate mofetil (1 g bid) and combined oral contraceptives containing ethinylestradiol (0.02 mg to 0.04 mg) and levonorgestrel (0.05 mg to 0.20 mg), desogestrel (0.15 mg) or gestodene (0.05 mg to 0.10 mg) was conducted in 18 women with psoriasis over 3 consecutive menstrual cycles. Mean AUC(0-24h) was similar for ethinylestradiol and 3-keto desogestrel; however, mean levonorgestrel AUC(0-24h) significantly decreased by about 15%. There was large inter-patient variability (% CV in the range of 60% to 70%) in the data, especially for ethinylestradiol. Mean serum levels of LH, FSH and progesterone were not significantly affected. Mycophenolate mofetil may not have any influence on the ovulation-suppressing action of the studied oral contraceptives. It is recommended to coadminister mycophenolate mofetil with hormonal contraceptives (e.g., birth control pill, transdermal patch, vaginal ring, injection, and implant) with caution and additional barrier contraceptive methods must be used (see PRECAUTIONS, 
                                    Pregnancy Exposure Prevention and Planning
                                 ).
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Sevelamer
                           
                              Concomitant administration of sevelamer and mycophenolate mofetil in adult and pediatric patients decreased the mean MPA Cmax and AUC0-12h by 36% and 26% respectively. This data suggest that sevelamer and other calcium free phosphate binders should not be administered simultaneously with mycophenolate mofetil. Alternatively, it is recommended that sevelamer and other calcium free phosphate binders preferentially could be given 2 hours after mycophenolate mofetil intake to minimize the impact on the absorption of MPA.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Trimethoprim/Sulfamethoxazole
                           
                              Following single-dose administration of mycophenolate mofetil (1.5 g) to 12 healthy male volunteers on day 8 of a 10 day course of trimethoprim 160 mg/sulfamethoxazole 800 mg administered bid, no effect on the bioavailability of MPA was observed. The mean (± SD) AUC and Cmax of MPA after concomitant administration were 75.2 (± 19.8) mcg•h/mL and 34.0 (± 6.6) mcg/mL, respectively, compared to 79.2 (± 27.9) mcg•h/mL and 34.2 (± 10.7) mcg/mL, respectively, after administration of mycophenolate mofetil alone.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Norfloxacin and Metronidazole
                           
                              Following single-dose administration of mycophenolate mofetil (1 g) to 11 healthy volunteers on day 4 of a 5 day course of a combination of norfloxacin and metronidazole, the mean MPA AUC0-48h was significantly reduced by 33% compared to the administration of mycophenolate mofetil alone (p < 0.05). Therefore, mycophenolate mofetil is not recommended to be given with the combination of norfloxacin and metronidazole. There was no significant effect on mean MPA AUC0-48h when mycophenolate mofetil was concomitantly administered with norfloxacin or metronidazole separately. The mean (± SD) MPA AUC0-48h after coadministration of mycophenolate mofetil with norfloxacin or metronidazole separately was 48.3 (± 24) mcg•h/mL and 42.7 (± 23) mcg•h/mL, respectively, compared with 56.2 (± 24) mcg•h/mL after administration of mycophenolate mofetil alone.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Ciprofloxacin and Amoxicillin plus Clavulanic Acid 
                           
                              A total of 64 mycophenolate mofetil-treated renal transplant recipients received either oral ciprofloxacin 500 mg bid or amoxicillin plus clavulanic acid 375 mg tid for 7 or at least 14 days. Approximately 50% reductions in median trough MPA concentrations (pre-dose) from baseline (mycophenolate mofetil alone) were observed in 3 days following commencement of oral ciprofloxacin or amoxicillin plus clavulanic acid. These reductions in trough MPA concentrations tended to diminish within 14 days of antibiotic therapy and ceased within 3 days after discontinuation of antibiotics. The postulated mechanism for this interaction is an antibiotic-induced reduction in glucuronidase-possessing enteric organisms leading to a decrease in enterohepatic recirculation of MPA. The change in trough level may not accurately represent changes in overall MPA exposure; therefore, clinical relevance of these observations is unclear. 
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Rifampin
                           
                              In a single heart-lung transplant patient, after correction for dose, a 67% decrease in MPA exposure (AUC0-12h) has been observed with concomitant administration of mycophenolate mofetil and rifampin. Therefore, mycophenolate mofetil is not recommended to be given with rifampin concomitantly unless the benefit outweighs the risk.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Other Interactions
                           
                              The measured value for renal clearance of MPAG indicates removal occurs by renal tubular secretion as well as glomerular filtration. Consistent with this, coadministration of probenecid, a known inhibitor of tubular secretion, with mycophenolate mofetil in monkeys results in a 3 fold increase in plasma MPAG AUC and a 2 fold increase in plasma MPA AUC. Thus, other drugs known to undergo renal tubular secretion may compete with MPAG and thereby raise plasma concentrations of MPAG or the other drug undergoing tubular secretion.
                              Drugs that alter the gastrointestinal flora may interact with mycophenolate mofetil by disrupting enterohepatic recirculation. Interference of MPAG hydrolysis may lead to less MPA available for absorption.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Live Vaccines
                           
                              During treatment with mycophenolate mofetil, the use of live attenuated vaccines should be avoided and patients should be advised that vaccinations may be less effective (see PRECAUTIONS, 
                                    Immunizations
                                 ). Influenza vaccination may be of value. Prescribers should refer to national guidelines for influenza vaccination.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               