
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        OsmoPrep Tablets, a dosing regimen containing 48 grams of sodium phosphate (32 tablets), induces diarrhea. Each administration has a purgative effect for approximately 1 to 3 hours. The primary mode of action is thought to be through the osmotic effect of sodium, causing large amounts of water to be drawn into the colon, promoting evacuation. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        Pharmacokinetic studies with OsmoPrep have not been conducted.  However, the following pharmacokinetic study was conducted with Visicol tablets which contain the same active ingredients (sodium phosphate) as OsmoPrep.  In addition, Visicol is administered at a dose that is 25% greater than the OsmoPrep dose.
                        An open-label pharmacokinetic study of Visicol in healthy volunteers was performed to determine the concentration-time profile of serum inorganic phosphorus levels after Visicol administration.  All subjects received the approved Visicol dosing regimen (60 grams of sodium phosphate with a total liquid volume of 3.6 quarts) for colon cleansing.  A 30 gram dose (20 tablets given as 3 tablets every 15 minutes with 8 ounces of clear liquids) was given beginning at 6 PM in the evening.  The 30 gram dose (20 tablets given as 3 tablets every 15 minutes with 8 ounces of clear liquids) was repeated the following morning beginning at 6 AM.  
                        Twenty-three healthy subjects (mean age 57 years old; 57% male and 43% female; and 65% Hispanic, 30% Caucasian, and 4% African-American) participated in this pharmacokinetic study.  The serum phosphorus level rose from a mean (± standard deviation) baseline of 4.0 (± 0.7) mg/dL to 7.7 (± 1.6 mg/dL), at a median of 3 hours after the administration of the first 30-gram dose of sodium phosphate tablets (see Figure 1).  The serum phosphorus level rose to a mean of 8.4 (± 1.9) mg/dL, at a median of 4 hours after the administration of the second 30-gram dose of sodium phosphate tablets.  The serum phosphorus level remained above baseline for a median of 24 hours after the administration of the initial dose of sodium phosphate tablets (range 16 to 48 hours).  
                        
                           Figure 1. Mean (±standard deviation) serum phosphorus concentrations
                        
                        
                           
                        
                        The upper (4.5 mg/dL) and lower (2.6 mg/dL) reference limits for serum phosphate are represented by solid bars.  
                        
                           Special Populations 
                        
                        
                           Renal Insufficiency: The effect of renal dysfunction on the pharmacokinetics of OsmoPrep Tablets has not been studied.  Since the inorganic form of phosphate in the circulating plasma is excreted almost entirely by the kidneys, patients with renal disease may have difficulty excreting a large phosphate load.  Thus, OsmoPrep Tablets should be used with caution in patients with impaired renal function. [see Warnings and Precautions (5)]
                        
                        
                           Hepatic Insufficiency: OsmoPrep Tablets have not been investigated in patients with hepatic failure.  
                        
                           Geriatric: In a single pharmacokinetic study of sodium phosphate tablets, which included 6 elderly volunteers, plasma half-life increased two-fold in subjects > 70 years of age compared to subjects < 50 years of age (3 subjects and 5 subjects, respectively). 
                        
                           Gender: No difference in serum phosphate AUC values were observed in the single pharmacokinetic study conducted with sodium phosphate tablets in 13 male and 10 female healthy volunteers. 
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           figure-3
                           
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         