
                     
                     
                     Drug Interactions
                     
                        Doxorubicin is extensively metabolized by the liver. Changes in hepatic function induced by concomitant therapies may affect doxorubicin metabolism, pharmacokinetics, therapeutic efficacy, and/or toxicity. Toxicities associated with doxorubicin, especially hematologic and gastrointestinal events, may be increased when doxorubicin is used in combination with other cytotoxic drugs.
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           Paclitaxel
                           
                              There have been a number of reports in the literature that describe an increase in cardiotoxicity when doxorubicin is co-administered with paclitaxel. Two published studies report that initial administration of paclitaxel infused over 24 hours followed by doxorubicin administered over 48 hours resulted in a significant decrease in doxorubicin clearance with more profound neutropenic and stomatitis episodes than the reverse sequence of administration.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           Progesterone
                           
                              In a published study, progesterone was given intravenously to patients with advanced malignancies (ECOG PS < 2) at high doses (up to 10 g over 24 hours) concomitantly with a fixed doxorubicin dose (60 mg/m2) via bolus injection. Enhanced doxorubicin-induced neutropenia and thrombocytopenia were observed.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           Verapamil
                           
                              A study of the effects of verapamil on the acute toxicity of doxorubicin in mice revealed higher initial peak concentrations of doxorubicin in the heart with a higher incidence and severity of degenerative changes in cardiac tissue resulting in a shorter survival.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           Cyclosporine
                           
                              The addition of cyclosporine to doxorubicin may result in increases in AUC for both doxorubicin and doxorubicinol possibly due to a decrease in clearance of parent drug and a decrease in metabolism of doxorubicinol. Literature reports suggest that adding cyclosporine to doxorubicin results in more profound and prolonged hematologic toxicity than doxorubicin alone. Coma and/or seizures have also been described.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           Dexrazoxane
                           
                              In a clinical study of women with metastatic breast cancer, the concurrent use of the cardioprotectant, dexrazoxane, with the initiation of a regimen of fluorouracil, doxorubicin, and cyclophosphamide (FAC) was associated with a lower tumor response rate. Later initiation of dexrazoxane (after administration of a cumulative doxorubicin dose of 300 mg/m2 of doxorubicin had been given as a component of FAC) was not associated with a reduction in chemotherapy activity. Dexrazoxane is only indicated for use in women with metastatic breast cancer who have received a cumulative doxorubicin dose of 300 mg/m2 and are continuing with doxorubicin therapy.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           Cytarabine
                           
                              Necrotizing colitis manifested by typhlitis (cecal inflammation), bloody stools, and severe and sometimes fatal infections have been associated with a combination of doxorubicin given by intravenous push daily for 3 days and cytarabine given by continuous infusion daily for 7 or more days.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           Sorafenib
                           
                              In clinical studies, both an increase of 21% and 47%, and no change in the AUC of doxorubicin were observed with concomitant treatment with sorafenib 400 mg twice daily. The clinical significance of these findings is unknown.
                              
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           Cyclophosphamide
                           
                              The addition of cyclophosphamide to doxorubicin treatment does not affect exposure to doxorubicin, but may result in an increase in exposure to doxorubicinol, a metabolite. Doxorubicinol only has 5% of the cytotoxic activity of doxorubicin. Concurrent treatment with doxorubicin has been reported to exacerbate cyclophosphamide-induced hemorrhagic cystitis. Acute myeloid leukemia has been reported as a second malignancy after treatment with doxorubicin and cyclophosphamide.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           Literature reports have also described the following drug interactions
                           
                              Phenobarbital increases the elimination of doxorubicin; phenytoin levels may be decreased by doxorubicin; streptozocin (Zanosar®) may inhibit hepatic metabolism of doxorubicin; saquinavir in combination with cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, and etoposide increased mucosal toxicity in patients with HIV-associated non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma; and administration of live vaccines to immunosuppressed patients including those undergoing cytotoxic chemotherapy may be hazardous (see 
                                    WARNINGS).
                              
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               