
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Certolizumab pegol binds to human TNFα with a KD of 90pM. TNFα is a key pro-inflammatory cytokine with a central role in inflammatory processes. Certolizumab pegol selectively neutralizes TNFα (IC90 of 4 ng/mL for inhibition of human TNFα in the in vitro L929 murine fibrosarcoma cytotoxicity assay) but does not neutralize lymphotoxin α (TNFβ). Certolizumab pegol cross-reacts poorly with TNF from rodents and rabbits, therefore in vivo efficacy was evaluated using animal models in which human TNFα was the physiologically active molecule.
                        Certolizumab pegol was shown to neutralize membrane-associated and soluble human TNFα in a dose-dependent manner. Incubation of monocytes with certolizumab pegol resulted in a dose-dependent inhibition of LPS-induced TNFα and IL-1β production in human monocytes.
                        Certolizumab pegol does not contain a fragment crystallizable (Fc) region, which is normally present in a complete antibody, and therefore does not fix complement or cause antibody-dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity in vitro. It does not induce apoptosis in vitro in human peripheral blood-derived monocytes or lymphocytes, nor does certolizumab pegol induce neutrophil degranulation.
                        A tissue reactivity study was carried out ex vivo to evaluate potential cross-reactivity of certolizumab pegol with cryosections of normal human tissues. Certolizumab pegol showed no reactivity with a designated standard panel of normal human tissues.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        Biological activities ascribed to TNFα include the upregulation of cellular adhesion molecules and chemokines, upregulation of major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I and class II molecules, and direct leukocyte activation. TNFα stimulates the production of downstream inflammatory mediators, including interleukin-1, prostaglandins, platelet activating factor, and nitric oxide. Elevated levels of TNFα have been implicated in the pathology of Crohn's disease and rheumatoid arthritis. Certolizumab pegol binds to TNFα, inhibiting its role as a key mediator of inflammation. TNFα is strongly expressed in the bowel wall in areas involved by Crohn's disease and fecal concentrations of TNFα in patients with Crohn's disease have been shown to reflect clinical severity of the disease. After treatment with certolizumab pegol, patients with Crohn's disease demonstrated a decrease in the levels of C-reactive protein (CRP). Increased TNFα levels are found in the synovial fluid of rheumatoid arthritis patients and play an important role in the joint destruction that is a hallmark of this disease.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                    Absorption
                                 
                              
                              A total of 126 healthy subjects received doses of up to 800 mg certolizumab pegol subcutaneously (sc) and up to 10 mg/kg intravenously (IV) in four pharmacokinetic studies. Data from these studies demonstrate that single intravenous and subcutaneous doses of certolizumab pegol have predictable dose-related plasma concentrations with a linear relationship between the dose administered and the maximum plasma concentration (Cmax), and the Area Under the certolizumab pegol plasma concentration versus time Curve (AUC). A mean Cmax of approximately 43 to 49 mcg/mL occurred at Week 5 during the initial loading dose period using the recommended dose regimen for the treatment of patients with rheumatoid arthritis (400 mg sc at Weeks 0, 2 and 4 followed by 200 mg every other week).
                              Certolizumab pegol plasma concentrations were broadly dose-proportional and pharmacokinetics observed in patients with rheumatoid arthritis and Crohn's disease were consistent with those seen in healthy subjects.
                              Following subcutaneous administration, peak plasma concentrations of certolizumab pegol were attained between 54 and 171 hours post-injection. Certolizumab pegol has bioavailability (F) of approximately 80% (ranging from 76% to 88%) following subcutaneous administration compared to intravenous administration.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                    Distribution
                                 
                              
                              The steady state volume of distribution (Vss) was estimated as 6 to 8 L in the population pharmacokinetic analysis for patients with Crohn's disease and patients with rheumatoid arthritis.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                    Metabolism
                                 
                              
                              The metabolism of certolizumab pegol has not been studied in human subjects. Data from animals indicate that once cleaved from the Fab' fragment the PEG moiety is mainly excreted in urine without further metabolism.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                    Elimination
                                 
                              
                              PEGylation, the covalent attachment of PEG polymers to peptides, delays the metabolism and elimination of these entities from the circulation by a variety of mechanisms, including decreased renal clearance, proteolysis, and immunogenicity. Accordingly, certolizumab pegol is an antibody Fab' fragment conjugated with PEG in order to extend the terminal plasma elimination half-life (t1/2) of the Fab'. The terminal elimination phase half-life (t1/2) was approximately 14 days for all doses tested. The clearance following IV administration to healthy subjects ranged from 9.21 mL/h to 14.38 mL/h. The clearance following sc dosing was estimated 17 mL/h in the Crohn's disease population PK analysis with an inter-subject variability of 38% (CV) and an inter-occasion variability of 16%.  Similarly, the clearance following sc dosing was estimated as 21.0 mL/h in the RA population PK analysis, with an inter-subject variability of 30.8% (%CV) and inter-occasion variability 22.0%. The route of elimination of certolizumab pegol has not been studied in human subjects. Studies in animals indicate that the major route of elimination of the PEG component is via urinary excretion.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                    Special Populations
                                 
                              
                              Population pharmacokinetic analysis was conducted on data from patients with rheumatoid arthritis and patients with Crohn's disease, to evaluate the effect of age, race, gender, methotrexate use, concomitant medication, creatinine clearance and presence of anti-certolizumab antibodies on pharmacokinetics of certolizumab pegol.
                              Only bodyweight and presence of anti-certolizumab antibodies significantly affected certolizumab pegol pharmacokinetics. Pharmacokinetic exposure was inversely related to body weight but pharmacodynamic exposure-response analysis showed that no additional therapeutic benefit would be expected from a weight-adjusted dose regimen. The presence of anti-certolizumab antibodies was associated with a 3.6-fold increase in clearance.
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    Age: Pharmacokinetics of certolizumab pegol was not different in elderly compared to young adults.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    Gender: Pharmacokinetics of certolizumab pegol was similar in male and female subjects.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    Renal Impairment: Specific clinical studies have not been performed to assess the effect of renal impairment on the pharmacokinetics of CIMZIA. The pharmacokinetics of the PEG (polyethylene glycol) fraction of certolizumab pegol is expected to be dependent on renal function but has not been assessed in renal impairment. There are insufficient data to provide a dosing recommendation in moderate and severe renal impairment.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    Race: A specific clinical study showed no difference in pharmacokinetics between Caucasian and Japanese subjects.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                    Drug Interaction Studies
                                 
                              
                              Methotrexate pharmacokinetics is not altered by concomitant administration with CIMZIA in patients with rheumatoid arthritis. The effect of methotrexate on CIMZIA pharmacokinetics was not studied. However, methotrexate-treated patients have lower incidence of antibodies to CIMZIA. Thus, therapeutic plasma levels are more likely to be sustained when CIMZIA is administered with methotrexate in patients with rheumatoid arthritis.
                              Formal drug-drug interaction studies have not been conducted with CIMZIA upon concomitant administration with corticosteroids, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, analgesics or immunosuppressants.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         