
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                            Use with Biological DMARDs  – increased risk of serious infections (5.8, 7.1)
                            Live vaccines – avoid use with CIMZIA (5.10, 7.2)
                            Laboratory tests – may interfere with aPTT tests (7.3)
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 Use with Anakinra, Abatacept, Rituximab, and Natalizumab
                     
                        An increased risk of serious infections has been seen in clinical studies of other TNF-blocking agents used in combination with anakinra or abatacept, with no added benefit. Formal drug interaction studies have not been performed with rituximab or natalizumab. Because of the nature of the adverse events seen with these combinations with TNF blocker therapy, similar toxicities may also result from the use of CIMZIA in these combinations. There is not enough information to assess the safety and efficacy of such combination therapy. Therefore, the use of CIMZIA in combination with anakinra, abatacept, rituximab, or natalizumab is not recommended [see Warnings and Precautions (5.8)].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 Live Vaccines
                     
                        Avoid use of live (including attenuated) vaccines concurrently with CIMZIA [see Warnings and Precautions (5.10)].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3 Laboratory Tests
                     
                        Interference with certain coagulation assays has been detected in patients treated with CIMZIA. Certolizumab pegol may cause erroneously elevated activated partial thromboplastin time (aPTT) assay results in patients without coagulation abnormalities. This effect has been observed with the PTT-Lupus Anticoagulant (LA) test and Standard Target Activated Partial Thromboplastin time (STA-PTT) Automate tests from Diagnostica Stago, and the HemosIL APTT-SP liquid and HemosIL lyophilized silica tests from Instrumentation Laboratories. Other aPTT assays may be affected as well. Interference with thrombin time (TT) and prothrombin time (PT) assays has not been observed. There is no evidence that CIMZIA therapy has an effect on in vivo coagulation.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         