
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  

                  

                  Mode of ActionFluconazole is a highly selective inhibitor of fungal cytochrome 
P-450 sterol C-14 alpha-demethylation. Mammalian cell demethylation is much less 
sensitive to fluconazole inhibition. The subsequent loss of normal sterols 
correlates with the accumulation of 14 alpha-methyl sterols in fungi and may be 
responsible for the fungistatic activity of fluconazole.
                  
                  Pharmacokinetics and MetabolismThe pharmacokinetic properties of fluconazole are similar 
following administration by the intravenous or oral routes. In normal 
volunteers, the bioavailability of orally administered fluconazole is over 90% 
compared with intravenous administration. Bioequivalence was established between 
the 100 mg tablet and both suspension strengths when administered as a single 
200 mg dose.
                  Peak plasma concentrations (Cmax) in fasted normal 
volunteers occur between 1 and 2 hours with a terminal plasma elimination 
half-life of approximately 30 hours (range: 20 to 50 hours) after oral 
administration.
                  In fasted normal volunteers, administration of a single oral 400 mg dose of 
fluconazole leads to a mean Cmax of 6.72 mcg/mL (range: 
4.12 to 8.08 mcg/mL) and after single oral doses of 50 to 400 mg, fluconazole 
plasma concentrations and AUC (area under the plasma concentration-time curve) 
are dose proportional.
                  Administration of a single oral 150 mg tablet of fluconazole to ten lactating 
women resulted in a mean Cmax of 2.61 mcg/mL (range: 1.57 
to 3.65 mcg/mL).
                  Steady-state concentrations are reached within 5 to 10 days following oral 
doses of 50 to 400 mg given once daily. Administration of a loading dose (on day 
1) of twice the usual daily dose results in plasma concentrations close to 
steady-state by the second day. The apparent volume of distribution of 
fluconazole approximates that of total body water. Plasma protein binding is low 
(11 to 12%). Following either single- or multiple-oral doses for up to 14 days, 
fluconazole penetrates into all body fluids studied (see table below). In normal 
volunteers, saliva concentrations of fluconazole were equal to or slightly 
greater than plasma concentrations regardless of dose, route, or duration of 
dosing. In patients with bronchiectasis, sputum concentrations of fluconazole 
following a single 150 mg oral dose were equal to plasma concentrations at both 
4 and 24 hours post dose. In patients with fungal meningitis, fluconazole 
concentrations in the CSF are approximately 80% of the corresponding plasma 
concentrations.
                  A single oral 150 mg dose of fluconazole administered to 27 patients 
penetrated into vaginal tissue, resulting in tissue: plasma ratios ranging from 
0.94 to 1.14 over the first 48 hours following dosing.
                  A single oral 150 mg dose of fluconazole administered to 14 patients 
penetrated into vaginal fluid, resulting in fluid: plasma ratios ranging from 
0.36 to 0.71 over the first 72 hours following dosing.
                  
                  


                  




                  In normal volunteers, fluconazole is cleared primarily by renal excretion, 
with approximately 80% of the administered dose appearing in the urine as 
unchanged drug. About 11% of the dose is excreted in the urine as 
metabolites.
                  The pharmacokinetics of fluconazole are markedly affected by reduction in 
renal function. There is an inverse relationship between the elimination 
half-life and creatinine clearance. The dose of fluconazole may need to be 
reduced in patients with impaired renal function (see DOSAGE 
AND ADMINISTRATION). A 3-hour hemodialysis session decreases plasma 
concentrations by approximately 50%.
                  In normal volunteers, fluconazole administration (doses ranging from 200 mg 
to 400 mg once daily for up to 14 days) was associated with small and 
inconsistent effects on testosterone concentrations, endogenous corticosteroid 
concentrations, and the ACTH-stimulated cortisol response.
                  
                  Pharmacokinetics in ChildrenIn children, the following pharmacokinetic data {Mean(%cv)} have 
been reported:
                  
                  


                  


Clearance corrected for body weight was not affected by age in these studies. 
Mean body clearance in adults is reported to be 0.23 (17%) mL/min/kg.
                  In premature newborns (gestational age 26 to 29 weeks), the mean (%cv) 
clearance within 36 hours of birth was 0.180 (35%, N=7) mL/min/kg, which increased with time to a mean of 
0.218 (31%, N=9) mL/min/kg six days later and 0.333 
(56%, N=4) mL/min/kg 12 days later. Similarly, the 
half-life was 73.6 hours, which decreased with time to a mean of 53.2 hours six 
days later and 46.6 hours 12 days later.
                  
                  Pharmacokinetics in ElderlyA pharmacokinetic study was conducted in 22 subjects, 65 years of 
age or older receiving a single 50 mg oral dose of fluconazole. Ten of these 
patients were concomitantly receiving diuretics. The Cmax 
was 1.54 mcg/mL and occurred at 1.3 hours post dose. The mean AUC was 76.4+ 20.3 
mcg∙h/mL, and the mean terminal half-life was 46.2 hours. These pharmacokinetic 
parameter values are higher than analogous values reported for normal young male 
volunteers. Coadministration of diuretics did not significantly alter AUC or 
Cmax. In addition, creatinine clearance (74 mL/min), the 
percent of drug recovered unchanged in urine (0-24 hr, 22%) and the fluconazole 
renal clearance estimates (0.124 mL/min/kg) for the elderly were generally lower 
than those of younger volunteers. Thus, the alteration of fluconazole 
disposition in the elderly appears to be related to reduced renal function 
characteristic of this group. A plot of each subject’s terminal elimination 
half-life versus creatinine clearance compared with the predicted half-life – 
creatinine clearance curve derived from normal subjects and subjects with 
varying degrees of renal insufficiency indicated that 21 of 22 subjects fell 
within the 95% confidence limit of the predicted half-life – creatinine 
clearance curves. These results are consistent with the hypothesis that higher 
values for the pharmacokinetic parameters observed in the elderly subjects 
compared with normal young male volunteers are due to the decreased kidney 
function that is expected in the elderly.
                  
                     

                  
               
               
            
         