


12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
	The primary action of ChiRhoStim® is to increase the volume and bicarbonate content of secreted pancreatic juices. The standard unit of activity used for ChiRhoStim® is the clinical unit as defined in the literature.(5)  Synthetic human secretin (sHS), synthetic porcine secretin (sPS) and biologically derived porcine secretin (bPS) have been evaluated and compared in the validated cat bioassay used for release of bPS.  sHS and sPS were found to have similar pharmacological activity in terms of stimulating the exocrine pancreas to secrete juice and bicarbonate.  The potency correlation with bPS for both sHS and sPS was 0.2 mcg (sHS or sPS) corresponding to 1 CU (bPS).  The biological activity of sHS and sPS was approximately 5.0 CU per mcg as opposed to 3.0 CU per mcg for bPS.   ® is to increase the volume and bicarbonate content of secreted pancreatic juices. The standard unit of activity used for ChiRhoStim





12.1 Mechanism of Action
Secretin is a hormone that is normally released from the duodenum upon exposure of the proximal intestinal lumen to gastric acid, fatty acids and amino acids. Secretin is released from enterochromaffin cells in the intestinal mucosa. Secretin receptors have been identified in the pancreas, stomach, liver, colon and other tissues. When secretin binds to secretin receptors on pancreatic duct cells it opens cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) channels, leading to secretion of bicarbonate-rich-pancreatic fluid. Secretin may also work through vagal-vagal neural pathways since stimulation of the efferent vagus nerve stimulates bicarbonate secretion and atropine blocks secretin-stimulated pancreatic secretion. See references 6 and 7 for additional details on mechanism of action of secretin and feedback controls.







12.3 Pharmacokinetics
The PK profile for synthetic human secretin was evaluated in 12 normal subjects. After intravenous bolus administration of 0.4 mcg/kg, synthetic human secretin concentration rapidly declines to baseline secretin levels within 90 to 120 minutes. The elimination half-life of synthetic human secretin is 45 minutes. The clearance of synthetic human secretin is 580.9 ± 51.3 mL/min and the volume of distribution is 2.7 L. 




