
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  Like other topical corticosteroids, Clodan™ has anti-inflammatory, antipruritic, and vasoconstrictive properties. The mechanism of the anti-inflammatory activity of the topical steroids, in general, is unclear. However, corticosteroids are thought to act by the induction of phospholipase A2 inhibitory proteins, collectively called lipocortins. It is postulated that these proteins control the biosynthesis of potent mediators of inflammation such as prostaglandins and leukotrienes by inhibiting the release of their common precursor, arachidonic acid. Arachidonic acid is released from membrane phospholipids by phospholipase A2.
               
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        The extent of percutaneous absorption of topical corticosteroids is determined by many factors, including the vehicle, the integrity of the epidermal barrier and occlusion. Topical corticosteroids can be absorbed from normal intact skin, while inflammation and/or other disease processes in the skin may increase percutaneous absorption.
                        Due to the fact that circulating levels of corticosteroids are usually below the limit of detection following application, there are no human data regarding the pharmacokinetics of topical corticosteroids. In such cases pharmacodynamic end points, including both hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis testing and topical vasoconstriction, are used as surrogates in the assessments of systemic exposure and relative potency, respectively.
                        In studies evaluating the potential for hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis suppression, use of clobetasol propionate shampoo, 0.05%, resulted in demonstrable HPA axis suppression in 5 out of 12 (42%) adolescent patients (see 
                              PRECAUTIONS
                           ).
                        Clobetasol propionate shampoo, 0.05% is in the super-high range of potency in vasoconstrictor studies.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         