
               
               
               DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
                  
                  
                  Drug Interactions
                  
                     In vitro drug metabolism studies 
suggest that there is a potential for drug interactions when trazodone is given 
with CYP3A4 inhibitors. Ritonavir, a potent CYP3A4 inhibitor, increased the 
Cmax, AUC, and elimination half-life, and decreased 
clearance of trazodone after administration of ritonavir twice daily for 2 days. 
Adverse effects including nausea, hypotension, and syncope were observed when 
ritonavir and trazodone were coadministered. It is likely that ketoconazole, 
indinavir, and other CYP3A4 inhibitors such as itraconazole or nefazodone may 
lead to substantial increases in trazodone plasma concentrations, with the 
potential for adverse effects. If trazodone is used with a potent CYP3A4 
inhibitor, a lower dose of trazodone should be considered. 
                  Carbamazepine reduced plasma concentrations of trazodone when coadministered. 
Patients should be closely monitored to see if there is a need for an increased 
dose of trazodone when taking both drugs. 
                  Increased serum digoxin or phenytoin levels have been reported to occur in 
patients receiving trazodone hydrochloride concurrently with either of those two 
drugs. It is not known whether interactions will occur between monoamine oxidase 
(MAO) inhibitors and trazodone hydrochloride. Due to the absence of clinical 
experience, if MAO inhibitors are discontinued shortly before or are to be given 
concomitantly with trazodone hydrochloride, therapy should be initiated 
cautiously with gradual increase in dosage until optimum response is achieved. 

                  
                  
                  
                  Therapeutic Interactions
                  Concurrent administration with electroshock therapy should be 
avoided because of the absence of experience in this area. 
                  There have been reports of increased and decreased prothrombin time occurring 
in warfarinized patients who take trazodone. 
                  
                  
                  
                  Carcinogenesis, Mutagenesis, 
Impairment of Fertility
                  No drug- or dose-related occurrence of carcinogenesis was evident 
in rats receiving trazodone hydrochloride in daily oral doses up to 300 mg/kg 
for 18 months. 
               
               
            
         