
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     PHARMACODYNAMICS
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Oral Contraception 
                           
                              Combination oral contraceptives (COCs) act by suppression of gonadotropins. Although the primary mechanism of this action is inhibition of ovulation, other alterations include changes in the cervical mucus (which increases the difficulty of sperm entry into the uterus) and the endometrium (which reduces the likelihood of implantation). 
                              Drospirenone is a spironolactone analogue with antimineralocorticoid activity. Preclinical studies in animals and in vitro have shown that drospirenone has no androgenic, estrogenic, glucocorticoid, or antiglucocorticoid activity. Preclinical studies in animals have also shown that drospirenone has antiandrogenic activity.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Acne
                           
                              Acne vulgaris is a skin condition with a multifactorial etiology including androgen stimulation of sebum production. While the combination of ethinyl estradiol and drospirenone increases sex hormone binding globulin (SHBG) and decreases free testosterone, the relationship between these changes and a decrease in the severity of facial acne in otherwise healthy women with this skin condition has not been established. The impact of the antiandrogenic activity of drospirenone on acne is not known.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     PHARMACOKINETICS
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Absorption
                           
                              The absolute bioavailability of drospirenone (DRSP) from a single entity tablet is about 76%. The absolute bioavailability of ethinyl estradiol (EE) is approximately 40% as a result of presystemic conjugation and first-pass metabolism. The absolute bioavailability of Gianvi, which is a combination tablet of drospirenone and ethinyl estradiol stabilized by betadex as a clathrate (molecular inclusion complex), has not been evaluated. The bioavailability of EE is similar when dosed via a betadex clathrate formulation compared to when it is dosed as a free steroid. Serum concentrations of DRSP and EE reached peak levels within 1-2 hours after administration of Gianvi.
                              The pharmacokinetics of DRSP are dose proportional following single doses ranging from 1-10 mg. Following daily dosing of Gianvi, steady state DRSP concentrations were observed after 8 days. There was about 2 to 3 fold accumulation in serum Cmax and AUC (0-24h) values of DRSP following multiple dose administration of Gianvi (see Table I).
                              For EE, steady-state conditions are reported during the second half of a treatment cycle. Following daily administration of Gianvi serum Cmax and AUC (0-24h) values of EE accumulate by a factor of about 1.5 to 2 (see Table I).
                              


                           



                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Effect of Food
                                 
                                    The rate of absorption of DRSP and EE following single administration of a formulation similar to Gianvi was slower under fed (high fat meal) conditions with the serum Cmax being reduced about 40% for both components. The extent of absorption of DRSP, however, remained unchanged. In contrast, the extent of absorption of EE was reduced by about 20% under fed conditions.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Distribution
                           
                              DRSP and EE serum levels decline in two phases. The apparent volume of distribution of DRSP is approximately 4 L/kg and that of EE is reported to be approximately 4–5 L/kg.
                              DRSP does not bind to sex hormone binding globulin (SHBG) or corticosteroid binding globulin (CBG) but binds about 97% to other serum proteins. Multiple dosing over 3 cycles resulted in no change in the free fraction (as measured at trough levels). EE is reported to be highly but non-specifically bound to serum albumin (approximately 98.5 %) and induces an increase in the serum concentrations of both SHBG and CBG. EE induced effects on SHBG and CBG were not affected by variation of the DRSP dosage in the range of 2 to 3 mg.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Metabolism
                           
                              The two main metabolites of DRSP found in human plasma were identified to be the acid form of DRSP generated by opening of the lactone ring and the 4,5-dihydrodrospirenone-3-sulfate. These metabolites were shown not to be pharmacologically active. In in vitro studies with human liver microsomes, DRSP was metabolized only to a minor extent mainly by Cytochrome P450 3A4 (CYP3A4). 
                              EE has been reported to be subject to presystemic conjugation in both small bowel mucosa and the liver. Metabolism occurs primarily by aromatic hydroxylation but a wide variety of hydroxylated and methylated metabolites are formed. These are present as free metabolites and as conjugates with glucuronide and sulfate. CYP3A4 in the liver is responsible for the 2-hydroxylation which is the major oxidative reaction. The 2-hydroxy metabolite is further transformed by methylation and glucuronidation prior to urinary and fecal excretion.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Excretion
                           
                              DRSP serum levels are characterized by a terminal disposition phase half-life of approximately 30 hours after both single and multiple dose regimens. Excretion of DRSP was nearly complete after ten days and amounts excreted were slightly higher in feces compared to urine. DRSP was extensively metabolized and only trace amounts of unchanged DRSP were excreted in urine and feces. At least 20 different metabolites were observed in urine and feces. About 38-47% of the metabolites in urine were glucuronide and sulfate conjugates. In feces, about 17-20% of the metabolites were excreted as glucuronides and sulfates. 
                              For EE the terminal disposition phase half-life has been reported to be approximately 24 hours. EE is not excreted unchanged. EE is excreted in the urine and feces as glucuronide and sulfate conjugates and undergoes enterohepatic circulation.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Special Populations
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Ethnic groups
                                 
                                    No clinically significant difference was observed between the pharmacokinetics of DRSP or EE in Japanese versus Caucasian women (age 20-35) when Gianvi was administered daily for 21 days. Other ethnic groups have not been studied.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Hepatic Dysfunction
                                 
                                    Gianvi is contraindicated in patients with hepatic dysfunction (see CONTRAINDICATIONS and BOLDED WARNING). The mean exposure to DRSP in women with moderate liver impairment is approximately three times higher than the exposure in women with normal liver function. Gianvi has not been studied in women with severe hepatic impairment.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Renal Insufficiency
                                 
                                    Gianvi is contraindicated in patients with renal insufficiency (see CONTRAINDICATIONS and BOLDED WARNING).
                                    
                                    The effect of renal insufficiency on the pharmacokinetics of DRSP (3 mg daily for 14 days) and the effect of DRSP on serum potassium levels were investigated in female subjects (n = 28, age 30–65) with normal renal function and mild and moderate renal impairment. All subjects were on a low potassium diet. During the study 7 subjects continued the use of potassium sparing drugs for the treatment of the underlying illness. On the 14th day (steady-state) of DRSP treatment, serum DRSP levels in the group with mild renal impairment (creatinine clearance CLcr, 50–80 mL/min) were comparable to those in the group with normal renal function (CLcr, >80 mL/min). The serum DRSP levels were on average 37 % higher in the group with moderate renal impairment (CLcr, 30–50 mL/min) compared to those in the group with normal renal function. DRSP treatment was well tolerated by all groups. DRSP treatment did not show any clinically significant effect on serum potassium concentration. Although hyperkalemia was not observed in the study, in five of the seven subjects who continued use of potassium sparing drugs during the study, mean serum potassium levels increased by up to 0.33 mEq/L. Therefore, potential exists for hyperkalemia to occur in subjects with renal impairment whose serum potassium is in the upper reference range, and who are concomitantly using potassium sparing drugs.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         