
               
               
               12	CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1	Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Adipocytes store lipids to meet the fuel requirements of non-adipose tissues during fasting. In patients with generalized lipodystrophy, the deficiency of adipose tissue leads to hypertriglyceridemia and ectopic deposition of fat in non-adipose tissues such as liver and muscle, contributing to metabolic abnormalities including insulin resistance. Native leptin is a hormone predominantly secreted by adipose tissue that informs the central nervous system of the status of energy stores in the body. In patients with generalized lipodystrophy, leptin deficiency, resulting from the loss of adipose tissue, contributes to excess caloric intake, which exacerbates the metabolic abnormalities.
                        MYALEPT (metreleptin) for injection exerts its function by binding to and activating the human leptin receptor (ObR), which belongs to the Class I cytokine family of receptors that signals through the JAK/STAT transduction pathway.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2	Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        Clinical studies in patients with generalized lipodystrophy suggest that MYALEPT increases insulin sensitivity and reduces food intake. Improvements in insulin sensitivity and reductions in food intake are consistent with lower HbA1c, fasting glucose, and fasting triglyceride values that were seen in the MYALEPT clinical trial [see 
                              Clinical Studies (14)
                           ].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3	Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        There are limited data on the pharmacokinetics of metreleptin in patients with generalized lipodystrophy, and therefore, no formal exposure-response analysis has been performed. It should be noted that the leptin assay measures both endogenous leptin as well as exogenously administered metreleptin.
                        
                           Absorption
                        
                        Peak serum leptin concentration (Cmax) occurred approximately 4.0 to 4.3 hours after subcutaneous administration of single doses ranging from 0.1 to 0.3 mg/kg in healthy subjects. In a supportive trial in lipodystrophy patients, the median Tmax of metreleptin was 4 hours (range: 2 to 8 hours; N=5) following single-dose administration of metreleptin.
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Distribution
                              
                              In studies of healthy adult subjects, following intravenous administration of metreleptin, leptin volume of distribution was approximately 4 to 5 times plasma volume; volumes (Vz) (mean ± SD) were 370 ± 184 mL/kg, 398 ± 92 mL/kg, and 463 ± 116 mL/kg for 0.3, 1.0, and 3.0 mg/kg/day doses, respectively.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Metabolism and Elimination 
                              
                              No formal metabolism studies have been conducted with metreleptin. Nonclinical data indicate renal clearance is the major route of metreleptin elimination, with no apparent contribution of systemic metabolism or degradation. Following single subcutaneous doses of 0.01 to 0.3 mg/mL metreleptin in healthy subjects, the half-life was 3.8 to 4.7 hours. The clearance of metreleptin is expected to be delayed in the presence of leptin antibodies [see 
                                    Adverse Reactions (6.2)
                                 ].
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Drug Interactions
                              
                              No drug interaction studies have been conducted in lipodystrophy patients [see 
                                    Drug Interactions (7)
                                 ].
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Specific Populations
                              
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                          Renal Impairment
                                       
                                    
                                    No formal pharmacokinetic studies were conducted in patients with renal impairment. Nonclinical data indicate renal clearance is the major route of metreleptin elimination, with no apparent contribution of systemic metabolism or degradation. Hence, the pharmacokinetics of metreleptin may be altered in subjects with renal impairment.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                          Hepatic Impairment
                                       
                                    
                                    No formal pharmacokinetic studies were conducted in patients with hepatic impairment.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                          Age, Gender, Race, Body Mass Index
                                       
                                    
                                    Specific clinical studies have not been conducted to assess the effect of age, gender, race, or body mass index on the pharmacokinetics of metreleptin in patients with generalized lipodystrophy.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         