
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Azithromycin is a macrolide antibacterial drug [see Microbiology (12.4)].
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        Based on animal models of infection, the antibacterial activity of azithromycin appears to correlate with the ratio of area under the concentration-time curve to minimum inhibitory concentration (AUC/MIC) for certain pathogens (S. pneumoniae and S. aureus).  The principal pharmacokinetic/pharmacodynamic parameter best associated with clinical and microbiological cure has not been elucidated in clinical trials with azithromycin.
                        
                           Cardiac Electrophysiology
                        
                        QTc interval prolongation was studied in a randomized, placebo-controlled parallel trial in 116 healthy subjects who received either chloroquine (1,000 mg) alone or in combination with oral azithromycin (500 mg, 1,000 mg, and 1,500 mg once daily).  Co-administration of azithromycin increased the QTc interval in a dose- and concentration-dependent manner.  In comparison to chloroquine alone, the maximum mean (95% upper confidence bound) increases in QTcF were 5 (10) ms, 7 (12) ms and 9 (14) ms with the co-administration of 500 mg, 1,000 mg and 1,500 mg azithromycin, respectively.
                        

                        Since the mean Cmax of azithromycin following a 500 mg IV dose given over 1 hour is higher than the mean Cmax of azithromycin following the administration of a 1,500 mg oral dose, it is possible that QTc may be prolonged to a greater extent with IV azithromycin at close proximity to a one hour infusion of 500 mg.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        In patients hospitalized with community-acquired pneumonia receiving single daily one-hour intravenous infusions for 2 to 5 days of 500 mg azithromycin at a concentration of 2 mg/mL, the mean Cmax ± S.D. achieved was 3.63 ± 1.60 mcg/mL, while the 24-hour trough level was 0.20 ± 0.15 mcg/mL, and the AUC24 was 9.60 ± 4.80 mcg•h/mL.
                        

                        The mean Cmax , 24-hour trough and AUC24 values were 1.14 ± 0.14 mcg/mL, 0.18 ± 0.02 mcg/mL, and 8.03 ± 0.86 mcg•h/mL, respectively, in normal volunteers receiving a 3-hour intravenous infusion of 500 mg azithromycin at a concentration of 1 mg/mL.  Similar pharmacokinetic values were obtained in patients hospitalized with community-acquired pneumonia who received the same 3-hour dosage regimen for 2 to 5 days.
                        


                        



                           a 500 mg (2 mg/mL) for 2 to 5 days in community-acquired pneumonia patients.
                        
                           b 500 mg (1 mg/mL) for 5 days in healthy subjects.
                        

                        

                        Comparison of the plasma pharmacokinetic parameters following the 1st and 5th daily doses of 500 mg intravenous azithromycin showed only an 8% increase in Cmax but a 61% increase in AUC24 reflecting a threefold rise in C24 trough levels.
                        

                        Following single-oral doses of 500 mg azithromycin (two 250 mg capsules) to 12 healthy volunteers, Cmax, trough level, and AUC24 were reported to be 0.41 mcg/mL, 0.05 mcg/mL, and 2.6 mcg•h/mL, respectively.  These oral values are approximately 38%, 83%, and 52% of the values observed following a single 500 mg I.V. 3-hour infusion (Cmax: 1.08 mcg/mL, trough: 0.06 mcg/mL, and AUC24: 5 mcg•h/mL). Thus, plasma concentrations are higher following the intravenous regimen throughout the 24-hour interval.
                        
                           Distribution
                        
                        The serum protein binding of azithromycin is variable in the concentration range approximating human exposure, decreasing from 51% at 0.02 mcg/mL to 7% at 2 mcg/mL.
                        

                        Tissue concentrations have not been obtained following intravenous infusions of azithromycin, but following oral administration in humans azithromycin has been shown to penetrate into tissues, including skin, lung, tonsil, and cervix. 
                        

                        Tissue levels were determined following a single oral dose of 500 mg azithromycin in 7 gynecological patients.  Approximately 17 hours after dosing, azithromycin concentrations were 2.7 mcg/g in ovarian tissue, 3.5 mcg/g in uterine tissue, and 3.3 mcg/g in salpinx.  Following a regimen of 500 mg on the first day followed by 250 mg daily for 4 days, concentrations in the cerebrospinal fluid were less than 0.01 mcg/mL in the presence of non-inflamed meninges.
                        
                            
                        
                        
                           Metabolism
                        
                        
                           In vitro and in vivo studies to assess the metabolism of azithromycin have not been performed.
                        
                           Elimination
                        
                        Plasma concentrations of azithromycin following single 500 mg oral and IV doses declined in a polyphasic pattern with a mean apparent plasma clearance of 630 mL/min and terminal elimination half-life of 68 hours.  The prolonged terminal half-life is thought to be due to extensive uptake and subsequent release of drug from tissues.
                        

                        In a multiple-dose study in 12 normal volunteers utilizing a 500 mg (1 mg/mL) one-hour intravenous-dosage regimen for five days, the amount of administered azithromycin dose excreted in urine in 24 hours was about 11% after the 1st dose and 14% after the 5th dose.  These values are greater than the reported 6% excreted unchanged in urine after oral administration of azithromycin.  Biliary excretion is a major route of elimination for unchanged drug, following oral administration.
                        
                           Specific Populations
                        
                        
                           Renal Insufficiency
                        
                        Azithromycin pharmacokinetics were investigated in 42 adults (21 to 85 years of age) with varying degrees of renal impairment.  Following the oral administration of a single 1,000 mg dose of azithromycin, mean Cmax and AUC0-120 increased by 5.1% and 4.2%, respectively in subjects with mild to moderate renal impairment (GFR 10 to 80 mL/min) compared to subjects with normal renal function (GFR > 80 mL/min).  The mean Cmax and AUC0-120 increased 61% and 35%, respectively in subjects with severe renal impairment (GFR < 10 mL/min) compared to subjects with normal renal function (GFR > 80 mL/min).
                        
                           Hepatic Insufficiency
                        
                        The pharmacokinetics of azithromycin in subjects with hepatic impairment has not been established.
                        
                           Gender
                        
                        There are no significant differences in the disposition of azithromycin between male and female subjects.  No dosage adjustment is recommended based on gender.
                        
                           Geriatric Patients
                        
                        Pharmacokinetic studies with intravenous azithromycin have not been performed in older volunteers.  Pharmacokinetics of azithromycin following oral administration in older volunteers (65 to 85 years old) were similar to those in younger volunteers (18 to 40 years old) for the 5 day therapeutic regimen [see Geriatric Use 8.5)].
                        
                        
                           Pediatric Patients
                        
                        Pharmacokinetic studies with intravenous azithromycin have not been performed in children.
                        
                           Drug-drug Interactions
                        
                        Drug interaction studies were performed with oral azithromycin and other drugs likely to be co-administered.  The effects of co-administration of azithromycin on the pharmacokinetics of other drugs are shown in Table 1 and the effects of other drugs on the pharmacokinetics of azithromycin are shown in Table 2.
                        

                        Co-administration of azithromycin at therapeutic doses had a modest effect on the pharmacokinetics of the drugs listed in Table 1.  No dosage adjustment of drugs listed in Table 1 is recommended when co-administered with azithromycin.
                        

                        Co-administration of azithromycin with efavirenz or fluconazole had a modest effect on the pharmacokinetics of azithromycin.  Nelfinavir significantly increased the Cmax and AUC of azithromycin.  No dosage adjustment of azithromycin is recommended when administered with drugs listed in Table 2 [see Drug Interactions (7.3)].
                        
                        
                           Table 1.  Drug Interactions: Pharmacokinetic Parameters for Co-administered Drugs in the Presence of Azithromycin
                        
                        
                            
                        
                        


                        


* - 90% Confidence interval not reported
                        
                           Table 2.  Drug Interactions: Pharmacokinetic Parameters for Azithromycin in the Presence of Co-administered Drugs 
                           [see Drug Interactions (7.3)].
                        
                        


                        


            * - 90% Confidence interval not reported
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.4 Microbiology
                     
                        Mechanism of Action 
                        Azithromycin acts by binding to the 50S ribosomal subunit of susceptible microorganisms and, thus, interfering with microbial protein synthesis.  Nucleic acid synthesis is not affected.
                        

                        Cross Resistance
                        Azithromycin demonstrates cross-resistance with erythromycin-resistant Gram-positive isolates.
                        

                        Azithromycin has been shown to be active against most isolates of the following bacteria, both in vitro and in clinical infections as described in [see Indications and Usage (1)].
                        
                        
                           Gram-positive Bacteria
                        
                        
                           Staphylococcus aureus
                        
                        
                           Streptococcus pneumoniae
                        
                        
                           Gram-negative Bacteria
                        
                        
                           Haemophilus influenzae
                        
                        
                           Moraxella catarrhalis
                        
                        
                           Neisseria gonorrhoeae
                        
                        
                           Legionella pneumophila
                        
                        
                           Other Bacteria
                        
                        
                           Chlamydophila pneumoniae
                        
                        
                           Chlamydia trachomatis
                        
                        
                           Mycoplasma hominis
                        
                        
                           Mycoplasma pneumoniae
                        
                        
                            
                        
                        The following in vitro data are available, but their clinical significance is unknown. Azithromycin exhibits in vitro minimal inhibitory concentrations (MICs) of 2 mcg/mL or less against most (≥ 90%) isolates of the following bacteria; however, the safety and effectiveness of azithromycin in treating clinical infections due to these bacteria have not been established in adequate and well-controlled trials.
                        
                           Aerobic Gram-positive Bacteria
                        
                        Streptococci (Groups C, F, G) 
                        Viridans group streptococci
                        
                           Gram-negative Bacteria
                        
                        
                           Bordetella pertussis
                        
                        
                           Anaerobic Bacteria
                        
                        
                           Peptostreptococcus species
                        
                        
                           Prevotella bivia
                        
                        
                           Other Bacteria
                        
                        
                           Ureaplasma urealyticum
                        
                        
                           Susceptibility Testing Methods
                        
                        When available, clinical microbiology laboratory should provide the results of in vitro susceptibility test results for antimicrobial products used in resident hospitals to the physician as periodic reports that describe the susceptibility profile of nosocomial and community-acquired pathogens.  These reports should aid the physician in selecting an antibacterial drug product for treatment.
                        
                           Dilution techniques
                        
                        Quantitative methods are used to determine minimal inhibitory concentrations (MICs). These MICs provide estimates of the susceptibility of bacteria to antimicrobial compounds.  The MICs should be determined using a standardized test method1,2 (broth, and/or agar).  The MIC values should be interpreted according to criteria provided in Table 3.
                        
                           Diffusion techniques
                        
                        Quantitative methods that require measurement of zone diameters can provide reproducible estimates of the susceptibility of bacteria to antimicrobial compounds.  The zone size provides an estimate of the susceptibility of bacteria to antimicrobial compounds.  The zone size should be determined using standardized methods2,3.  This procedure uses paper disk impregnated with 15 mcg azithromycin to test the susceptibility of bacteria to azithromycin.  The disk diffusion interpretive criteria are provided in Table 3.

                           
                              
Table 3: Susceptibility Interpretive Criteria for Azithromycin
                        
                        

                        


                        




                        *Insufficient information is available to determine Intermediate or Resistant interpretive criteria
                        A report of “Susceptible” indicates that the pathogen is likely to inhibit growth of the pathogen if the antimicrobial compound reaches the concentration at the infection site necessary to inhibit growth of the pathogen.  A report of “Intermediate” indicates that the result should be considered equivocal, and if the microorganism is not fully susceptible to alternative clinically feasible drugs, the test should be repeated.  This category implies possible clinical applicability in body sites where the drug is physiologically concentrated.  This category also provides a buffer zone that prevents small uncontrolled technical factors from causing major discrepancies in interpretation.  A report of “Resistant” indicates that the antimicrobial is not likely to inhibit growth of the pathogen if the antimicrobial compound reaches the concentrations usually achievable at the infection site; other therapy should be selected
                        
                           Quality Control
                        
                        Standardized susceptibility test procedures require the use of laboratory controls to monitor and ensure the accuracy and precision of supplies and reagents used in the assay, and the techniques of the individuals performing the test1,2,3.  Standard azithromycin powder should provide the following range of MIC values provided in Table 4.  For the diffusion technique using the 15 mcg azithromycin disk the criteria provided in Table 4 should be achieved.
                        

                        
                           Table 4: Acceptable Quality Control Ranges for Susceptibility Testing
                        
                        


                        


ATCC = American Type Culture Collection
                        

                        The ability to correlate MIC values and plasma drug levels is difficult as azithromycin concentrates in macrophages and tissues [see Clinical Pharmacology (12)].
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         