
                     
                     
                     Drug Interactions
                     
                        Drug-drug interactions with Mefloquine Hydrochloride Tablets have not been explored in detail. There is one report of cardiopulmonary arrest, with full recovery, in a patient who was taking a beta blocker (propranolol) (see 
                              PRECAUTIONS: Cardiac Effects
                           ). The effects of mefloquine on the compromised cardiovascular system have not been evaluated. The benefits of mefloquine therapy should be weighed against the possibility of adverse effects in patients with cardiac disease.
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Halofantrine and Other Antimalarials
                           
                              Halofantrine should not be administered with Mefloquine Hydrochloride Tablets or within 15 weeks of the last dose of Mefloquine Hydrochloride Tablets due to the risk of a potentially fatal prolongation of the QTc interval (see 
                                    WARNINGS
                                 ).
                              Concomitant administration of Mefloquine Hydrochloride Tablets and other related antimalarial compounds (e.g., quinine, quinidine and chloroquine) may produce electrocardiographic abnormalities and increase the risk of convulsions (see 
                                    WARNINGS
                                 ). If these drugs are to be used in the initial treatment of severe malaria, Mefloquine Hydrochloride Tablets administration should be delayed at least 12 hours after the last dose. Clinically significant QTc prolongation has not been found with mefloquine alone.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Ketoconazole (Potent Inhibitor of CYP3A4)
                           
                              Co-administration of a single 500 mg oral dose of Mefloquine Hydrochloride Tablets with 400 mg of ketoconazole once daily for 10 days in 8 healthy volunteers resulted in an increase in the mean Cmax and AUC of mefloquine by 64% and 79%, respectively, and an increase in the mean elimination half-life of mefloquine from 322 hours to 448 hours. Ketoconazole should not be administered with Mefloquine Hydrochloride Tablets or within 15 weeks of the last dose of Mefloquine Hydrochloride Tablets due to the risk of a potentially fatal prolongation of the QTc interval (see 
                                    WARNINGS
                                 ).
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Other Drugs that Prolong the QTc Interval
                           
                              Co-administration of other drugs known to alter cardiac conduction (e.g., anti-arrhythmic or beta-adrenergic blocking agents, calcium channel blockers, antihistamines or H1-blocking agents, tricyclic antidepressants and phenothiazines) might also contribute to a prolongation of the QTc interval. There are no data that conclusively establish whether the concomitant administration of mefloquine and the above listed agents has an effect on cardiac function.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Anticonvulsants
                           
                              In patients taking an anticonvulsant (e.g., valproic acid, carbamazepine, phenobarbital or phenytoin), the concomitant use of Mefloquine Hydrochloride Tablets may reduce seizure control by lowering the plasma levels of the anticonvulsant. Therefore, patients concurrently taking antiseizure medication and Mefloquine Hydrochloride Tablets should have the blood level of their antiseizure medication monitored and the dosage adjusted appropriately (see 
                                    PRECAUTIONS
                                 ).
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Vaccines
                           
                              When Mefloquine Hydrochloride Tablets are taken concurrently with oral live typhoid vaccines, attenuation of immunization cannot be excluded. Vaccinations with attenuated live bacteria should therefore be completed at least 3 days before the first dose of Mefloquine Hydrochloride Tablets.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Rifampin (Potent Inducer of CYP3A4)
                           
                              Co-administration of a single 500 mg oral dose of Mefloquine Hydrochloride Tablets and 600 mg of rifampin once daily for 7 days in 7 healthy Thai volunteers resulted in a decrease in the mean Cmax and AUC of mefloquine by 19% and 68%, respectively, and a decrease in the mean elimination half-life of mefloquine from 305 hours to 113 hours. Rifampin should be used cautiously in patients taking Mefloquine Hydrochloride Tablets .
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Inhibitors and Inducers of CYP3A4
                           
                              Mefloquine does not inhibit or induce the CYP 450 enzyme system. Thus, concomitant administration of Mefloquine Hydrochloride Tablets and substrates of the CYP 450 enzyme system is not expected to result in a drug interaction. However, mefloquine is metabolized by CYP3A4 and inhibitors of CYP3A4 may modify the pharmacokinetics/metabolism of mefloquine, leading to an increase in mefloquine plasma concentrations and potential risk of adverse reactions. Therefore, Mefloquine Hydrochloride Tablets should be used with caution when administered concomitantly with CYP3A4 inhibitors. Similarly, inducers of CYP3A4 may modify the pharmacokinetics/metabolism of mefloquine, leading to a decrease in mefloquine plasma concentrations and potential reduction in efficacy of Mefloquine Hydrochloride Tablets. Therefore, Mefloquine Hydrochloride Tablets should also be used with caution when administered concomitantly with CYP3A4 inducers. 
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Substrates and Inhibitors of P-glycoprotein
                           
                              It has been shown in vitro that mefloquine is a substrate and an inhibitor of P-glycoprotein. Therefore, drug-drug interactions could also occur with drugs that are substrates or are known to modify the expression of this transporter. The clinical relevance of these interactions is not known to date.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Other Potential Interactions
                           
                              No other drug interactions are known. Nevertheless, the effects of Mefloquine Hydrochloride Tablets on travelers receiving comedication, particularly diabetics or patients using anticoagulants, should be checked before departure.
                              In clinical trials, the concomitant administration of sulfadoxine and pyrimethamine did not alter the adverse reaction profile of mefloquine.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               