
               
               
               12. CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Follicle stimulating hormone (FSH), the active component in Gonal-f® RFF Redi-ject™, is required for normal follicular growth, follicular maturation, and gonadal steroid production. The level of FSH is critical for the onset and duration of follicular development, and consequently for the timing and number of follicles reaching maturity.
                        Gonal-f® RFF Redi-ject™ stimulates ovarian follicular growth in women who do not have primary ovarian failure. In order to effect the final phase of follicle maturation, resumption of meiosis, and rupture of the follicle in the absence of an endogenous LH surge, human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) must be given following treatment with Gonal-f® RFF Redi-ject™ when monitoring of the woman indicates that appropriate follicular development parameters have been achieved. There is inter-woman variability in response to FSH administration.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        Single-dose pharmacokinetics of follitropin alfa were determined following subcutaneous administration of 300 International Units of Gonal-f® RFF Redi-ject™ to 21 pre-menopausal healthy female volunteers who were pituitary down-regulated with a GnRH agonist.
                        The descriptive statistics for the pharmacokinetic parameters are presented in Table 3.
                        


                     



                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Absorption
                              
                              The absorption rate of Gonal-f® RFF Redi-ject™ following subcutaneous administration is slower than the elimination rate. Hence, the pharmacokinetics of Gonal-f® RFF Redi-ject™ are absorption rate-limited.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Distribution
                              
                              Human tissue or organ distribution of FSH has not been determined for Gonal-f® RFF Redi-ject™.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Metabolism/Excretion
                              
                              FSH metabolism and excretion following administration of Gonal-f® RFF Redi-ject™ have not been studied in humans.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         