
               
               
               
                  12   CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        The mechanism of HEMANGEOL’s effects on infantile hemangiomas is not well understood. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        Propranolol is a nonselective beta-adrenergic receptor blocking agent possessing no other autonomic nervous system activity.  It specifically competes with beta-adrenergic receptor stimulating agents for available receptor sites.  When access to beta-receptor sites is blocked by propranolol, chronotropic, inotropic, and vasodilator responses to beta-adrenergic stimulation are decreased proportionately.
                        Propranolol selectively blocks beta-adrenergic receptors, leaving alpha-adrenergic responses intact.  There are two well-characterized subtypes of beta receptors (beta1 and beta2); propranolol interacts with both subtypes equally.  Beta1-adrenergic receptors are found primarily in the heart.  Blockade of cardiac beta1-adrenergic receptors leads to a decrease in the activity of both normal and ectopic pacemaker cells and a decrease in A-V nodal conduction velocity.  Blockade of cardiac beta1-adrenergic receptors also decreases the myocardial force of contraction and may provoke cardiac decompensation in patients with minimal cardiac reserve.
                        Beta2-adrenergic receptors are found predominantly in smooth muscle-vascular, bronchial, gastrointestinal and genitourinary.  Blockade of these receptors results in constriction.  Propranolol’s beta-blocking effects are attributable to its S(-) enantiomer.
                        
                           Pharmacodynamic drug interactions
                        
                        
                           Alpha blockers: Co-administration of beta-blockers with alpha blockers (prazosin) has been associated with prolongation of first dose hypotension and syncope.
                        
                           Antidepressants: The hypotensive effect of MAO inhibitors and tricyclic antidepressants is exacerbated when administered with beta-blockers. 
                        
                           Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs:  Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) may attenuate the antihypertensive effect of beta-adrenoreceptor blocking agents. Monitor blood pressure.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        
                           Adults
                        
                        
                           Absorption: Propranolol is almost completely absorbed after oral administration. However, it undergoes an extensive first-pass metabolism by the liver and on average; only about 25% of propranolol reaches the systemic circulation. Peak plasma concentrations occur about 1 to 4 hours after an oral dose. Administration of protein-rich foods increases the bioavailability of propranolol by about 50% with no change in time to peak concentration.
                        Propranolol is a substrate for the intestinal efflux transporter, P-glycoprotein (P-gp). However, studies suggest that P-gp is not dose-limiting for intestinal absorption of propranolol in the usual therapeutic dose range.
                        
                           Distribution: Approximately 90% of circulating propranolol is bound to plasma proteins (albumin and alpha1 acid glycoprotein). The volume of distribution of propranolol is approximately 4 L/kg. Propranolol crosses the blood-brain barrier and the placenta, and is distributed into breast milk.
                        Propranolol is extensively metabolized with most metabolites appearing in the urine.
                        
                           Metabolism: Propranolol is metabolized through three primary routes: aromatic hydroxylation (mainly 4-hydroxylation), N-dealkylation followed by further side-chain oxidation, and direct glucuronidation. The percentage contributions of these routes to total metabolism are 42%, 41% and 17%, respectively, but with considerable variability between individuals. The four major final metabolites are propranolol glucuronide, naphthyloxylactic acid and glucuronic acid, and sulfate conjugates of 4-hydroxy propranolol. In vitro studies indicated that CYP2D6 (aromatic hydroxylation), CYP1A2 (chain oxidation) and to a less extent CYP2C19 were involved in propranolol metabolism.
                        In healthy subjects, no difference was observed between CYP2D6 extensive metabolizers (EMs) and poor metabolizers (PMs) with respect to oral clearance or elimination half-life. 
                        
                           Elimination:The plasma half-life of propranolol ranges from 3 to 6 hours. Less than 1% of a dose is excreted as unchanged drug in the urine. 
                        
                           Infants
                        
                        The pharmacokinetics of propranolol and 4-OH-propranolol were evaluated in a multiple dose 12 week study conducted in 23 male and female infants 35 to 150 days of age with hemangioma. The infants were stratified by age (35 to 90 days and 91 to 150 days). The starting dose was 1.2 mg/kg/day which was titrated to the target dose of 3.4 mg/kg/day in 1.1 mg/kg/day increments at weekly intervals. At steady state, following administration of 3.4 mg/kg/day twice daily, peak plasma propranolol concentrations were observed within 2 hours of oral administration. Clearance of propranolol in infants was similar across the age range studied (2.7 (SD=0.03) L/h/kg in infants <90 days of age and 3.3 (SD=0.35) L/h/kg in infants >90 days of age) and to that in adults when adjusted by body weight. The median elimination half-life of propranolol was about 3.5 hours. Plasma propranolol concentrations approximate a dose proportional increase in the dose range of 1.2 mg/kg/day to 3.4 mg/kg/day. 
                        Plasma concentration of 4-OH-propranolol, the main metabolite, was about 5% of total plasma exposure of propranolol.
                        
                           Sex
                        
                        There is no known dependence of pharmacokinetics of propranolol by sex in infants.
                        
                           Race
                        
                        There is little information on dependence of pharmacokinetics of propranolol by race in infants.
                        A study conducted in 12 Caucasian and 13 African-American adult male subjects taking propranolol, showed that at steady state, the clearance of R(+)- and S(-)-propranolol were about 76% and 53% higher in African-Americans than in Caucasians, respectively.
                        Chinese adult subjects had a greater proportion (18% to 45% higher) of unbound propranolol in plasma compared to Caucasians, which was associated with a lower plasma concentration of alpha1 acid glycoprotein.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.6 Drug Interactions
                     
                        
                           Impact of propranolol on co-administered drugs: The effect of propranolol on plasma concentration of co-administered drug is presented in the table below.
                        
                           Table 3. Effect of propranolol on co-administered drugs
                        
                        


                        



                           Impact of co-administered drugs on propranolol: The effect of co-administered drugs on propranolol plasma concentration is presented in the table below.
                        
                           Table 4. Effect of co-administered drugs on propranolol
                        
                        


