
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           Rifampin (strong CYP enzyme inducer): Decreases exposure to and effects of ramelteon. (7.1)
                           Ketoconazole (strong CYP3A4 inhibitor): Increases AUC for ramelteon; administer with caution. (7.1)
                           Fluconazole (strong CYP2C9 inhibitor): Increases systemic exposure of ramelteon; administer with caution. (7.1)
                           Donepezil increases systemic exposure of ramelteon; patients should be closely monitored when ramelteon is coadministered with donepezil. (7.1)
                           Doxepin increases systemic exposure of ramelteon; patients should be closely monitored when ramelteon is coadministered with doxepin. (7.1)
                           Alcohol: Causes additive psychomotor impairment; should not be used in combination. (7.2)
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 Effects of Other Drugs on ROZEREM
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                    Fluvoxamine (strong CYP1A2 inhibitor): AUC0-inf for ramelteon increased approximately 190-fold, and the Cmax increased approximately 70-fold upon coadministration of fluvoxamine and ROZEREM, compared to ROZEREM administered alone. ROZEREM should not be used in combination with fluvoxamine [see Contraindications (4), Clinical Pharmacology (12.5)]. Other less strong CYP1A2 inhibitors have not been adequately studied. ROZEREM should be administered with caution to patients taking less strong CYP1A2 inhibitors.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                    Rifampin (strong CYP enzyme inducer): Administration of multiple doses of rifampin resulted in a mean decrease of approximately 80% in total exposure to ramelteon and metabolite M-II. Efficacy may be reduced when ROZEREM is used in combination with strong CYP enzyme inducers such as rifampin [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.5)].
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                    Ketoconazole (strong CYP3A4 inhibitor): The AUC0-inf and Cmax of ramelteon increased by approximately 84% and 36% upon coadministration of ketoconazole with ROZEREM. ROZEREM should be administered with caution in subjects taking strong CYP3A4 inhibitors such as ketoconazole [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.5)].
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                    Fluconazole (strong CYP2C9 inhibitor): The AUC0-inf and Cmax of ramelteon was increased by approximately 150% when ROZEREM was coadministered with fluconazole. ROZEREM should be administered with caution in subjects taking strong CYP2C9 inhibitors such as fluconazole [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.5)].
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                    Donepezil:
                                  The AUC0-inf and Cmax of ramelteon increased by approximately 100% and 87%, respectively upon coadministration of donepezil with ROZEREM. Patients should be closely monitored when ROZEREM is coadministered with donepezil [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.5)].
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                    Doxepin:
                                  The AUC0-inf and Cmax of ramelteon increased by approximately 66% and 69%, respectively, upon coadministration of doxepin with ROZEREM. Patients should be closely monitored when ROZEREM is coadministered with doxepin [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.5)] .
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 Effect of Alcohol on ROZEREM
                     
                        Alcohol by itself impairs performance and can cause sleepiness. Since the intended effect of ROZEREM is to promote sleep, patients should be cautioned not to consume alcohol when using ROZEREM [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.5)]. Use of the products in combination may have an additive effect.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3 Drug/Laboratory Test Interactions
                     
                        ROZEREM is not known to interfere with commonly used clinical laboratory tests. In addition, in vitro data indicate that ramelteon does not cause false-positive results for benzodiazepines, opiates, barbiturates, cocaine, cannabinoids, or amphetamines in two standard urine drug screening methods in vitro.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         