
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           Drug metabolized by CYP450: Caution with drugs metabolized by CYP2C8/9 (e.g., warfarin, phenytoin) or CYP2D6 (e.g., flecainide). (7.1)
                           Methadone: Monitor for increased narcotic effect. (7.2)
                           Nucleoside analogues: Closely monitor for toxicities. Discontinue nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors or reduce dose or discontinue interferon, ribavirin, or both with worsening toxicities. (7.3)
                           Didanosine: Concurrent use with REBETOL is not recommended. (7.3)
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1	Drugs Metabolized by Cytochrome P-450
                     
                        When administering PegIntron with medications metabolized by CYP2C8/9 (e.g., warfarin and phenytoin) or CYP2D6 (e.g., flecainide), the therapeutic effect of these substrates may be decreased [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2	Methadone
                     
                        PegIntron may increase methadone concentrations [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)]. The clinical significance of this finding is unknown; however, patients should be monitored for signs and symptoms of increased narcotic effect.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3	Use with Ribavirin (Nucleoside Analogues)
                     
                        Hepatic decompensation (some fatal) has occurred in cirrhotic HIV/HCV co-infected patients receiving combination antiretroviral therapy for HIV and interferon alpha and ribavirin. Adding treatment with alpha interferons alone or in combination with ribavirin may increase the risk in this patient subset. Patients receiving interferon with ribavirin and nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors (NRTIs) should be closely monitored for treatment- associated toxicities, especially hepatic decompensation and anemia. Discontinuation of NRTIs should be considered as medically appropriate [see labeling for individual NRTI product]. Dose reduction or discontinuation of interferon, ribavirin, or both should also be considered if worsening clinical toxicities are observed, including hepatic decompensation (e.g., Child-Pugh greater than 6).
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Stavudine, Lamivudine, and Zidovudine
                              
                              
                                 In vitro studies have shown ribavirin can reduce the phosphorylation of pyrimidine nucleoside analogues such as stavudine, lamivudine, and zidovudine. In a trial with another pegylated interferon alpha, no evidence of a pharmacokinetic or pharmacodynamic (e.g., loss of HIV/HCV virologic suppression) interaction was seen when ribavirin was co-administered with zidovudine, lamivudine, or stavudine in HIV/HCV co-infected subjects [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                              HIV/HCV co-infected subjects who were administered zidovudine in combination with pegylated interferon alpha and ribavirin developed severe neutropenia (ANC less than 500) and severe anemia (hemoglobin less than 8 g/dL) more frequently than similar subjects not receiving zidovudine.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Didanosine
                              
                              Co-administration of ribavirin and didanosine is not recommended. Reports of fatal hepatic failure, as well as peripheral neuropathy, pancreatitis, and symptomatic hyperlactatemia/lactic acidosis have been reported in clinical trials [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)]
                                 .
                              
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         