
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1           Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Lisinopril inhibits angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) in human subjects and animals. ACE is a peptidyl dipeptidase that catalyzes the conversion of angiotensin I to the vasoconstrictor substance, angiotensin II. Angiotensin II also stimulates aldosterone secretion by the adrenal cortex. The beneficial effects of lisinopril in hypertension and heart failure appear to result primarily from suppression of the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system. Inhibition of ACE results in decreased plasma angiotensin II which leads to decreased vasopressor activity and to decreased aldosterone secretion. The latter decrease may result in a small increase of serum potassium. In hypertensive patients with normal renal function treated with lisinopril tablets alone for up to 24 weeks, the mean increase in serum potassium was approximately 0.1 mEq/L; however, approximately 15% of patients had increases greater than 0.5 mEq/L and approximately 6% had a decrease greater than 0.5 mEq/L. In the same study, patients treated with lisinopril tablets and hydrochlorothiazide for up to 24 weeks had a mean decrease in serum potassium of 0.1 mEq/L; approximately 4% of patients had increases greater than 0.5 mEq/L and approximately 12% had a decrease greater than 0.5 mEq/L [See Clinical Studies (14.1)]. Removal of angiotensin II negative feedback on renin secretion leads to increased plasma renin activity. 
                        ACE is identical to kininase, an enzyme that degrades bradykinin. Whether increased levels of bradykinin, a potent vasodepressor peptide, play a role in the therapeutic effects of lisinopril tablets remains to be elucidated.
                        While the mechanism through which lisinopril tablets lowers blood pressure is believed to be primarily suppression of the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system, lisinopril tablets are antihypertensive even in patients with low-renin hypertension. Although lisinopril tablets were antihypertensive in all races studied, Black hypertensive patients (usually a low-renin hypertensive population) had a smaller average response to monotherapy than non-Black patients.
                        Concomitant administration of lisinopril tablets and hydrochlorothiazide further reduced blood pressure in Black and non-Black patients and any racial differences in blood pressure response were no longer evident.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2           Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        
                           Hypertension

                           Adult Patients:Administration of lisinopril tablets to patients with hypertension results in a reduction of both supine and standing blood pressure to about the same extent with no compensatory tachycardia. Symptomatic postural hypotension is usually not observed although it can occur and should be anticipated in volume and/or salt-depleted patients [See Warnings and Precautions (5.4)]. When given together with thiazide-type diuretics, the blood pressure lowering effects of the two drugs are approximately additive.
                        In most patients studied, onset of antihypertensive activity was seen at one hour after oral administration of an individual dose of lisinopril tablets, with peak reduction of blood pressure achieved by 6 hours. Although an antihypertensive effect was observed 24 hours after dosing with recommended single daily doses, the effect was more consistent and the mean effect was considerably larger in some studies with doses of 20 mg or more than with lower doses; however, at all doses studied, the mean antihypertensive effect was substantially smaller 24 hours after dosing than it was 6 hours after dosing.
                        The antihypertensive effects of lisinopril tablets are maintained during long-term therapy. Abrupt withdrawal of lisinopril tablets has not been associated with a rapid increase in blood pressure, or a significant increase in blood pressure compared to pretreatment levels.
                        
                           Non-Steroidal Anti-Inflammatory Agents

                           In a study in 36 patients with mild to moderate hypertension where the antihypertensive effects of lisinopril tablets alone were compared to lisinopril tablets given concomitantly with indomethacin, the use of indomethacin was associated with a reduced effect, although the difference between the two regimens was not significant. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3           Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        
                           Adult Patients:Following oral administration of lisinopril tablets, peak serum concentrations of lisinopril occur within about 7 hours, although there was a trend to a small delay in time taken to reach peak serum concentrations in acute myocardial infarction patients. Food does not alter the bioavailability of lisinopril tablets. Declining serum concentrations exhibit a prolonged terminal phase, which does not contribute to drug accumulation. This terminal phase probably represents saturable binding to ACE and is not proportional to dose. Upon multiple dosing, lisinopril exhibits an effective half-life of 12 hours.
                        Lisinopril does not appear to be bound to other serum proteins. Lisinopril does not undergo metabolism and is excreted unchanged entirely in the urine. Based on urinary recovery, the mean extent of absorption of lisinopril is approximately 25%, with large intersubject variability (6%-60%) at all doses tested (5-80 mg). The absolute bioavailability of lisinopril is reduced to 16% in patients with stable NYHA Class II-IV congestive heart failure, and the volume of distribution appears to be slightly smaller than that in normal subjects. The oral bioavailability of lisinopril in patients with acute myocardial infarction is similar to that in healthy volunteers.
                        Impaired renal function decreases elimination of lisinopril, which is excreted principally through the kidneys, but this decrease becomes clinically important only when the glomerular filtration rate is below 30 mL/min. Above this glomerular filtration rate, the elimination half-life is little changed. With greater impairment, however, peak and trough lisinopril levels increase, time to peak concentration increases and time to attain steady state is prolonged [see Dosage and Administration (2.4)]. Lisinopril can be removed by hemodialysis.
                        
                           Pediatric Patients: The pharmacokinetics of lisinopril were studied in 29 pediatric hypertensive patients between 6 years and 16 years with glomerular filtration rate >30 mL/min/1.73 m2. After doses of 0.1 to 0.2 mg per kg, steady state peak plasma concentrations of lisinopril occurred within 6 hours and the extent of absorption based on urinary recovery was about 28%. These values are similar to those obtained previously in adults. The typical value of lisinopril oral clearance (systemic clearance/absolute bioavailability) in a child weighing 30 kg is 10 L/h, which increases in proportion to renal function.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         