
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           Concomitant administration of rifampin or rifabutin reduces atovaquone concentrations; concomitant use with atovaquone oral suspension is not recommended. (7.1) 
                           Concomitant administration of tetracycline reduces atovaquone concentrations; use caution when co-administering. Monitor patients for potential loss of efficacy of atovaquone if co-administration of tetracycline is necessary. (7.2) 
                           Concomitant administration with metoclopramide reduces atovaquone concentrations; administer concomitantly only if other antiemetics are not available. (7.3) 
                           Concomitant administration of indinavir reduces indinavir trough concentrations; use caution when co-administering. Monitor patients for potential loss of efficacy of indinavir if co-administration is necessary. (7.4) 
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        7.1 Rifampin/Rifabutin
                     
                     
                         Concomitant administration of rifampin or rifabutin and atovaquone oral suspension is known to reduce atovaquone concentrations [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)]. Concomitant administration of atovaquone oral suspension and rifampin or rifabutin is not recommended.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        7.2 Tetracycline
                     
                     
                        Concomitant administration of tetracycline and atovaquone oral suspension has been associated with a reduction in plasma concentrations of atovaquone [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)]. Caution should be used when prescribing tetracycline concomitantly with atovaquone oral suspension. Monitor patients for potential loss of efficacy of atovaquone if co-administration is necessary.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3 Metoclopramide
                     
                        Metoclopramide may reduce the bioavailability of atovaquone and should be used only if other antiemetics are not available [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        7.4 Indinavir
                     
                     
                        Concomitant administration of atovaquone and indinavir did not result in any change in the steady-state AUC and Cmax of indinavir but resulted in a decrease in the Ctrough of indinavir [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)]. Caution should be exercised when prescribing atovaquone oral suspension with indinavir due to the decrease in trough concentrations of indinavir. Monitor patients for potential loss of efficacy of indinavir if co-administration with atovaquone oral suspension is necessary.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         