
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Endogenous estrogens are largely responsible for the development and maintenance of the female reproductive system and secondary sexual characteristics. Although circulating estrogens exist in a dynamic equilibrium of metabolic interconversions, estradiol is the principal intracellular human estrogen and is substantially more potent than its metabolites, estrone and estriol, at the receptor level. 
                        The primary source of estrogen in normally cycling adult women is the ovarian follicle, which secretes 70 to 500 mcg of estradiol daily, depending on the phase of the menstrual cycle. After menopause, most endogenous estrogen is produced by conversion of androstenedione, secreted by the adrenal cortex, to estrone in the peripheral tissues. Thus, estrone and the sulfate-conjugated form, estrone sulfate, are the most abundant circulating estrogens in postmenopausal women.
                        Estrogens act through binding to nuclear receptors in estrogen-responsive tissues. To date, two estrogen receptors have been identified. These vary in proportion from tissue to tissue.
                        Circulating estrogens modulate the pituitary secretion of the gonadotropins, luteinizing hormone (LH), and FSH, through a negative feedback mechanism. Estrogens act to reduce the elevated levels of these hormones in postmenopausal women.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        There are no pharmacodynamic data for ENJUVIA.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        
                           Absorption
                        
                        Synthetic conjugated estrogens, B are soluble in water and are well absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract after release from the drug formulation. ENJUVIA tablets release synthetic conjugated estrogens, B slowly over a period of several hours. 
                              Table 3
                            and 
                              Table 4
                            summarize the mean pharmacokinetic parameters for unconjugated (free) and conjugated (total) estrogens following single administration of two 0.625 mg tablets to 21 healthy postmenopausal women under fasting conditions. The effect of food on the bioavailability of synthetic conjugated estrogens, B following administration of ENJUVIA tablets has not been studied. However, the presence of food did not significantly affect the pharmacokinetics of a similar formulation of synthetic conjugated estrogens, B.
                        


                        


Cmax = peak plasma concentration; tmax = time peak concentration occurs; t1/2 = apparent terminal-phase disposition half-life; AUC0-48h = total area under the concentration-time curve from time zero to time of last quantifiable concentration (48h); * Δ8,9 Dehydroestrone (free) levels were below the assay limit of quantitation; CV= Coefficient of Variance
                        


                        


Cmax = peak plasma concentration; tmax = time peak concentration occurs; t1/2 = apparent terminal-phase disposition half-life; AUC0-48h = total area under the concentration-time curve from time zero to time of last quantifiable concentration (48h); CV= Coefficient of Variance
                        
                           Distribution
                        
                        The distribution of exogenous estrogens is similar to that of endogenous estrogens. Estrogens are widely distributed in the body and are generally found in higher concentrations in the sex hormone target organs. Estrogens circulate in the blood largely bound to SHBG and albumin.
                        
                           Metabolism
                        
                        Exogenous estrogens are metabolized in the same manner as endogenous estrogens. Circulating estrogens exist in a dynamic equilibrium of metabolic interconversions. These transformations take place mainly in the liver. Estradiol is converted reversibly to estrone, and both can be converted to estriol, which is a major urinary metabolite. Estrogens also undergo enterohepatic recirculation via sulfate and glucuronide conjugation in the liver, biliary secretion of conjugates into the intestine, and hydrolysis in the intestine followed by reabsorption. In postmenopausal women, a significant portion of the circulating estrogens exist as sulfate conjugates, especially estrone sulfate, which serves as a circulating reservoir for the formation of more active estrogens.
                        
                           Excretion
                        
                        Estradiol, estrone, and estriol are excreted in the urine along with glucuronide and sulfate conjugates. The mean (SD) apparent terminal elimination half-life (t½) of conjugated estrone is 14 (± 6) hours and conjugated equilin is 11 (± 6) hours.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         