
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Hydrocodone is a semi-synthetic opioid agonist with relative
selectivity for the mu-opioid receptor, although it can interact with
other opioid receptors at higher doses. Hydrocodone acts as an agonist
binding to and activating opioid receptors in the brain and spinal
cord, which are coupled to G-protein complexes and modulate synaptic
transmission through adenylate cyclase. The pharmacological effects
of hydrocodone including analgesia, euphoria, respiratory depression
and physiological dependence are believed to be primarily mediated
via μ opioid receptors.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        
                           Cardiac Electrophysiology
                           
QTc interval prolongation was studied in a double-blind,
placebo- and positive-controlled 3-treatment parallel-group, dose-escalating
study of HYSINGLA ER in 196 healthy subjects.  QTc interval prolongation
was observed following HYSINGLA ER 160 mg per day.  The maximum mean
(90% upper confidence bound) difference in the QTc interval between
HYSINGLA ER and placebo (after baseline-correction) at steady state
was 6 (9) milliseconds, 7 (10) milliseconds, and 10 (13) milliseconds
at HYSINGLA ER doses of 80 mg, 120 mg and 160mg respectively.  For
clinical implications of the prolonged QTc interval, see Warnings
and Precautions (5.14).
                        
                           Central Nervous System
                           
The principal therapeutic action of hydrocodone is analgesia.
In common with other opioids, hydrocodone causes respiratory depression,
in part by a direct effect on the brainstem respiratory centers. The
respiratory depression involves a reduction in the responsiveness
of the brain stem respiratory centers to both increases in carbon
dioxide tension and electrical stimulation. Opioids depress the cough
reflex by direct effect on the cough center in the medulla.
                        Hydrocodone causes miosis, even
in total darkness. Pinpoint pupils are a sign of opioid overdose but
are not pathognomonic (e.g., pontine lesions of hemorrhagic or ischemic
origin may produce similar findings). Marked mydriasis rather than
miosis may be seen with hypoxia in overdose situations [see
Overdosage (10.1)]. In
addition to analgesia, the widely diverse effects of hydrocodone include
drowsiness, changes in mood, decreased gastrointestinal motility,
nausea, vomiting, and alterations of the endocrine and autonomic nervous
system [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.2)].
                        
                           Gastrointestinal Tract and Other Smooth Muscle
                           
Hydrocodone causes a reduction in motility associated
with an increase in smooth muscle tone in the antrum of the stomach
and duodenum. Digestion of food in the small intestine is delayed
and propulsive contractions are decreased. Propulsive peristaltic
waves in the colon are decreased, while tone may be increased to the
point of spasm resulting in constipation. Other opioid-induced effects
may include a reduction in gastric, biliary and pancreatic secretions,
spasm of sphincter of Oddi, and transient elevations in serum amylase.
                        
                           Cardiovascular System
                           
Hydrocodone may produce release of histamine with or
without associated peripheral vasodilation. Manifestations of histamine
release and/or peripheral vasodilation may include pruritus, flushing,
red eyes, sweating, and/or orthostatic hypotension.
                        
                           Endocrine System
                           
Opioids may influence the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal or -gonadal
axes. Some changes that can be seen include an increase in serum prolactin,
and decreases in plasma cortisol and testosterone. Clinical signs
and symptoms may be manifest from these hormonal changes.
                        
                           Immune System
                           

                           In vitro and animal studies indicate
that opioids have a variety of effects on immune functions, depending
on the context in which they are used. The clinical significance of
these findings is unknown.
                        
                           Concentration/Exposure—Efficacy
Relationships
                           
The minimum effective plasma
concentration of hydrocodone for analgesia varies widely among patients,
especially among patients who have been previously treated with agonist
opioids. As a result, titrate the doses of individual patients to
achieve a balance between therapeutic and adverse effects. The minimum
effective analgesic concentration of hydrocodone for any individual
patient may increase over time due to an increase in pain, progression
of disease, development of a new pain syndrome and/or potential development
of analgesic tolerance. 
                        
                           Concentration/Exposure—Adverse Experience Relationships
                           
There is a general relationship between increasing opioid
plasma concentration and increasing frequency of adverse experiences
such as nausea, vomiting, CNS effects, and respiratory depression.
 As with all opioids, the dose of HYSINGLA ER must be individualized [see Dosage and Administration (2.1, 
                              2.2)].  The effective analgesic
dose for some patients will be too high to be tolerated by other patients.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        
                           Absorption
                           
HYSINGLA ER is a single-entity extended-release formulation of hydrocodone
that yields a gradual increase in plasma hydrocodone concentrations
with a median Tmax of 14 – 16 hours noted for
different dose strengths.  Peak plasma levels may occur in the range
of 6 -30 hours after single dose HYSINGLA ER administration.
                        Systemic exposure (AUC and Cmax) increased linearly with doses from 20 to 120 mg.
 Both Cmax and AUC increased slightly more
than dose proportionally (Table 5).  The mean terminal half-life (t1/2) was similar for all HYSINGLA ER dose strengths ranging
from 7 to 9 hours.
                        


                        


As compared to an immediate-release
hydrocodone combination product, HYSINGLA ER at the same daily dose
results in similar bioavailability but with lower maximum concentrations
at steady state. (Figure 3).
                        
                           Figure 3. Mean Steady-State Plasma
Hydrocodone Concentration Profile
                           

                           
                        
                        Steady-state plasma hydrocodone concentrations
were confirmed on day 3 of once-daily dosing of HYSINGLA ER.  The
extent of accumulation of systemic exposure was 1.3 and 1.1 fold with
respect to AUC and Cmax at steady-state.  The
mean terminal half-life (t1/2) at steady state
was 7 hours.  Median Tmax values were 14 hours
(range: 12 to 24 hours) on both Day 1 and Day 5 following once daily
administration of HYSINGLA ER for five days.  Daily fluctuation in
peak to trough plasma levels of hydrocodone were higher at 80 mg and
120 mg doses of HYSINGLA ER compared to 30 mg dose (Table 6).
                        


                        



                           Food Effects
                           
Cmax and AUC of HYSINGLA ER 120
mg tablets were similar under low fat conditions relative to fasting
conditions (17% and 9% higher, respectively). Cmax was higher (54%) under high fat conditions relative to fasting conditions;
however, AUC of HYSINGLA ER 120 mg tablets was only 20% higher when
co-administered with a high fat meal.  HYSINGLA ER may be administered
without regard to meals.
                        
                           Distribution
                           
Following administration
of HYSINGLA ER, the typical (70 kg adult) value of apparent volume
of distribution (V/F) is 402 L, suggesting extensive tissue distribution.
 The extent of in vivo binding of hydrocodone to
human plasma proteins was minimal with a mean % bound at 36%.
                        
                           Elimination
                           

                           Metabolism
                           
Hydrocodone exhibits
a complex pattern of metabolism, including N-demethylation, O-demethylation, and 6-keto reduction to the corresponding
6-α- and 6-β-hydroxy metabolites.  CYP3A4 mediated N-demethylation to inactive norhydrocodone is the primary metabolic
pathway of hydrocodone with a lower contribution from CYP2B6 and CYP2C19.
 The minor metabolite hydromorphone (<3% of the circulating parent
hydrocodone) was mainly formed by CYP2D6 mediated O-demethylation with a smaller contribution by CYP2B6 and CYP2C19.
Hydromorphone may contribute to the total analgesic effect of hydrocodone.
                        
                           Excretion
                           
Hydrocodone and its metabolites are cleared primarily by renal excretion.
The percent of administered dose excreted unchanged as hydrocodone
in urine was 6.5% in subjects with normal renal function, and 5.0%,
4.8%, and 2.3% in subjects with mild, moderate, and severe renal impairment,
respectively. Renal clearance (CLr) of hydrocodone in healthy subjects
was small (5.3 L/h) compared to apparent oral clearance (CL/F, 83
L/h); suggesting that non-renal clearance is the main elimination
route. Ninety-nine percent of the administered dose is eliminated
within 72 hours. The mean terminal half-life (t1/2) was similar for all HYSINGLA ER dose strengths ranging from approximately
7 to 9 hours across the range of doses.
                        
                           Specific Populations
                           

                           Elderly (≥ 65 years)
                           
Following
administration of 40 mg HYSINGLA ER, the pharmacokinetics of hydrocodone
in healthy elderly subjects (65 to 77 years) are similar to the pharmacokinetics
in healthy younger subjects (20 to 45 years).  There were no clinically
meaningful increase in Cmax (16%) and AUC (15%)
of hydrocodone in elderly as compared with younger adult subjects [see Use in Specific Populations (8.5)].
                        
                           Gender
                           
Systemic exposure of hydrocodone (Cmax and AUC) was similar between males and females.
                        
                           Hepatic Impairment
                           
After a single dose of 20 mg HYSINGLA ER in subjects
(8 each) with normal hepatic function, mild, moderate or severe hepatic
impairment based on Child-Pugh classifications, mean hydrocodone Cmax values were 16, 15, 17, and 18 ng/mL, respectively.
Mean hydrocodone AUC values were 342, 310, 390, and 415 ng.hr/mL for
subjects with normal hepatic function, mild, moderate or severe hepatic
impairment, respectively.  Geometric mean hydrocodone Cmax values were -6%, 5%, and 5% and AUC values were -14%,
13%, and 4% in patients with mild, moderate or severe hepatic impairment,
respectively, when compared with subjects with normal hepatic functions.
                        The mean in vivo plasma protein binding of hydrocodone across the groups was similar,
ranging from 33% to 37% [see Use in Specific Populations (8.6)].
                        
                        
                           Renal Impairment
                           
After a single dose of 60 mg HYSINGLA ER in subjects (8 each) with
normal renal function, mild, moderate, or severe renal impairment
based on Cockcroft-Gault criteria and end stage renal disease (with dialysis) patients,
mean hydrocodone Cmax values were 40, 50, 51,
46, and 38 ng/mL, respectively. Mean hydrocodone AUC values were 754,
942, 1222, 1220, and 932 ng.hr/mL for subjects with normal renal function,
mild, moderate or severe renal impairment and ESRD with dialysis,
respectively.  Hydrocodone Cmax values were
14%, 23%, 11% and -13% and AUC values were 13%, 61%, 57% and 4% higher
in patients with mild, moderate or severe renal impairment or end
stage renal disease with dialysis, respectively [see Use in
Specific Populations (8.7)].
                        
                        
                           Drug Interaction
Studies
                           

                           CYP3A4
                           
Co-administration
of HYSINGLA ER (20 mg single dose) and CYP3A4 inhibitor ketoconazole
(200 mg BID for 6 days) increased mean hydrocodone AUC and Cmax by 135% and 78%, respectively [see Warnings
and Precautions (5.11) and Drug Interactions (7.1)].
                        
                           CYP2D6
                           
The 90%
confidence interval (CI) of the geometric means for hydrocodone AUCinf (98 to 115%), AUCt (98 to
115%), and Cmax (93 to 121%) values were within
the range of 80 to 125% when a single dose of HYSINGLA ER 20 mg was
co-administered with CYP2D6 inhibitor paroxetine (20 mg treatment
each morning for 12 days).  No differences in systemic exposure of
hydrocodone were observed in the presence of paroxetine.
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           Figure 3
                           
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         