
               
               
               7 DRUG
INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           The CYP3A4 isoenzyme plays a major role in the metabolism
of HYSINGLA ER.  Drugs that inhibit CYP3A4 activity may cause decreased
clearance of hydrocodone which could lead to an increase in hydrocodone
plasma concentrations. (7.1)
                           
                           CNS depressants: Increased risk of respiratory depression,
hypotension, profound sedation, coma or death.  When combined therapy
with CNS depressant is contemplated, the dose of one or both agents
should be reduced. (7.2)
                           
                           Mixed Agonists/Antagonists: May precipitate withdrawal or
decrease analgesic effect if given concurrently with HYSINGLA ER. (7.3)
                           
                           The use of MAO inhibitors or tricyclic antidepressants with
HYSINGLA ER may increase the effect of either the antidepressant or
HYSINGLA ER. (7.4)
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 Drugs Affecting Cytochrome P450 Isoenzymes
                     
                        
                           
                              Inhibitors
of CYP3A4
                           
                           
Co-administration of HYSINGLA
ER with ketoconazole, a strong CYP3A4 inhibitor, significantly increased
the plasma concentrations of hydrocodone. Inhibition of CYP3A4 activity
by inhibitors, such as macrolide antibiotics (e.g., erythromycin),
azole-antifungal agents (e.g., ketoconazole), and protease inhibitors
(e.g., ritonavir), may prolong opioid effects. Caution is advised
when initiating therapy with, currently taking, or discontinuing CYP3A4
inhibitors. Evaluate these patients at frequent intervals and consider
dose adjustments until stable drug effects are achieved [see
Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                        
                           
                              Inducers of CYP3A4
                           
                           
CYP3A4 inducers
may induce the metabolism of hydrocodone and, therefore, may cause
increased clearance of the drug which could lead to a decrease in
hydrocodone plasma concentrations, lack of efficacy or, possibly,
development of a withdrawal syndrome in a patient who had developed
physical dependence to hydrocodone. If co-administration with HYSINGLA
ER is necessary, monitor for signs of opioid withdrawal and consider
dose adjustments until stable drug effects are achieved [see
Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 Central Nervous System Depressants
                     
                        The concomitant use of HYSINGLA ER with other
CNS depressants including sedatives, hypnotics, tranquilizers, general
anesthetics, phenothiazines, other opioids, and alcohol can increase
the risk of respiratory depression, profound sedation, coma and death.
 Monitor patients receiving CNS depressants and HYSINGLA ER for signs
of respiratory depression, sedation and hypotension.
                        When combined therapy with any of the above
medications is considered, the dose of one or both agents should be
reduced [see Warnings and Precautions (5.4)].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3 Interactions with Mixed Agonist/Antagonist and Partial Agonist
Opioid Analgesics
                     
                        Mixed agonist/antagonist analgesics (i.e.,
pentazocine, nalbuphine, and butorphanol) and partial agonist analgesics
(buprenorphine) may reduce the analgesic effect of HYSINGLA ER or
precipitate withdrawal symptoms in these patients. Avoid the use of
mixed agonist/antagonist and partial agonist analgesics in patients
receiving HYSINGLA ER.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4 MAO Inhibitors
                     
                        HYSINGLA ER is not recommended for use in
patients who have received MAO inhibitors within 14 days, because
severe and unpredictable potentiation by MAO inhibitors has been reported
with opioid analgesics. No specific interaction between hydrocodone
and MAO inhibitors has been observed, but caution in the use of any
opioid in patients taking this class of drugs is appropriate.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.5 Anticholinergics
                     
                        Anticholinergics or other drugs with anticholinergic
activity when used concurrently with opioid analgesics may increase
the risk of urinary retention or severe constipation, which may lead
to paralytic ileus. Monitor patients for signs of urinary retention
and constipation in addition to respiratory and central nervous system
depression when HYSINGLA ER is used concurrently with anticholinergic
drugs.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.6 Strong Laxatives
                     
                        Concomitant use of HYSINGLA ER with strong
laxatives (e.g., lactulose), that rapidly increase gastrointestinal
motility, may decrease hydrocodone absorption and result in decreased
hydrocodone plasma levels.  If HYSINGLA ER is used in these patients,
closely monitor for the development of adverse events as well as changing
analgesic requirements.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         