
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS

               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           Trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole (TMP/SMX) increases the level of dapsone and its metabolites (7.1).

                           Topical benzoyl peroxide used at the same time as ACZONE
                              
                                 ®
                               may result in temporary local yellow or orange skin discoloration (7.2).

                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 Trimethoprim-Sulfamethoxazole

                     
                        A drug-drug interaction study evaluated the effect of the use of ACZONE
                           ® Gel, 5%, in combination with double strength (160 mg/800 mg) trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (TMP/SMX). During co-administration, systemic levels of TMP and SMX were essentially unchanged. However, levels of dapsone and its metabolites increased in the presence of TMP/SMX. Systemic exposure (AUC0-12) of dapsone and N-acetyl-dapsone (NAD) were increased by about 40% and 20% respectively in the presence of TMP/SMX. Notably, systemic exposure (AUC0-12) of dapsone hydroxylamine (DHA) was more than doubled in the presence of TMP/SMX. Exposure from the proposed topical dose is about 1% of that from the 100 mg oral dose, even when co-administered with TMP/SMX.

                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 Topical Benzoyl Peroxide

                     
                        Topical application of ACZONE
                           ® Gel followed by benzoyl peroxide in subjects with acne vulgaris resulted in a temporary local yellow or orange discoloration of the skin and facial hair (reported by 7 out of 95 subjects in a clinical study) with resolution in 4 to 57 days.

                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3 Drug Interactions with Oral Dapsone

                     
                        Certain concomitant medications (such as rifampin, anticonvulsants, St. John's wort) may increase the formation of dapsone hydroxylamine, a metabolite of dapsone associated with hemolysis. With oral dapsone treatment, folic acid antagonists such as pyrimethamine have been noted to possibly increase the likelihood of hematologic reactions.

                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4 Concomitant Use with Drugs that Induce Methemoglobinemia

                     
                        Concomitant use of ACZONE
                           
                              ®
                            with drugs that induce methemoglobinemia such as sulfonamides, acetaminophen, acetanilide, aniline dyes, benzocaine, chloroquine, dapsone, naphthalene, nitrates and nitrites, nitrofurantoin, nitroglycerin, nitroprusside, pamaquine, para‐aminosalicylic acid, phenacetin, phenobarbital, phenytoin, primaquine, and quinine may increase the risk for developing methemoglobinemia [see Warnings and Precautions (5.1)].

                     
                     
                  
               
            
         