
                     
                     
                     Drug Interactions
                     
                        Multiple dosing of rifabutin has been associated with induction of hepatic metabolic enzymes of the CYP450 IIIA subfamily.  Rifabutin's predominant metabolite (25-desacetyl rifabutin; LM 565), may also contribute to this effect.  Metabolic induction due to rifabutin is likely to produce a decrease in circulating levels of concomitantly administered drugs (especially those metabolized by the CYP450 IIIA pathway).  Kinetic data suggest that enzymatic induction by rifabutin is complete within 5 days and is dose-independent over the 300 to 600 mg dose-range.  Similarly, concomitant medications that competitively inhibit the CYP450 IIIA activity may increase circulating levels of rifabutin.
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Malabsorption
                           
                              Gastric pH alteration due to progressing HIV disease has been linked with malabsorption of some drugs used in HIV-positive patients (e.g., rifampin, isoniazid).  Drug serum concentration data from AIDS patients with varying disease severity (based on CD4+ counts) suggest that rifabutin absorption is not influenced by progressing HIV disease.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Effects on Other Drugs
                           
                              Rifabutin induces CYP3A enzymes and therefore may reduce the plasma concentrations of drugs metabolized by those enzymes. This effect may reduce the efficacy of standard doses of such drugs, which include itraconazole, clarithromycin, and saquinavir (see CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY-Drug-Drug Interactions).
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Effects on Rifabutin
                           
                              Some drugs that inhibit CYP3A may significantly increase the plasma concentration of rifabutin. Because high plasma levels of rifabutin may increase the risk of adverse reactions, carefully monitor patients receiving coadministration of such drugs, which include fluconazole and clarithromycin (see CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY-Drug-Drug Interactions). In some cases, the dosage of MYCOBUTIN may need to be reduced when it is coadministered with such a drug (see below).
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              The following table summarizes the results and magnitude of the pertinent drug interactions assessed with rifabutin.  The clinical relevance of these interactions and subsequent dose modifications should be judged in light of the population studied, severity of the disease, patient's drug profile, and the likely impact on the risk/benefit ratio.
                              


                           



                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Other drugs
                           
                              The structurally similar drug, rifampin, is known to reduce the plasma concentrations of a number of other drugs (see prescribing information for rifampin). Although rifabutin is a weaker enzyme inducer than rifampin, it may be expected to have some effect on those drugs as well.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               