
               
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                          
                                             
                                                
                                                   
                                                      
                                                         
                                                            
                                                               
                                                                  
                                                                     
                                                                        CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
                                                                     
                                                                  
                                                               
                                                            
                                                         
                                                      
                                                   
                                                
                                             
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  		IBU tablets contain ibuprofen which possesses analgesic andantipyretic activities. Its mode of action, like that of other NSAIDs, isnot completely understood, but may be related to prostaglandin synthetaseinhibition.
                  
              		In clinical studies in patients with rheumatoid arthritis andosteoarthritis, Ibuprofen tablets have been shown to be comparableto aspirin in controlling pain and inflammation and to be associatedwith a statistically significant reduction in the milder gastrointestinalside effects (see        
       
                        ADVERSE REACTIONS
                     
              ). Ibuprofen may be well toleratedin some patients who have had gastrointestinal side effectswith aspirin, but these patients when treated with IBU tablets shouldbe carefully followed for signs and symptoms of gastrointestinalulceration and bleeding. Although it is not definitely known whetheribuprofen causes less peptic ulceration than aspirin, in one studyinvolving 885 patients with rheumatoid arthritis treated for up to oneyear, there were no reports of gastric ulceration with ibuprofenwhereas frank ulceration was reported in 13 patients in the aspiringroup (statistically significant p<.001).      
      
                  		Gastroscopic studies at varying doses show an increased tendencytoward gastric irritation at higher doses. However, at comparabledoses, gastric irritation is approximately half that seen with aspirin.Studies using 51Cr-tagged red cells indicate that fecal blood lossassociated with Ibuprofen tablets in doses up to 2400 mg daily didnot exceed the normal range, and was significantly less than thatseen in aspirin-treated patients.
                  
              		In clinical studies in patients with rheumatoid arthritis, Ibuprofenhas been shown to be comparable to indomethacin in controlling thesigns and symptoms of disease activity and to be associated with astatistically significant reduction of the milder gastrointestinal (see        
       
                        ADVERSE REACTIONS
                     
              ) and CNS side effects.      
      
                  		Ibuprofen may be used in combination with gold salts and/or corticosteroids.
                  		Controlled studies have demonstrated that Ibuprofen is a more effective analgesic than propoxyphene for the relief of episiotomy pain, pain following dental extraction procedures, and for the relief ofthe symptoms of primary dysmenorrhea.
                  		In patients with primary dysmenorrhea, Ibuprofen has been shown to reduce elevated levels of prostaglandin activity in the menstrualfluid and to reduce resting and active intrauterine pressure, as well asthe frequency of uterine contractions. The probable mechanism ofaction is to inhibit prostaglandin synthesis rather than simply to provide analgesia.
                  		The ibuprofen in IBU tablets is rapidly absorbed. Peak serum ibuprofen levels are generally attained one to two hours after administration.With single doses up to 800 mg, a linear relationship exists between amount of drug administered and the integrated area underthe serum drug concentration vs time curve. Above 800 mg, however,the area under the curve increases less than proportional to increases in dose. There is no evidence of drug accumulation or enzyme induction.
                  		The administration of Ibuprofen tablets either under fasting conditions or immediately before meals yields quite similar serum ibuprofen concentration-time profiles. When Ibuprofen is administered immediately after a meal, there is a reduction in the rate of absorption but no appreciable decrease in the extent of absorption.The bioavailability of the drug is minimally altered by the presence of food.
                  		A bioavailability study has shown that there was no interference with the absorption of ibuprofen when given in conjunction with anantacid containing both aluminum hydroxide and magnesium hydroxide.
                  		Ibuprofen is rapidly metabolized and eliminated in the urine. The excretion of ibuprofen is virtually complete 24 hours after the last dose. The serum half-life is 1.8 to 2.0 hours.
                  
              		Studies have shown that following ingestion of the drug, 45% to79% of the dose was recovered in the urine within 24 hours as metabolite A (25%), (+)-2-[        
       p
               -(2hydroxymethyl-propyl) phenyl] propionic acid and metabolite B (37%), (+)-2-[        
       p
               -(2carboxypropyl)phenyl]propionic acid; the percentages of free and conjugated ibuprofen were approximately 1% and 14%, respectively.      
      
               
               
            
         