
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  Endogenous estrogens are largely responsible for the development and maintenance of the female reproductive system and secondary sexual characteristics. Although circulating estrogens exist in a dynamic equilibrium of metabolic interconversions, estradiol is the principal intracellular human estrogen and is substantially more potent than its metabolites, estrone and estriol, at the receptor level.
                  The primary source of estrogen in normally cycling adult women is the ovarian follicle, which secretes 70 to 500 mcg of estradiol daily, depending on the phase of the menstrual cycle. After menopause, most endogenous estrogen is produced by conversion of androstenedione, secreted by the adrenal cortex, to estrone by peripheral tissues. Thus, estrone and the sulfate conjugated form, estrone sulfate, are the most abundant circulating estrogens in postmenopausal women.
                  Estrogens act through binding to nuclear receptors in estrogen-responsive tissues. To date, two estrogen receptors have been identified. These vary in proportion from tissue to tissue.
                  Circulating estrogens modulate the pituitary secretion of the gonadotropins, luteinizing hormone (LH), and follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) through a negative feedback mechanism. Estrogens act to reduce the elevated levels of these hormones seen in postmenopausal women.
                  Progestin compounds enhance cellular differentiation and generally oppose the actions of estrogens by decreasing estrogen receptor levels, increasing local metabolism of estrogens to less active metabolites, or inducing gene products that blunt cellular responses to estrogen. Progestins exert their effects in target cells by binding to specific progesterone receptors that interact with progesterone response elements in target genes. Progesterone receptors have been identified in the female reproductive tract, breast, pituitary, hypothalamus, and central nervous system. Progestins produce similar endometrial changes to those of the naturally occurring hormone progesterone.
               
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     PHARMACOKINETICS
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           A. Absorption
                           
                              Estradiol is well absorbed through the gastrointestinal tract. Following oral administration of Estradiol/Norethindrone Acetate tablets, peak plasma estradiol concentrations are reached slowly within 5-8 hours. When given orally, estradiol is extensively metabolized (first-pass effect) to estrone sulfate, with smaller amounts of other conjugated and unconjugated estrogens. After oral administration, norethindrone acetate is rapidly absorbed and transformed to norethindrone. It undergoes first-pass metabolism in the liver and other enteric organs, and reaches a peak plasma concentration within 0.5 - 1.5 hours after the administration of Estradiol/Norethindrone Acetate tablets. The oral bioavailability of estradiol and norethindrone following administration of Estradiol/Norethindrone Acetate Tablets 1.0 mg/0.5 mg when compared to a combination oral solution is 53% and 100%, respectively. Administration of Estradiol/Norethindrone Acetate Tablets 1.0 mg/0.5 mg with food did not modify the bioavailability of estradiol, although increases in AUC0-72 of 19% and decreases in Cmax of 36% for norethindrone were seen. The pharmacokinetic parameters of estradiol (E2), estrone (E1), and norethindrone (NET) following oral administration of 1 Estradiol/Norethindrone Acetate Tablets 1.0 mg/0.5 mg or 2 Estradiol/Norethindrone Acetate 0.5 mg/0.1 mg tablet(s) to healthy postmenopausal women are summarized in Table 1.
                              


                              


Following continuous dosing with once-daily administration of Estradiol/Norethindrone Acetate Tablets 1.0 mg/0.5 mg, serum levels of estradiol, estrone, and norethindrone reached steady-state within two weeks with an accumulation of 33-47% above levels following single dose administration. Unadjusted circulating levels of E2, E1, and NET during Estradiol/Norethindrone Acetate Tablets 1.0 mg/0.5 mg treatment at steady state (dosing at time 0) are provided in Figures 1a and 1b.
                              



                           



                           
                           
                              
                                 Figure 1a
                                 
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 Figure 1b
                                 
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           B. Distribution
                           
                              The distribution of exogenous estrogens is similar to that of endogenous estrogens. Estrogens are widely distributed in the body and are generally found in higher concentrations in the sex hormone target organs. Estradiol circulates in the blood bound to sex-hormone-binding globulin (SHBG) (37%) and to albumin (61%), while only approximately 1-2% is unbound. Norethindrone also binds to a similar extent to SHBG (36%) and to albumin (61%).
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           C. Metabolism
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Estradiol
                                 
                                    Exogenous estrogens are metabolized in the same manner as endogenous estrogens. Circulating estrogens exist in a dynamic equilibrium of metabolic interconversions. These transformations take place mainly in the liver. Estradiol is converted reversibly to estrone, and both can be converted to estriol, which is the major urinary metabolite. Estrogens also undergo enterohepatic recirculation via sulfate and glucuronide conjugation in the liver, biliary secretion of conjugates into the intestine, and hydrolysis in the intestine followed by reabsorption. In postmenopausal women, a significant proportion of the circulating estrogens exist as sulfate conjugates, especially estrone sulfate, which serves as a circulating reservoir for the formation of more active estrogens.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Norethindrone Acetate
                                 
                                    The most important metabolites of norethindrone are isomers of 5α-dihydro-norethindrone and tetrahydro-norethindrone, which are excreted mainly in the urine as sulfate or glucuronide conjugates.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           D. Excretion
                           
                              Estradiol, estrone, and estriol are excreted in the urine along with glucuronide and sulfate conjugates. The half-life of estradiol following single dose administration of Estradiol/Norethindrone Acetate Tablets 1.0 mg/0.5 mg is 12-14 hours. The terminal half-life of norethindrone is about 8-11 hours.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           E. Special Populations
                           
                              No pharmacokinetic studies were conducted in special populations, including patients with renal or hepatic impairment.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           F. Drug Interactions
                           
                              Coadministration of estradiol with norethindrone acetate did not elicit any apparent influence on the pharmacokinetics of norethindrone. Similarly, no relevant interaction of norethindrone on the pharmacokinetics of estradiol was found within the NETA dose range investigated in a single dose study.
                              
                                 In-vitro and in-vivo studies have shown that estrogens are metabolized partially by cytochrome P450 3A4 (CYP3A4). Therefore, inducers or inhibitors of CYP3A4 may affect estrogen drug metabolism. Inducers of CYP3A4 such as St. John's Wort preparations (Hypericum perforatum), phenobarbital, carbamazepine, and rifampin may reduce plasma concentrations of estrogens, possibly resulting in a decrease in therapeutic effects and/or changes in the uterine bleeding profile. Inhibitors of CYP3A4 such as erythromycin, clarithromycin, ketoconazole, itraconazole, ritonavir and grapefruit juice may increase plasma concentrations of estrogens and result in side effects.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         