
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  Enter section text here
               
               
               
                  
                     image of Figure 1
                     
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        The primary activity of insulin, including insulin glargine, is 
regulation of glucose metabolism. Insulin and its analogs lower blood glucose by 
stimulating peripheral glucose uptake, especially by skeletal muscle and fat, 
and by inhibiting hepatic glucose production. Insulin inhibits lipolysis and 
proteolysis, and enhances protein synthesis.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        Insulin glargine is a human insulin analog that has been designed 
to have low aqueous solubility at neutral pH. At pH 4, as in the LANTUS 
injection solution, insulin glargine is completely soluble. After injection into 
the subcutaneous tissue, the acidic solution is neutralized, leading to 
formation of microprecipitates from which small amounts of insulin glargine are 
slowly released, resulting in a relatively constant concentration/time profile 
over 24 hours with no pronounced peak. This profile allows once-daily dosing as 
a basal insulin.
                        In clinical studies, the glucose-lowering effect on a molar basis (i.e., when 
given at the same doses) of intravenous insulin glargine is approximately the 
same as that for human insulin. In euglycemic clamp studies in healthy subjects 
or in patients with type 1 diabetes, the onset of action of subcutaneous insulin 
glargine was slower than NPH insulin. The effect profile of insulin glargine was 
relatively constant with no pronounced peak and the duration of its effect was 
prolonged compared to NPH insulin. Figure 1 shows 
results from a study in patients with type 1 diabetes conducted for a maximum of 
24 hours after the injection. The median time between injection and the end of 
pharmacological effect was 14.5 hours (range: 9.5 to 19.3 hours) for NPH 
insulin, and 24 hours (range: 10.8 to >24.0 hours) (24 hours was the end of 
the observation period) for insulin glargine.
                        
                           Figure 1. Activity Profile in Patients with Type 1 
Diabetes
                        
                        
                           
                        
                        * Determined as amount of glucose infused to maintain constant plasma glucose 
levels (hourly mean values); indicative of insulin activity.
                        The longer duration of action (up to 24 hours) of LANTUS is directly related 
to its slower rate of absorption and supports once-daily subcutaneous 
administration. The time course of action of insulins, including LANTUS, may 
vary between individuals and within the same individual.
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        Absorption and Bioavailability. After subcutaneous injection of 
insulin glargine in healthy subjects and in patients with diabetes, the insulin 
serum concentrations indicated a slower, more prolonged absorption and a 
relatively constant concentration/time profile over 24 hours with no pronounced 
peak in comparison to NPH insulin. Serum insulin concentrations were thus 
consistent with the time profile of the pharmacodynamic activity of insulin 
glargine.
                        After subcutaneous injection of 0.3 Units/kg insulin glargine in patients 
with type 1 diabetes, a relatively constant concentration/time profile has been 
demonstrated. The duration of action after abdominal, deltoid, or thigh 
subcutaneous administration was similar.
                        
                        Metabolism. A metabolism study in humans indicates that insulin 
glargine is partly metabolized at the carboxyl terminus of the B chain in the 
subcutaneous depot to form two active metabolites with in vitro activity similar 
to that of insulin, M1 (21A-Gly-insulin) and M2 (21A-Gly-des-30B-Thr-insulin). Unchanged 
drug and these degradation products are also present in the circulation.
                        
                        Special Populations
                        
                        
                           Age, Race, and Gender. Information on 
the effect of age, race, and gender on the pharmacokinetics of LANTUS is not 
available. However, in controlled clinical trials in adults (n=3890) and a 
controlled clinical trial in pediatric patients (n=349), subgroup analyses based 
on age, race, and gender did not show differences in safety and efficacy between 
insulin glargine and NPH insulin [see Clinical Studies (14)].
                        
                        
                           Smoking. The effect of smoking on the 
pharmacokinetics/pharmacodynamics of LANTUS has not been studied. 
                        
                        
                           Pregnancy. The effect of pregnancy on 
the pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of LANTUS has not been studied [see Use in Specific Populations (8.1)].
                        
                        
                        
                           Obesity. In controlled clinical 
trials, which included patients with Body Mass Index (BMI) up to and including 
49.6 kg/m2, subgroup analyses based on BMI did not show 
differences in safety and efficacy between insulin glargine and NPH insulin 
[see Clinical Studies (14)].
                        
                        
                           Renal Impairment. The effect of renal 
impairment on the pharmacokinetics of LANTUS has not been studied. However, some 
studies with human insulin have shown increased circulating levels of insulin in 
patients with renal failure. Careful glucose monitoring and dose adjustments of 
insulin, including LANTUS, may be necessary in patients with renal impairment 
[See Warnings and 
Precautions (5.5)].
                        
                        
                        
                           Hepatic Impairment. The effect of 
hepatic impairment on the pharmacokinetics of LANTUS has not been studied. 
However, some studies with human insulin have shown increased circulating levels 
of insulin in patients with liver failure. Careful glucose monitoring and dose 
adjustments of insulin, including LANTUS, may be necessary in patients with 
hepatic impairment [See Warnings and 
Precautions (5.6)].
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         