
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 Serotonergic Drugs  
                     
                        Serious, sometimes fatal, central nervous system (CNS) toxicity referred to as the “serotonin syndrome” has been reported with the combination of nonselective MAOIs and serotonergic drugs. Use of EMSAM with these drugs is contraindicated [see Contraindications (4) and Warnings and Precautions (5.2)].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 Tyramine
                     
                        EMSAM has the capacity to inhibit intestinal MAO, which is responsible for the catabolism of tyramine in food and beverages. As a result of this inhibition, large amounts of tyramine may enter the systemic circulation and precipitate a sudden, large rise in blood pressure or hypertensive crisis [see Warnings and Precautions (5.3) and Clinical Pharmacology (12.2)].
                        A diet low in tyramine content may be necessary to avoid this interaction. Studies to evaluate the potential for EMSAM to inhibit tyramine metabolism have been conducted and, overall, the data for EMSAM 6 mg per 24 hours support a recommendation that a modified diet is not required at this dose. Due to the more limited data available for EMSAM 9 mg per 24 hours and the results from the Phase I tyramine challenge study in fed volunteers administered EMSAM 12 mg per 24 hours, patients receiving these doses should follow Dietary Modifications Required for Patients Taking EMSAM 9 mg per 24 hours and 12 mg per 24 hours below [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.2)].
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Dietary Modifications Required for Patients Taking EMSAM 9 mg per 24 hours and 12 mg per 24 hours
                              
                           
                           
                              The foods and beverages listed in Table 5 should be avoided beginning on the first day of EMSAM 9 mg per 24 hours or 12 mg per 24 hours treatment, and should continue to be avoided for 2 weeks after a dose reduction to EMSAM 6 mg per 24 hours or following the discontinuation of EMSAM 9 mg per 24 hours or 12 mg per 24 hours.
                              


                           



                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3 Sympathomimetic Amines and Buspirone
                     
                        The use of EMSAM with sympathomimetic amines or buspirone may produce substantial elevations in blood pressure. Therefore, monitor blood pressure if EMSAM is used with any of the following drugs: buspirone, amphetamines, and cold products or weight-reducing preparations that contain sympathomimetic amines (e.g., pseudoephedrine, phenylephrine, phenylpropanolamine, and ephedrine).
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4 Effect of Other Drugs on EMSAM
                     
                        Carbamazepine is contraindicated with MAOIs, including selegiline [see Contraindications (4), Warnings and Precautions (5.3) and Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].  
                        No dose adjustment for EMSAM is needed when EMSAM is used concomitantly with alcohol, alprazolam, ibuprofen, olanzapine, risperidone, levothyroxine, and CYP3A4 inhibitors (e.g., ketoconazole). No clinically meaningful change in selegiline exposure was seen when EMSAM was co-administered with alcohol, alprazolam, ibuprofen, olanzapine, risperidone, levothyroxine, and ketoconazole [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)]. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.5 Effect of EMSAM on Other Drugs
                     
                        Use of alcohol while taking EMSAM is not recommended, even though EMSAM has not been shown to increase the impairment of mental and motor skills caused by alcohol (0.75 mg per kg) [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)]. 
                        Monitor blood pressure if sympathomimetic agents (e.g., phenylpropanolamine (PPA) or pseudoephedrine) are used with EMSAM, even though selegiline does not appear to affect the pharmacokinetics of PPA or pseudoephedrine [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)]. 
                        No dose adjustment of alprazolam, ibuprofen, levothyroxine, olanzapine, risperdione, warfarin, or strong CYP3A4 inhibitors (e.g., ketoconazole) is necessary when these drugs are used in combination with EMSAM. EMSAM had no clinically relevant effect on pharmacokinetics of these drugs. 
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         