
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  Following a 1 hour intravenous infusion of a single dose of 800 mg sulfamethoxazole and 160 mg trimethoprim to 11 patients whose weight ranged from 105 lbs to 165 lbs (mean, 143 lbs) the peak plasma concentrations of sulfamethoxazole and trimethoprim were 46.3 ± 2.7 mcg/mL and 3.4 ± 0.3 mcg/mL, respectively. Following repeated intravenous administration of the same dose at 8 hour intervals, the mean plasma concentrations just prior to and immediately after each infusion at steady state were 70.6 ± 7.3 mcg/mL and 105.6 ± 10.9 mcg/mL for sulfamethoxazole and 5.6 ± 0.6 mcg/mL and 8.8 ± 0.9 mcg/mL for trimethoprim. The mean plasma half-life was 12.8 ± 1.8 hours for sulfamethoxazole and 11.3 ± 0.7 hours for trimethoprim. All of these 11 patients had normal renal function, and their ages ranged from 17 to 78 years (median, 60 years).1
                  
                  Pharmacokinetic studies in children and adults suggest an age-dependent half-life of trimethoprim, as indicated in the following table.2
                  
                  


                  


Patients with severely impaired renal function exhibit an increase in the half-lives of both components, requiring dosage regimen adjustment (see 
                        DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION
                      section).
                  Both sulfamethoxazole and trimethoprim exist in the blood as unbound, protein-bound and metabolized forms; sulfamethoxazole also exists as the conjugated form. The metabolism of sulfamethoxazole occurs predominately by N4-acetylation, although the glucuronide conjugate has been identified. The principal metabolites of trimethoprim are the 1- and 3-oxides and the 3’- and 4’-hydroxy derivatives. The free forms of sulfamethoxazole and trimethoprim are considered to be the therapeutically active forms. Approximately 70% of sulfamethoxazole and 44% of trimethoprim are bound to plasma proteins. The presence of 10 mg percent sulfamethoxazole in plasma decreases the protein binding of trimethoprim by an insignificant degree; trimethoprim does not influence the protein binding of sulfamethoxazole.
                  Excretion of sulfamethoxazole and trimethoprim is primarily by the kidneys through both glomerular filtration and tubular secretion. Urine concentrations of both sulfamethoxazole and trimethoprim are considerably higher than are the concentrations in the blood. The percent of dose excreted in urine over a 12 hour period following the intravenous administration of the first dose of 1200 mg of sulfamethoxazole and 240 mg of trimethoprim on day 1 ranged from 7% to 12.7% as free sulfamethoxazole and 17% to 42.4% as free trimethoprim; and 36.7% to 56% as total (free plus the N4-acetylated metabolite) sulfamethoxazole. When administered together, neither sulfamethoxazole nor trimethoprim affects the urinary excretion pattern of the other. Both sulfamethoxazole and trimethoprim distribute to sputum and vaginal fluid; trimethoprim also distributes to bronchial secretions, and both pass the placental barrier and are excreted in breast milk.
               
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Microbiology
                     
                        Sulfamethoxazole inhibits bacterial synthesis of dihydrofolic acid by competing with para-aminobenzoic acid (PABA). Trimethoprim blocks the production of tetrahydrofolic acid from dihydrofolic acid by binding to and reversibly inhibiting the required enzyme, dihydrofolate reductase. Thus, sulfamethoxazole and trimethoprim blocks two consecutive steps in the biosynthesis of nucleic acids and proteins essential to many bacteria.
                        
                           In vitro studies have shown that bacterial resistance develops more slowly with both sulfamethoxazole and trimethoprim in combination than with either sulfamethoxazole or trimethoprim alone. 
                        Sulfamethoxazole and trimethoprim have been shown to be active against most strains of the following microorganisms, both in vitro and in clinical infections as described in the 
                              INDICATIONS AND USAGE
                           section.
                        
                           Aerobic gram-positive microorganisms
                        
                        
                           Streptococcus pneumoniae
                        
                        
                           Aerobic gram-negative microorganisms
                        
                        
                           Escherichia coli (including susceptible enterotoxigenic strains implicated in traveler’s diarrhea)

                           Klebsiella species

                           Enterobacter species

                           Haemophilus influenzae
                           

                           Morganella morganii
                           

                           Proteus mirabilis
                           

                           Proteus vulgaris
                           

                           Shigella flexneri
                           

                           Shigella sonnei
                        
                        
                           Other Organisms
                        
                        
                           Pneumocystis jiroveci
                        
                        
                           Susceptibility Testing Methods
                        
                        
                           Dilution Techniques
                        
                        Quantitative methods are used to determine antimicrobial minimum inhibitory concentrations (MICs). These MICs provide estimates of the susceptibility of bacteria to antimicrobial compounds. The MICs should be determined using a standardized procedure. Standardized procedures are based on a dilution method3 (broth or agar) or equivalent with standardized inoculum concentrations and standardized concentrations of sulfamethoxazole and trimethoprim powder. The MIC values should be interpreted according to the following criteria:
                        


                        


  a These interpretative standards are applicable only to broth microdilution susceptibility tests with Haemophilus influenzae using Haemophilus Test Medium (HTM).3
                        
                        
                           b These interpretative standards are applicable only to broth microdilution susceptibility tests using cation-adjusted Mueller-Hinton broth with 2% to 5% lysed horse blood.3
                        
                        A report of “Susceptible” indicates that the pathogen is likely to be inhibited if the antimicrobial compound in the blood reaches the concentrations usually achievable. A report of “Intermediate” indicates that the result should be considered equivocal, and, if the microorganism is not fully susceptible to alternative, clinically feasible drugs, the test should be repeated. This category implies possible clinical applicability in body sites where the drug is physiologically concentrated or in situations where high dosage of drug can be used. This category also provides a buffer zone which prevents small uncontrolled technical factors from causing major discrepancies in interpretation. A report of “Resistant” indicates that the pathogen is not likely to be inhibited if the antimicrobial compound in the blood reaches the concentrations usually achievable; other therapy should be selected.
                        
                           Quality Control
                        
                        Standardized susceptibility test procedures require the use of laboratory control microorganisms to control the technical aspects of the laboratory procedures. Standard sulfamethoxazole and trimethoprim powder should provide the following range of values:
                        


                        



                           c This quality control range is applicable only to Haemophilus influenzae ATCC 49247 tested by broth microdilution procedure using Haemophilus Test Medium (HTM).3
                        
                        
                           d This quality control range is applicable to tests performed by the broth microdilution method only using cation-adjusted Mueller-Hinton broth with 2% to 5% lysed horse blood.3
                        
                        
                           Diffusion Techniques
                        
                        Quantitative methods that require measurement of zone diameters also provide reproducible estimates of the susceptibility of bacteria to antimicrobial compounds. One such standardized procedure4 requires the use of standardized inoculum concentrations. This procedure uses paper disks impregnated with 1.25/23.75 mcg of sulfamethoxazole and trimethoprim to test the susceptibility of microorganisms to sulfamethoxazole and trimethoprim.
                        Reports from the laboratory providing results of the standard single-disk susceptibility test with a 1.25/23.75 mcg of sulfamethoxazole and trimethoprim disk should be interpreted according to the following criteria:
                        For testing either Enterobacteriaceae or Haemophilus influenzae
                           e
                        
                        


                        



                           e These zone diameter standards are applicable only for disk diffusion testing with Haemophilus influenzae and Haemophilus Test Medium (HTM).4
                        
                        When testing Streptococcus pneumoniae
                           f
                        
                        


                        



                           f These zone diameter interpretative standards are applicable only to tests performed using Mueller-Hinton agar supplemented with 5% defibrinated sheep blood when incubated in 5% 
CO2. 
                           4
                        
                        Interpretation should be as stated above for results using dilution techniques. Interpretation involves correlation of the diameter obtained in the disk test with the MIC for sulfamethoxazole and trimethoprim.
                        
                           Quality Control
                        
                        As with standardized dilution techniques, diffusion methods require the use of laboratory control microorganisms that are used to control the technical aspects of the laboratory procedures. For the diffusion technique, the 1.25/23.75 mcg sulfamethoxazole and trimethoprim disk* should provide the following zone diameters in these laboratory test quality control strains:
                        


                        



                           *Mueller-Hinton agar should be checked for excessive levels of thymidine or thymine. To determine whether Mueller-Hinton medium has sufficiently low levels of thymidine and thymine, an Enterococcus faecalis (ATCC 29212 or ATCC 33186) may be tested with sulfamethoxazole and trimethoprim disks. A zone of inhibition ≥ 20 mm that is essentially free of fine colonies indicates a sufficiently low level of thymidine and thymine.
                        
                           g This quality control range is applicable only to Haemophilus influenzae ATCC 49247 tested by a disk diffusion procedure using Haemophilus Test Medium (HTM).4
                        
                        
                           h This quality control range is applicable only to tests performed by disk diffusion using Mueller-Hinton agar supplemented with 5% defibrinated sheep blood when incubated in 5% CO2.4
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         