
                     
                     
                     Drug Interactions
                     
                        
                           Drug interaction studies have been completed with INVIRASE and saquinavir soft gel capsules. Observations from drug interaction studies with saquinavir soft gel capsules may not be predictive for INVIRASE/ritonavir. Because ritonavir is coadministered, prescribers should also refer to the prescribing information for ritonavir regarding drug interactions associated with this agent.
                        The metabolism of saquinavir is mediated by cytochrome P450, with the specific isoenzyme CYP3A4 responsible for 90% of the hepatic metabolism. Additionally, saquinavir is a substrate for P-Glycoprotein (Pgp). Therefore, drugs that affect CYP3A4 and/or Pgp, may modify the pharmacokinetics of saquinavir. Similarly, saquinavir might also modify the pharmacokinetics of other drugs that are substrates for CYP3A4 or Pgp.
                        Drugs that are contraindicated specifically due to the expected magnitude of interaction and potential for serious adverse events are listed in 
                              Table 4
                            under CONTRAINDICATIONS. These recommendations are based on either drug interaction studies or predicted interactions due to the expected magnitude of interaction and potential for serious events or loss of efficacy.
                        Drug interactions that have been established based on drug interaction studies are listed with the pharmacokinetic results in 
                              Table 2
                           , which summarizes the effect of saquinavir, administered as saquinavir soft gel capsules or INVIRASE, on the geometric mean AUC and Cmax of coadministered drugs and 
                              Table 3
                           , which summarizes the effect of coadministered drugs on the geometric mean AUC and Cmax of saquinavir. Clinical dose recommendations can be found in 
                              Table 5
                           . The magnitude of the interactions may be different when INVIRASE is given with ritonavir (see 
                              CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
                           ).
                        When coadministering INVIRASE/ritonavir with any agent having a narrow therapeutic margin, such as anticoagulants, anticonvulsants, and antiarrhythmics, special attention is warranted. With some agents, the metabolism may be induced, resulting in decreased concentrations. Examples and clinical dose recommendations can be found in 
                              Table 5
                           .
                        


