
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  Cyclobenzaprine relieves skeletal muscle spasm of local origin 
without interfering with muscle function. Cyclobenzaprine has not been shown to 
be effective in muscle spasm due to central nervous system disease. In animal 
models, cyclobenzaprine reduced or abolished skeletal muscle hyperactivity. 
Animal studies indicate that cyclobenzaprine does not act at the neuromuscular 
junction or directly on skeletal muscle. Such studies show that cyclobenzaprine 
acts primarily within the central nervous system at the brain stem as opposed to 
the spinal cord level, although an overlapping action on the latter may 
contribute to its overall skeletal muscle relaxant activity. Evidence suggests 
that the net effect of cyclobenzaprine is a reduction of tonic somatic motor 
activity, influencing both gamma (γ) and alpha (α) motor systems. 
Pharmacological studies in animals demonstrated a similarity between the effects 
of cyclobenzaprine and the structurally related tricyclic antidepressants, 
including reserpine antagonism, norepinephrine potentiation, potent peripheral 
and central anticholinergic effects, and sedation. Cyclobenzaprine caused slight 
to moderate increase in heart rate in animals.
                  
                  
                  Pharmacokinetics
                  
                  AbsorptionIn a single-dose study comprised of healthy adult males (n=15), 
the dose adjusted ratios of the arithmetic means of AUC0-168 and AUC0-∞ indicated that exposure 
of the AMRIX 30 mg was about 16% and 10% higher than that of AMRIX 15 mg, 
respectively. The dose-adjusted ratios of the arithmetic means of Cmax indicated that the peak plasma concentration of AMRIX 30 mg 
was about 20% higher than that of AMRIX 15 mg. The half-lives and time to peak 
plasma cyclobenzaprine concentration were similar for both AMRIX 15 mg and 30 
mg. These data are summarized below.
                  


                  


SD = standard deviation

                  
                  A food effect study conducted in healthy adult subjects (n=15) utilizing a 
single dose of AMRIX 30 mg demonstrated a statistically significant increase in 
bioavailability when AMRIX 30 mg was given with food relative to the fasted 
state. There was a 35% increase in peak plasma cyclobenzaprine concentration 
(Cmax) and a 20% increase in exposure (AUC0-168 and AUC0-∞) in the presence of 
food. No effect, however, was noted in Tlag, Tmax, or the shape of the mean plasma cyclobenzaprine 
concentration versus time profile. Cyclobenzaprine in plasma was first 
detectable in both the fed and fasted states at 1.5 hours.
                  In a multiple-dose study utilizing AMRIX 30 mg administered once daily for 7 
days in a group of healthy adult volunteers (n=35) a 2.5-fold accumulation of 
plasma cyclobenzaprine levels was noted at steady-state.
                  
                  
                  Metabolism and EliminationCyclobenzaprine is extensively metabolized and is excreted 
primarily as glucuronides via the kidney. Cytochromes P-450 3A4, 1A2, and, to a 
lesser extent, 2D6, mediate N-demethylation, one of the oxidative pathways for 
cyclobenzaprine. Cyclobenzaprine has an elimination half-life of 32 hours (range 
8-37 hours; n=18); plasma clearance is 0.7 L/min following single dose 
administration of AMRIX.
                  
                  
                  Special Populations
                  
                  ElderlyAlthough there were no notable differences in Cmax or Tmax, cyclobenzaprine plasma AUC 
is increased by 40% and the plasma half-life of cyclobenzaprine is prolonged in 
elderly subjects greater than 65 years of age (50 hours) after dosing with AMRIX 
compared to younger subjects (32 hours). Pharmacokinetic characteristics of 
cyclobenzaprine following multiple-dose administration of AMRIX in the elderly 
were not evaluated.
                  


                  



                  
                  
                  * Measured over the entire 24 hour period
                  SD= standard deviation
                  
Hepatic ImpairmentIn a pharmacokinetic study of immediate-release cyclobenzaprine 
in 16 subjects with hepatic impairment (15 mild, 1 moderate per Child-Pugh 
score), both AUC and Cmax were approximately double the 
values seen in the healthy control group. The pharmacokinetics of 
cyclobenzaprine in subjects with severe hepatic impairment is not known.
               
               
            
         