
               
               
               DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
                  

                  

                  MAO inhibitors should be used with caution in patients receiving 
hydralazine.
                  When other potent parenteral antihypertensive drugs, such as diazoxide, are 
used in combination with hydralazine, patients should be continuously observed 
for several hours for any excessive fall in blood pressure. Profound hypotensive 
episodes may occur when diazoxide injection and hydralazine are used 
concomitantly.
                  
                  
                  Drug/Food InteractionsAdministration of hydralazine with food results in higher plasma 
levels.
                  
                  
                  Carcinogenesis, Mutagenesis, Impairment of 
FertilityIn a lifetime study in Swiss albino mice, there was a 
statistically significant increase in the incidence of lung tumors (adenomas and 
adenocarcinomas) of both male and female mice given hydralazine continuously in 
their drinking water at a dosage of about 250 mg/kg per day (about 80 times the 
maximum recommended human dose). In a 2-year carcinogenicity study of rats given 
hydralazine by gavage at dose levels of 15, 30, and 60 mg/kg/day (approximately 
5 to 20 times the recommended human daily dosage), microscopic examination of 
the liver revealed a small, but statistically significant, increase in benign 
neoplastic nodules in male and female rats from the high-dose group and in 
female rats from the intermediate-dose group. Benign interstitial cell tumors of 
the testes were also significantly increased in male rats from the high-dose 
group. The tumors observed are common in aged rats and a significantly increased 
incidence was not observed until 18 months of treatment. Hydralazine was shown 
to be mutagenic in bacterial systems (Gene Mutation and DNA Repair) and in one 
of two rats and one rabbit hepatocyte in vitro DNA 
repair studies. Additional in vivo and in vitro studies using lymphoma cells, germinal cells, and 
fibroblasts from mice, bone marrow cells from chinese hamsters and fibroblasts 
from human cell lines did not demonstrate any mutagenic potential for 
hydralazine.
                  The extent to which these findings indicate a risk to man is uncertain. While 
long-term clinical observation has not suggested that human cancer is associated 
with hydralazine use, epidemiologic studies have so far been insufficient to 
arrive at any conclusions.
                  

               
               
            
         