
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  
               
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        General Pharmacology and Mechanism of Action
                     
                     
                        Butorphanol is a mixed agonist-antagonist with low intrinsic activity at receptors of the µ-opioid type (morphine-like).  It is also an agonist at K -opioid receptors.  
                        Its interactions with these receptors in the central nervous system apparently mediate most of its pharmacologic effects, including analgesia.
                        In addition to analgesia, CNS effects include depression of spontaneous respiratory activity and cough, stimulation of the emetic center, miosis and sedation.  Effects possibly mediated by non-CNS mechanisms include alteration in cardiovascular resistance and capacitance, bronchomotor tone, gastrointestinal secretory and motor activity and bladder sphincter activity.
                        In an animal model, the dose of butorphanol tartrate required to antagonize morphine analgesia by 50% was similar to that for nalorphine, less than that for pentazocine and more than that for naloxone.
                        The pharmacological activity of butorphanol metabolites has not been studied in humans; in animal studies, butorphanol metabolites have demonstrated some analgesic activity.
                        In human studies of butorphanol (see Clinical Trials), sedation is commonly noted at doses of 0.5 mg or more. Narcosis is produced by 10 to 12 mg doses of butorphanol administered over 10 to 15 minutes intravenously.
                        Butorphanol, like other mixed agonist-antagonists with a high affinity for the ĸ-receptor, may produce unpleasant psychotomimetic effects in some individuals. 
                        Nausea and/or vomiting may be produced by doses of 1 mg or more administered by any route.
                        In human studies involving individuals without significant respiratory dysfunction, 2 mg of butorphanol IV and 10 mg of morphine sulfate IV depressed respiration to a comparable degree.  At higher doses, the magnitude of respiratory depression with butorphanol is not appreciably increased; however, the duration of respiratory depression is longer.  Respiratory depression noted after administration of butorphanol to humans by any route is reversed by treatment with naloxone, a specific opioid antagonist (see OVERDOSAGE, Treatment).
                        Butorphanol tartrate demonstrates antitussive effects in animals at doses less than those required for analgesia.
                        Hemodynamic changes noted during cardiac catheterization in patients receiving single 0.025 mg/kg intravenous doses of butorphanol have included increases in pulmonary artery pressure, wedge pressure and vascular resistance, increases in left ventricular end diastolic pressure and in systemic arterial pressure.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        The analgesic effect of butorphanol is influenced by the route of administration.  Onset of analgesia is within a few minutes for intravenous administration, within 15 minutes for intramuscular injection, and within 15 minutes for the nasal solution doses.
                        Peak analgesic activity occurs within 30 to 60 minutes following intravenous and intramuscular administration and within 1 to 2 hours following the nasal spray administration.
                        The duration of analgesia varies depending on the pain model as well as the route of administration, but is generally 3 to 4 hours with IM and IV doses as defined by the time 50% of patients required remedication.  In postoperative studies, the duration of analgesia with IV or IM butorphanol was similar to morphine, meperidine, and pentazocine when administered in the same fashion at equipotent doses (see Clinical Trials).  Compared to the injectable form and other drugs in this class, butorphanol tartrate nasal solution has a longer duration of action (4 to 5 hours) (see Clinical Trials). 
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        Pharmacokinetics
                     
                     
                        After nasal administration, mean peak blood levels of 0.9 to 1.04 ng/mL occur at 30 to 60 minutes after a 1 mg dose (see Table 1).  The absolute bioavailability of butorphanol tartrate nasal solution is 60% to 70% and is unchanged in patients with allergic rhinitis.  In patients using a nasal vasoconstrictor (oxymetazoline) the fraction of the dose absorbed was unchanged, but the rate of absorption was slowed.  The peak plasma concentrations were approximately half those achieved in the absence of the vasoconstrictor.
                        Following its initial absorption/distribution phase, the single dose pharmacokinetics of butorphanol by the intravenous, intramuscular, and nasal routes of administration are similar (see Figure 1).
                        
                           Figure 1 - Butorphanol Plasma Levels After IV, IM
                            and Nasal Solution Administration of 2 mg Dose
                        
                        
                        
                        Serum protein binding is independent of concentration over the range achieved in clinical practice (up to 7 ng/mL) with a bound fraction of approximately 80%.
                        The volume of distribution of butorphanol varies from 305 to 901 liters and total body clearance from 52 to 154 liters/hour (see Table 1).
                        
                        
                        Dose proportionality for butorphanol tartrate nasal solution has been determined at steady state in doses up to 4 mg at 6 hour intervals.  Steady state is achieved within 2 days.  The mean peak plasma concentration at steady state was 1.8-fold (maximal 3-fold) following a single dose.
                        The drug is transported across the blood brain and placental barriers and into human milk (see PRECAUTIONS: N
                           ursing Mothers).
                        Butorphanol is extensively metabolized in the liver.  Metabolism is qualitatively and quantitatively similar following intravenous, intramuscular, or nasal administration.  Oral bioavailability is only 5 to 17% because of extensive first pass metabolism of butorphanol.
                        The major metabolite of butorphanol is hydroxybutorphanol, while norbutorphanol is produced in small amounts.  Both have been detected in plasma following administration of butorphanol, with norbutorphanol present at trace levels at most time points.  The elimination half-life of hydroxybutorphanol is about 18 hours and, as a consequence, considerable accumulation (≈ 5-fold) occurs when butorphanol is dosed to steady state (1 mg transnasally q6h for 5 days).
                        Elimination occurs by urine and fecal excretion. When 3H labelled butorphanol is administered to normal subjects, most (70 to 80%) of the dose is recovered in the urine, while approximately 15% is recovered in the feces.
                        About 5% of the dose is recovered in the urine as butorphanol.  Forty-nine percent is eliminated in the urine as hydroxybutorphanol.  Less than 5% is excreted in the urine as norbutorphanol.
                        Butorphanol pharmacokinetics in the elderly differ from younger patients (see Table 1).  The mean absolute bioavailability of butorphanol tartrate nasal solution in elderly women (48%) was less than that in elderly men (75%), young men (68%) or young women (70%).  Elimination half-life is increased in the elderly (6.6 hours as opposed to 4.7 hours in younger subjects).
                        In renally impaired patients with creatinine clearances <30 mL/min, the elimination half-life was approximately doubled and the total body clearance was approximately one half (10.5 hours [clearance 150 L/h] compared to 5.8 hours [clearance 260 L/h] in healthy subjects).  No effect on Cmax or Tmax was observed after a single dose.
                        After intravenous administration to patients with hepatic impairment, the elimination half-life of butorphanol was approximately tripled and total body clearance was approximately one half (half-life 16.8 hours, clearance 92 L/h) compared to healthy subjects (half-life 4.8 hours, clearance 175 L/h).  The exposure of hepatically impaired patients to butorphanol was significantly greater (about 2-fold) than that in healthy subjects.  Similar results were seen after nasal administration.  No effect on Cmax or Tmax was observed after a single intranasal dose.
                        For further recommendations refer to PRECAUTIONS, Hepatic and Renal Disease, Drug Interactions, and  CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY, Individualization of Dosage.
                        
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        Clinical Trials
                     
                     
                        The effectiveness of opioid analgesics varies in different pain syndromes.  
                        Studies with butorphanol tartrate nasal solution have been performed in postoperative (general, orthopedic, oral, cesarean section) pain, in postepisiotomy pain, in pain of musculoskeletal origin, and in migraine headache pain (see below).
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Use in the Management of Pain
                           
                           
                              
                                 Postoperative Pain: The analgesic efficacy of butorphanol tartrate nasal solution was evaluated (approximately 35 patients per treatment group) in a general and orthopedic surgery trial.  Single doses of butorphanol tartrate nasal solution (1 or 2 mg) and IM meperidine (37.5 or 75 mg) were compared. Analgesia provided by 1 and 2 mg doses of butorphanol tartrate nasal solution was similar to 37.5 and 75 mg meperidine, respectively, with onset of analgesia within 15 minutes and peak analgesic effect within 1 hour.  The median duration of pain relief was 2.5 hours with 1 mg butorphanol tartrate nasal solution , 3.5 hours with 2 mg butorphanol tartrate nasal solution and 3.3 hours with either dose of meperidine.
                              In a postcesarean section trial, butorphanol tartrate nasal solution administered to 35 patients as two 1 mg doses 60 minutes apart was compared with a single 2 mg dose of butorphanol tartrate nasal solution or a single 2 mg IV dose of butorphanol tartrate injection (37 patients each).  Onset of analgesia was within 15 minutes for all butorphanol tartrate regimens.  Peak analgesic effects of 2 mg intravenous butorphanol tartrate injection and nasal solution were similar in magnitude.  The duration of pain relief provided by both 2 mg butorphanol tartrate nasal solution regimens was approximately 4.5 hours and was greater than intravenous butorphanol tartrate injection (2.6 hours).
                              
                                 Migraine Headache Pain:  The analgesic efficacy of two 1 mg doses one hour apart of butorphanol tartrate nasal solution in migraine headache pain was compared with a single dose of 10 mg IM methadone (31 and 32 patients, respectively).  Significant onset of analgesia occurred within 15 minutes for both butorphanol tartrate nasal solution and IM methadone.  Peak analgesic effect occurred at 2 hours for butorphanol tartrate nasal solution and 1.5 hours for methadone.  The median duration of pain relief was 6 hours with butorphanol tartrate nasal solution and 4 hours with methadone as judged by the time when approximately half of the patients remedicated.
                              In two other trials in patients with migraine headache pain, a 2 mg initial dose of butorphanol tartrate nasal solution followed by an additional 1 mg dose 1 hour later (76 patients) was compared with either 75 mg IM meperidine (24 patients) or placebo (72 patients).  Onset, peak activity and duration were similar with both active treatments; however, the incidence of adverse experiences (nausea, vomiting, dizziness) was higher in these two trials with the 2 mg initial dose of butorphanol tartrate nasal solution than in the trial with the 1 mg initial dose.
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        Individualization of Dosage
                     
                     
                        Use of butorphanol tartrate nasal solution in geriatric patients, patients with renal impairment, and patients with hepatic impairment requires extra caution (see below and PRECAUTIONS).
                        The usual recommended dose for initial nasal administration is 1 mg (1 spray in one nostril).  If adequate pain relief is not achieved within 60 to 90 minutes, an additional 1 mg dose may be given.
                        The initial dose sequence outlined above may be repeated in 3 to 4 hours as required after the second dose of the sequence.
                        For the management of severe pain, an initial dose of 2 mg (1 spray in each nostril) may be used in patients who will be able to remain recumbent in the event drowsiness or dizziness occurs.  In such patients additional doses should not be given for 3 to 4 hours.  The incidence of adverse events is higher with an initial 2 mg dose (see Clinical Trials).
                        The initial dose sequence in elderly patients and patients with renal or hepatic impairment should be limited to 1 mg followed, if needed, by 1 mg in 90 to 120 minutes.  The repeat dose sequence in these patients should be determined by the patient’s response rather than at fixed times but will generally be no less than at 6 hour intervals (see PRECAUTIONS).
                     
                  
               
            
         