
               
               
               DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
                  
                  Metronidazole has been reported to potentiate the anticoagulant 
effect of warfarin and other oral coumarin anticoagulants, resulting in a 
prolongation of prothrombin time. This possible drug interaction should be 
considered when metronidazole is prescribed for patients on this type of 
anticoagulant therapy.
                  The simultaneous administration of drugs that induce microsomal liver 
enzymes, such as phenytoin or phenobarbital, may accelerate the elimination of 
metronidazole, resulting in reduced plasma levels; impaired clearance of 
phenytoin has also been reported.
                  The simultaneous administration of drugs that decrease microsomal liver 
enzyme activity, such as cimetidine, may prolong the half life and decrease 
plasma clearance of metronidazole. In patients stabilized on relatively high 
doses of lithium, short term metronidazole therapy has been associated with 
elevation of serum lithium and, in a few cases, signs of lithium toxicity. Serum 
lithium and serum creatinine levels should be obtained several days after 
beginning metronidazole to detect any increase that may precede clinical 
symptoms of lithium intoxication.
                  Alcoholic beverages should not be consumed during metronidazole therapy and 
for at least one day afterward because abdominal cramps, nausea, vomiting, 
headaches, and flushing may occur.
                  Psychotic reactions have been reported in alcoholic patients who are using 
metronidazole and disulfiram concurrently. Metronidazole should not be given to 
patients who have taken disulfiram within the last two weeks.
                  
                  Drug/Laboratory Test InteractionsMetronidazole may interfere with certain types of determinations 
of serum chemistry values, such as aspartate aminotransferase (AST, SGOT), 
alanine aminotransferase (ALT, SGPT), lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), 
triglycerides, and hexokinase glucose. Values of zero may be observed. All of 
the assays in which interference has been reported involve enzymatic coupling of 
the assay to oxidation reduction of nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD+ ⇆ 
NADH). Interference is due to the similarity in absorbance peaks of NADH (340 
nm) and metronidazole (322 nm) at pH 7.
                  
                  Carcinogenesis, Mutagenesis, Impairment of 
FertilityMetronidazole has shown evidence of carcinogenic activity in a 
number of studies involving chronic, oral administration in mice and rats.
                  Prominent among the effects in the mouse was the promotion of pulmonary 
tumorigenesis. This has been observed in all six reported studies in that 
species, including one study in which the animals were dosed on an intermittent 
schedule (administration during every fourth week only). At very high dose 
levels (approx. 500 mg/kg/day which is approximately 33 times the most 
frequently recommended human dose for a 50 kg adult based on mg/kg body weight) 
there was a statistically significant increase in the incidence of malignant 
liver tumors in males. Also, the published results of one of the mouse studies 
indicate an increase in the incidence of malignant lymphomas as well as 
pulmonary neoplasms associated with lifetime feeding of the drug. All these 
effects are statistically significant.
                  Several long-term, oral-dosing studies in the rat have been completed. There 
were statistically significant increases in the incidence of various neoplasms, 
particularly in mammary and hepatic tumors, among female rats administered 
metronidazole over those noted in the concurrent female control groups.
                  Two lifetime tumorigenicity studies in hamsters have been performed and 
reported to be negative.
                  Although metronidazole has shown mutagenic activity in a number of in vitro assay systems, studies in mammals (in vivo) have failed to demonstrate a potential for genetic 
damage.
                  Fertility studies have been performed in mice at doses up to six times the 
maximum recommended human dose based on mg per sq. m. and have revealed no 
evidence of impaired fertility.
               
               
            
         