
                     
                     
                     Drug Interactions
                     
                        Oxcarbazepine can inhibit CYP2C19 and induce CYP3A4/5 with potentially important effects on plasma concentrations of other drugs. In addition, several AEDs that are cytochrome P450 inducers can decrease plasma concentrations of oxcarbazepine and MHD.
                        Oxcarbazepine was evaluated in human liver microsomes to determine its capacity to inhibit the major cytochrome P450 enzymes responsible for the metabolism of other drugs. Results demonstrate that oxcarbazepine and its pharmacologically active 10-monohydroxy metabolite (MHD) have little or no capacity to function as inhibitors for most of the human cytochrome P450 enzymes evaluated (CYP1A2, CYP2A6, CYP2C9, CYP2D6, CYP2E1, CYP4A9 and CYP4A11) with the exception of CYP2C19 and CYP3A4/5. Although inhibition of CYP3A4/5 by oxcarbazepine and MHD did occur at high concentrations, it is not likely to be of clinical significance. The inhibition of CYP2C19 by oxcarbazepine and MHD, however, is clinically relevant (see below).
                        In vitro, the UDP-glucuronyl transferase level was increased, indicating induction of this enzyme. Increases of 22% with MHD and 47% with oxcarbazepine were observed. As MHD, the predominant plasma substrate, is only a weak inducer of UDP-glucuronyl transferase, it is unlikely to have an effect on drugs that are mainly eliminated by conjugation through UDP-glucuronyl transferase (e.g., valproic acid, lamotrigine).
                        In addition, oxcarbazepine and MHD induce a subgroup of the cytochrome P450 3A family (CYP3A4 and CYP3A5) responsible for the metabolism of dihydropyridine calcium antagonists and oral contraceptives, resulting in a lower plasma concentration of these drugs.
                        As binding of MHD to plasma proteins is low (40%), clinically significant interactions with other drugs through competition for protein binding sites are unlikely.
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Antiepileptic Drugs
                           
                              Potential interactions between Oxcarbazepine and other AEDs were assessed in clinical studies. The effect of these interactions on mean AUCs and Cmin are summarized in Table 3.
                              


                              


In vivo, the plasma levels of phenytoin increased by up to 40% when Oxcarbazepine was given at doses above 1200 mg/day. Therefore, when using doses of Oxcarbazepine greater than 1200 mg/day during adjunctive therapy, a decrease in the dose of phenytoin may be required. The increase of phenobarbital level, however, is small (15%) when given with Oxcarbazepine.
                              Strong inducers of cytochrome P450 enzymes (i.e., carbamazepine, phenytoin and phenobarbital) have been shown to decrease the plasma levels of MHD (29%-40%).
                              No autoinduction has been observed with Oxcarbazepine.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Hormonal Contraceptives
                           
                              Coadministration of Oxcarbazepine with an oral contraceptive has been shown to influence the plasma concentrations of the two hormonal components, ethinylestradiol (EE) and levonorgestrel (LNG). The mean AUC values of EE were decreased by 48% [90% CI: 22-65] in one study and 52% [90% CI: 38-52] in another study. The mean AUC values of LNG were decreased by 32% [90% CI: 20-45] in one study and 52% [90% CI: 42-52] in another study. Therefore, concurrent use of Oxcarbazepine with hormonal contraceptives may render these contraceptives less effective (see Drug Interactions subsection). Studies with other oral or implant contraceptives have not been conducted.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Calcium Antagonists
                           
                              After repeated coadministration of Oxcarbazepine, the AUC of felodipine was lowered by 28% [90% CI: 20-33].
                              Verapamil produced a decrease of 20% [90% CI: 18-27] of the plasma levels of MHD.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Other Drug Interactions
                           
                              Cimetidine, erythromycin and dextropropoxyphene had no effect on the pharmacokinetics of MHD. Results with warfarin show no evidence of interaction with either single or repeated doses of Oxcarbazepine.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               