
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  

                  Pharmacokinetics

                  Pantoprazole sodium is prepared as an enteric-coated tablet so that absorption of pantoprazole begins only after the tablet leaves the stomach. Peak serum concentration (Cmax) and area under the serum concentration time curve (AUC) increase in a manner proportional to oral and intravenous doses from 10 mg to 80 mg. Pantoprazole does not accumulate and its pharmacokinetics are unaltered with multiple daily dosing. Following oral or intravenous administration, the serum concentration of pantoprazole declines biexponentially with a terminal elimination half-life of approximately one hour. In extensive metabolizers (seeCLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY, Pharmacokinetics, Metabolism) with normal liver function receiving an oral dose of the enteric-coated 40 mg pantoprazole tablet, the peak concentration (Cmax) is 2.5the time to reach the peak concentration (tmax) is 2.5 h and the total area under the plasma concentration versus time curve (AUC) is 4.8When pantoprazole is given with food, its tmax is highly variable and may increase significantly. Following intravenous administration of pantoprazole to extensive metabolizers, its total clearance is 7.6-14.0 L/h and its apparent volume of distribution is 11.0-23.6 L.

                  

                  Absorption

                  The absorption of pantoprazole is rapid, with a Cmax of 2.5

                  

                  Distribution

                  The apparent volume of distribution of pantoprazole is approximately 11.0-23.6 L, distributing mainly in extracellular fluid. The serum protein binding of pantoprazole is about 98%, primarily to albumin.

                  

                  Metabolism

                  23%) with once daily dosing.

                  

                  Elimination

                  After a single oral or intravenous dose of 14C-labeled pantoprazole to healthy, normal metabolizer volunteers, approximately 71% of the dose was excreted in the urine with 18% excreted in the feces through biliary excretion. There was no renal excretion of unchanged pantoprazole.

                  

               
               
            
         