
               
               
               DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
                  

                  

                  CYP2D6 and CYP3A4 Inhibitors
                  Concomitant administration of CYP2D6 and/or CYP3A4 inhibitors (see CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY, 
Pharmacokinetics), such as quinidine, fluoxetine, paroxetine and 
amitriptyline (CYP2D6 inhibitors), and ketoconazole and erythromycin (CYP3A4 
inhibitors), may reduce metabolic clearance of tramadol increasing the risk for 
serious adverse events including seizures and serotonin syndrome.
                  Serotonergic Drugs
                  There have been postmarketing reports of serotonin syndrome with use of 
tramadol and SSRIs/SNRIs or MAOIs and α2-adrenergic blockers. Caution is advised 
when tramadol hydrochloride is coadministered with other drugs that may affect 
the serotonergic neurotransmitter systems, such as SSRIs, MAOIs, triptans, 
linezolid (an antibiotic which is a reversible non-selective MAOI), lithium, or 
St. John’s Wort. If concomitant treatment of tramadol hydrochloride with a drug 
affecting the serotonergic neurotransmitter system is clinically warranted, 
careful observation of the patient is advised, particularly during treatment 
initiation and dose increases (see WARNINGS, Serotonin 
Syndrome).
                  Triptans
                  Based on the mechanism of action of tramadol and the potential for serotonin 
syndrome, caution is advised when tramadol hydrochloride is coadministered with 
a triptan. If concomitant treatment of tramadol hydrochloride with a triptan is 
clinically warranted, careful observation of the patient is advised, 
particularly during treatment initiation and dose increases (see WARNINGS, Serotonin 
Syndrome).
                  Use With Carbamazepine
                  Patients taking carbamazepine may have a significantly reduced analgesic 
effect of tramadol hydrochloride. Because carbamazepine increases tramadol 
metabolism and because of the seizure risk associated with tramadol, concomitant 
administration of tramadol hydrochloride and carbamazepine is not 
recommended.
                  Use With Quinidine
                  Tramadol is metabolized to M1 by CYP2D6. Quinidine is a selective inhibitor 
of that isoenzyme, so that concomitant administration of quinidine and tramadol 
hydrochloride  results in increased concentrations of tramadol and reduced 
concentrations of M1. The clinical consequences of these findings are unknown. 
In vitro drug interaction studies in human liver 
microsomes indicate that tramadol has no effect on quinidine metabolism.
                  Potential for Other Drugs to Affect Tramadol
                  
                     In vitro drug interaction studies in human liver 
microsomes indicate that concomitant administration with inhibitors of CYP2D6 
such as fluoxetine, paroxetine, and amitriptyline could result in some 
inhibition of the metabolism of tramadol. Administration of CYP3A4 inhibitors, 
such as ketoconazole and erythromycin, or inducers, such as rifampin and St. 
John’s Wort, with tramadol hydrochloride may affect the metabolism of tramadol 
leading to alteted tramadol exposure.
                  Potential for Tramadol to Affect Other Drugs
                  
                     In vitro studies indicate that tramadol is 
unlikely to inhibit the CYP3A4-mediated metabolism of other drugs when tramadol 
is administered concomitantly at therapeutic doses. Tramadol does not appear to 
induce its own metabolism in humans, since observed maximal plasma 
concentrations after multiple oral doses are higher than expected based on 
single-dose data. Tramadol is a mild inducer of selected drug metabolism 
pathways measured in animals.
                  Use With Cimetidine
                  Concomitant administration of tramadol hydrochloride®  with cimetidine does 
not result in clinically significant changes in tramadol pharmacokinetics. 
Therefore, no alteration of the tramadol hydrochloride dosage regimen is 
recommended.
                  Use With Digoxin and Warfarin
                  Post-marketing surveillance has revealed rare reports of digoxin toxicity and 
alteration of warfarin effect, including elevation of prothrombin times.
                  
                  
                  Carcinogenesis, Mutagenesis, 
Impairment of Fertility 
                  A slight, but statistically significant, increase in two common 
murine tumors, pulmonary and hepatic, was observed in a mouse carcinogenicity 
study, particularly in aged mice. Mice were dosed orally up to 30 mg/kg (90 
mg/m2 or 0.36 times the maximum daily human dosage of 246 
mg/m2) for approximately two years, although the study 
was not done with the Maximum Tolerated Dose. This finding is not believed to 
suggest risk in humans. No such finding occurred in a rat carcinogenicity study 
(dosing orally up to 30 mg/kg, 180 mg/m2, or 0.73 times 
the maximum daily human dosage).
                  Tramadol was not mutagenic in the following assays: Ames Salmonella microsomal activation test, CHO/HPRT mammalian 
cell assay, mouse lymphoma assay (in the absence of metabolic activation), 
dominant lethal mutation tests in mice, chromosome aberration test in Chinese 
hamsters, and bone marrow micronucleus tests in mice and Chinese hamsters. 
Weakly mutagenic results occurred in the presence of metabolic activation in the 
mouse lymphoma assay and micronucleus test in rats. Overall, the weight of 
evidence from these tests indicates that tramadol does not pose a genotoxic risk 
to humans.
                  No effects on fertility were observed for tramadol at oral dose levels up to 
50 mg/kg (300 mg/m2) in male rats and 75 mg/kg (450 
mg/m2) in female rats. These dosages are 1.2 and 1.8 
times the maximum daily human dosage of 246 mg/m2, 
respectively.
                  
                  
                  Pregnancy, Teratogenic Effects: 
Pregnancy Category C 
                  Tramadol has been shown to be embryotoxic and fetotoxic in mice, 
(120 mg/kg or 360 mg/m2), rats (≥25 mg/kg or 150 
mg/m2) and rabbits (≥75 mg/kg or 900 mg/m2) at maternally toxic dosages, but was not teratogenic at 
these dose levels. These dosages on a mg/m2 basis are 
1.4, ≥0.6, and ≥3.6 times the maximum daily human dosage (246 mg/m2) for mouse, rat and rabbit, respectively.
                  No drug-related teratogenic effects were observed in progeny of mice (up to 
140 mg/kg or 420 mg/m2), rats (up to 80 mg/kg or 480 
mg/m2) or rabbits (up to 300 mg/kg or 3600 mg/m2) treated with tramadol by various routes. Embryo and fetal 
toxicity consisted primarily of decreased fetal weights, skeletal ossification 
and increased supernumerary ribs at maternally toxic dose levels. Transient 
delays in developmental or behavioral parameters were also seen in pups from rat 
dams allowed to deliver. Embryo and fetal lethality were reported only in one 
rabbit study at 300 mg/kg (3600 mg/m2), a dose that would 
cause extreme maternal toxicity in the rabbit. The dosages listed for mouse, rat 
and rabbit are 1.7, 1.9 and 14.6 times the maximum daily human dosage (246 
mg/m2), respectively.
                  
                  
                  Non-teratogenic Effects 
                  Tramadol was evaluated in peri- and post-natal studies in rats. 
Progeny of dams receiving oral (gavage) dose levels of 50 mg/kg (300 mg/m2 or 1.2 times the maximum daily human tramadol dosage) or 
greater had decreased weights, and pup survival was decreased early in lactation 
at 80 mg/kg (480 mg/m2 or 1.9 and higher the maximum 
daily human dose).
                  There are no adequate and well-controlled studies in pregnant women. Tramadol 
Hydrochloride should be used during pregnancy only if the potential benefit 
justifies the potential risk to the fetus. Neonatal seizures, neonatal 
withdrawal syndrome, fetal death and still birth have been reported during 
post-marketing.
                  
                  
                  
                  Labor and Delivery 
                  Tramadol hydrochloride should not be used in pregnant women prior 
to or during labor unless the potential benefits outweigh the risks. Safe use in 
pregnancy has not been established. Chronic use during pregnancy may lead to 
physical dependence and post-partum withdrawal symptoms in the newborn (see DRUG ABUSE AND DEPENDENCE). 
Tramadol has been shown to cross the placenta. The mean ratio of serum tramadol 
in the umbilical veins compared to maternal veins was 0.83 for 40 women given 
tramadol during labor.
                  The effect of tramadol hydrochloride, if any, on the later growth, 
development, and functional maturation of the child is unknown.
                  
                     

                  
                  

               
               
            
         