
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  
                     
                     Mechanism of Action: The principal metabolite of quinapril, 
quinaprilat, is an inhibitor of ACE activity in human subjects and animals. ACE 
is peptidyl dipeptidase that catalyzes the conversion of angiotensin I to the 
vasoconstrictor, angiotensin II. The effect of quinapril in hypertension appears 
to result primarily from the inhibition of circulating and tissue ACE activity, 
thereby reducing angiotensin II formation. Quinapril inhibits the elevation in 
blood pressure caused by intravenously administered angiotensin I, but has no 
effect on the pressor response to angiotensin II, norepinephrine, or 
epinephrine. Angiotensin II also stimulates the secretion of aldosterone from 
the adrenal cortex, thereby facilitating renal sodium and fluid reabsorption. 
Reduced aldosterone secretion by quinapril may result in a small increase in 
serum potassium. In controlled hypertension trials, treatment with quinapril 
alone resulted in mean increases in potassium of 0.07 mmol/L (see PRECAUTIONS). Removal of angiotensin II negative feedback on 
renin secretion leads to increased plasma renin activity (PRA).
                  
                     While the principal 
mechanism of antihypertensive effect is thought to be through the 
renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system, quinapril exerts antihypertensive actions 
even in patients with low renin hypertension. Quinapril was an effective 
antihypertensive in all races studied, although it was somewhat less effective 
in blacks (usually a predominantly low renin group) than in non-blacks. ACE is 
identical to kininase II, an enzyme that degrades bradykinin, a potent peptide 
vasodilator; whether increased levels of bradykinin play a role in the 
therapeutic effect of quinapril remains to be elucidated.
                  
                     Hydrochlorothiazide is a 
thiazide diuretic. Thiazides affect the renal tubular mechanisms of electrolyte 
reabsorption, directly increasing excretion of sodium and chloride in 
approximately equivalent amounts. Indirectly, the diuretic action of 
hydrochlorothiazide reduces plasma volume, with consequent increases in plasma 
renin activity, increases in aldosterone secretion, increases in urinary 
potassium loss, and decreases in serum potassium. The renin-aldosterone link is 
mediated by angiotensin, so coadministration of an ACE inhibitor tends to 
reverse the potassium loss associated with these diuretics. 
                  
                     The mechanism of the 
antihypertensive effect of thiazides is unknown.
                  
                     
                     Pharmacokinetics and Metabolism: The rate and extent of 
absorption of quinapril and hydrochlorothiazide from quinapril hydrochloride and 
hydrochlorothiazide tablets are not different, respectively, from the rate and 
extent of absorption of quinapril and hydrochlorothiazide from immediate-release 
monotherapy formulations, either administered concurrently or separately. 
Following oral administration of quinapril monotherapy tablets, peak plasma 
quinapril concentrations are observed within 1 hour. Based on recovery of 
quinapril and its metabolites in urine, the extent of absorption is at least 
60%. The absorption of hydrochlorothiazide is somewhat slower (1 to 2.5 hours) 
and more complete (50% to 80%).
                  
                     The rate of quinapril 
absorption was reduced by 14% when quinapril hydrochloride and 
hydrochlorothiazide tablets were administered with a high-fat meal as compared 
to fasting, while the extent of absorption was not affected. The rate of 
hydrochlorothiazide absorption was reduced by 12% when quinapril hydrochloride 
and hydrochlorothiazide tablets were administered with a high-fat meal, while 
the extent of absorption was not significantly affected. Therefore, quinapril 
hydrochloride and hydrochlorothiazide may be administered without regard to 
food.
                  
                     Following absorption, 
quinapril is deesterified to its major active metabolite, quinaprilat (about 38% 
of oral dose), and to other minor inactive metabolites. Following multiple oral 
dosing of quinapril, there is an effective accumulation half-life of quinaprilat 
of approximately 3 hours, and peak plasma quinaprilat concentrations are 
observed approximately 2 hours postdose. Approximately 97% of either quinapril 
or quinaprilat circulating in plasma is bound to proteins. Hydrochlorothiazide 
is not metabolized. Its apparent volume of distribution is 3.6 to 7.8 L/kg, 
consistent with measured plasma protein binding of 67.9%. The drug also 
accumulates in red blood cells, so that whole blood levels are 1.6 to 1.8 times 
those measured in plasma.
                  
                     Some placental passage 
occurred when quinapril was administered to pregnant rats. Studies in rats 
indicate that quinapril and its metabolites do not cross the blood-brain 
barrier. Hydrochlorothiazide crosses the placenta freely but not the blood-brain 
barrier. 
                  
                     Quinaprilat is 
eliminated primarily by renal excretion, up to 96% of an IV dose, and has an 
elimination half-life in plasma of approximately 2 hours and a prolonged 
terminal phase with a half-life of 25 hours. Hydrochlorothiazide is excreted 
unchanged by the kidney. When plasma levels have been followed for at least 24 
hours, the plasma half-life has been observed to vary between 4 to 15 hours. At 
least 61% of the oral dose is eliminated unchanged within 24 hours.
                  
                     In patients with renal 
insufficiency, the elimination half-life of quinaprilat increases as creatinine 
clearance decreases. There is a linear correlation between plasma quinaprilat 
clearance and creatinine clearance. In patients with end-stage renal disease, 
chronic hemodialysis or continuous ambulatory peritoneal dialysis have little 
effect on the elimination of quinapril and quinaprilat. Elimination of 
quinaprilat is reduced in elderly patients ( ≥ 65 years) and in those with heart 
failure; this reduction is attributable to decrease in renal function (see DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION). Quinaprilat concentrations are 
reduced in patients with alcoholic cirrhosis due to impaired deesterification of 
quinapril. In a study of patients with impaired renal function (mean creatinine 
clearance of 19 mL/min), the half-life of hydrochlorothiazide elimination was 
lengthened to 21 hours.
                  
                     The pharmacokinetics of 
quinapril and quinaprilat are linear over a single-dose range of 5 to 80 mg 
doses and 40 to 160 mg in multiple daily doses.
                  
                     
                     Pharmacodynamics and Clinical Effects: Single doses of 20 mg 
of quinapril provide over 80% inhibition of plasma ACE for 24 hours. Inhibition 
of the pressor response to angiotensin I is shorter-lived, with a 20 mg dose 
giving 75% inhibition for about 4 hours, 50% inhibition for about 8 hours, and 
20% inhibition at 24 hours. With chronic dosing, however, there is substantial 
inhibition of angiotensin II levels at 24 hours by doses of 20 to 80 mg.
                  
                     Administration of 10 to 
80 mg of quinapril to patients with mild to severe hypertension results in a 
reduction of sitting and standing blood pressure to about the same extent with 
minimal effect on heart rate. Symptomatic postural hypotension is infrequent, 
although it can occur in patients who are salt- and/or volume-depleted (see 
WARNINGS). 
                  
                     Antihypertensive 
activity commences within 1 hour with peak effects usually achieved by 2 to 4 
hours after dosing. During chronic therapy, most of the blood pressure lowering 
effect of a given dose is obtained in 1 to 2 weeks. In multiple-dose studies, 10 
to 80 mg per day in single or divided doses lowered systolic and diastolic blood 
pressure throughout the dosing interval, with a trough effect of about 5 to 11/3 
to 7 mm Hg. The trough effect represents about 50% of the peak effect.
                  
                     While the dose-response 
relationship is relatively flat, doses of 40 to 80 mg were somewhat more 
effective at trough than 10 to 20 mg, and twice-daily dosing tended to give a 
somewhat lower trough blood pressure than once-daily dosing with the same total 
dose. The antihypertensive effect of quinapril continues during long-term 
therapy, with no evidence of loss of effectiveness.
                  
                     Hemodynamic assessments 
in patients with hypertension indicate that blood pressure reduction produced by 
quinapril is accompanied by a reduction in total peripheral resistance and renal 
vascular resistance with little or no change in heart rate, cardiac index, renal 
blood flow, glomerular filtration rate, or filtration fraction. 
                  
                     Therapeutic effects of 
quinapril appear to be the same for elderly ( ≥ 65 years of age) and younger 
adult patients given the same daily dosages, with no increase in adverse events 
in elderly patients. In patients with hypertension, quinapril 10 to 40 mg was 
similar in effectiveness to captopril, enalapril, propranolol, and thiazide 
diuretics.
                  
                     After oral 
administration of hydrochlorothiazide, diuresis begins within 2 hours, peaks in 
about 4 hours, and lasts about 6 to 12 hours. Use of quinapril with a thiazide 
diuretic gives blood pressure lowering effect greater than that seen with either 
agent alone. In clinical trials of quinapril/hydrochlorothiazide using quinapril 
doses of 2.5 to 40 mg and hydrochlorothiazide doses of 6.25 to 25 mg, the 
antihypertensive effects were sustained for at least 24 hours, and increased 
with increasing dose of either component. Although quinapril monotherapy is 
somewhat less effective in blacks than in non-blacks, the efficacy of 
combination therapy appears to be independent of race. By blocking the 
renin-angiotensin-aldosterone axis, administration of quinapril tends to reduce 
the potassium loss associated with the diuretic. In clinical trials of quinapril 
hydrochloride and hydrochlorothiazide, the average change in serum potassium was 
near zero when 2.5 to 40 mg of quinapril was combined with hydrochlorothiazide 
6.25 mg, and the average subject who received 10 to 20/12.5 to 25 mg experienced 
a milder reduction in serum potassium than that experienced by the average 
subject receiving the same dose of hydrochlorothiazide monotherapy.
               
               
            
         