
               
               
               12  CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Dabigatran and its acyl glucuronides are competitive, direct thrombin
inhibitors.  Because thrombin (serine protease) enables the conversion
of fibrinogen into fibrin during the coagulation cascade, its inhibition
prevents the development of a thrombus.  Both free and clot-bound
thrombin, and thrombin-induced platelet aggregation are inhibited
by the active moieties.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        At recommended therapeutic doses, dabigatran etexilate prolongs the
coagulation markers such as aPTT, ECT, and TT.  INR is relatively
insensitive to the exposure to dabigatran and cannot be interpreted
the same way as used for warfarin monitoring.
                        The aPTT test provides an approximation of PRADAXA’s
anticoagulant effect.  The average time course for effects on aPTT,
following approved dosing regimens in patients with various degrees
of renal impairment is shown in Figure 2.  The curves represent mean
levels without confidence intervals; variations should be expected
when measuring aPTT.  While advice cannot be provided on the level
of recovery of aPTT needed in any particular clinical setting, the
curves can be used to estimate the time to get to a particular level
of recovery, even when the time since the last dose of PRADAXA is
not precisely known. In the RE-LY trial, the median (10th to 90th percentile) trough
aPTT in patients receiving the 150 mg dose was 52 (40 to 76) seconds.
                        
                           Figure 2 Average Time Course for
Effects of Dabigatran on aPTT, Following Approved PRADAXA Dosing Regimens
in Patients with Various Degrees of Renal Impairment*
                        
                        
                           
                        
                        *Simulations based on
PK data from a study in subjects with renal impairment and PK/aPTT
relationships derived from the RE-LY study; aPTT prolongation in RE-LY
was measured centrally in citrate plasma using PTT Reagent Roche Diagnostics
GmbH, Mannheim, Germany. There may be quantitative differences between
various established methods for aPTT assessment.
                        The degree of anticoagulant activity can also be assessed
by the ecarin clotting time (ECT).  This test is a more specific measure
of the effect of dabigatran than activated partial thromboplastin
time (aPTT).  In the RE-LY trial, the median (10th to 90th percentile) trough ECT in patients
receiving the 150 mg dose was 63 (44 to 103) seconds.
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                    Cardiac Electrophysiology
                                 
                              
                              No prolongation of
the QTc interval was observed with dabigatran etexilate at doses up
to 600 mg.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           Figure 2
                           
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        Dabigatran etexilate mesylate is absorbed as the dabigatran etexilate
ester. The ester is then hydrolyzed, forming dabigatran, the active
moiety.  Dabigatran is metabolized to four different acyl glucuronides
and both the glucuronides and dabigatran have similar pharmacological
activity.  Pharmacokinetics described here refer to the sum of dabigatran
and its glucuronides. Dabigatran displays dose-proportional pharmacokinetics
in healthy subjects and patients in the range of doses from 10 to
400 mg.
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                    
                                       Absorption
                                    
                                 
                              
                              The absolute
bioavailability of dabigatran following oral administration of dabigatran
etexilate is approximately 3 to 7%. Dabigatran etexilate is a substrate
of the efflux transporter P-gp. After oral administration of dabigatran
etexilate in healthy volunteers, Cmax occurs
at 1 hour post-administration in the fasted state. Coadministration
of PRADAXA with a high-fat meal delays the time to Cmax by approximately 2 hours but has no effect on the bioavailability
of dabigatran; PRADAXA may be administered with or without food.
                              The oral bioavailability of dabigatran etexilate
increases by 37% after multiple doses and 75% after a single dose
when the pellets are taken without the capsule shell compared to the
intact capsule formulation. PRADAXA capsules should therefore not
be broken, chewed, or opened before administration.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                    
                                       Distribution
                                    
                                 
                              
                              Dabigatran
is approximately 35% bound to human plasma proteins.  The red blood
cell to plasma partitioning of dabigatran measured as total radioactivity
is less than 0.3. The volume of distribution of dabigatran is 50 to
70 L.  Dabigatran pharmacokinetics are dose proportional after single
doses of 10 to 400 mg. Given twice daily, dabigatran’s accumulation
factor is approximately two.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                    
                                       Elimination
                                    
                                 
                              
                              Dabigatran
is eliminated primarily in the urine.  Renal clearance of dabigatran
is 80% of total clearance after intravenous administration.  After
oral administration of radiolabeled dabigatran, 7% of radioactivity
is recovered in urine and 86% in feces. The half-life of dabigatran
in healthy subjects is 12 to 17 hours.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                    
                                       Metabolism
                                    
                                 
                              
                              After oral
administration, dabigatran etexilate is converted to dabigatran. 
The cleavage of the dabigatran etexilate by esterase-catalyzed hydrolysis
to the active principal dabigatran is the predominant metabolic reaction.
 Dabigatran is not a substrate, inhibitor, or inducer of CYP450 enzymes.
 Dabigatran is subject to conjugation forming pharmacologically active
acyl glucuronides.  Four positional isomers, 1-O, 2-O, 3-O, and 4-O-acylglucuronide
exist, and each accounts for less than 10% of total dabigatran in
plasma.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                    
                                       Renal Impairment
                                    
                                 
                              
                              An open,
parallel-group single-center study compared dabigatran pharmacokinetics
in healthy subjects and patients with mild to moderate renal impairment
receiving a single dose of PRADAXA 150 mg. Exposure to dabigatran
increases with severity of renal function impairment (Table 6). Similar
findings were observed in the RE-LY and RE-COVER trials.
                              


                              



                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                    
                                       Hepatic Impairment
                                    
                                 
                              
                              Administration
of PRADAXA in patients with moderate hepatic impairment (Child-Pugh
B) showed a large inter-subject variability, but no evidence of a
consistent change in exposure or pharmacodynamics.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                    
                                       Drug Interactions
                                    
                                 
                              
                              A summary of the effect of coadministered drugs on dabigatran exposure
is shown in Figures 3.1 and 3.2.
                              
                                 Figure 3.1 Effect of P-gp Inhibitor
or Inducer (rifampicin) Drugs on Peak and Total Exposure to Dabigatran
(Cmax and AUC). Shown are the Geometric Mean Ratios (Ratio) and 90%
Confidence Interval (90% CI). The Perpetrator and Dabigatran Etexilate
Dose and Dosing Frequency are given as well as the Time of Perpetrator
Dosing in Relation to Dabigatran Etexilate Dose (Time Difference)
                              
                              
                              
                                 Figure 3.2 Effect
of Non-P-gp Inhibitor or Inducer, Other Drugs, on Peak and Total Exposure
to Dabigatran (Cmax and AUC). Shown are the Geometric  Mean Ratios
(Ratio) and 90% Confidence Interval (90% CI). The Perpetrator and
Dabigatran Etexilate Dose and Dosing Frequency are given as  well
as the Time of Perpetrator Dosing in Relation to Dabigatran Etexilate
Dose (Time Difference)
                              
                              
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Figure 3.1
                                 
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 Figure 3.2
                                 
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              In RE-LY, dabigatran plasma samples were also collected.
 The concomitant use of proton pump inhibitors, H2 antagonists, and
digoxin did not appreciably change the trough concentration of dabigatran.
                              
                                 Impact of Dabigatran on
Other Drugs
                                 
In clinical studies exploring CYP3A4,
CYP2C9, P-gp and other pathways, dabigatran did not meaningfully alter
the pharmacokinetics of amiodarone, atorvastatin, clarithromycin,
diclofenac, clopidogrel, digoxin, pantoprazole, or ranitidine.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         