
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
                  Drug interaction studies were conducted to investigate the effect of co-administered drugs on the pharmacokinetics of mirabegron and the effect of mirabegron on the pharmacokinetics of co-administered drugs (e.g., ketoconazole, rifampin, solifenacin, tamsulosin, and oral contraceptives) [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)]. No dose adjustment is recommended when these drugs are co-administered with mirabegron.
                  The following are drug interactions for which monitoring is recommended:
               
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              •
                              Drugs Metabolized by CYP2D6 (e.g., Metoprolol and Desipramine): Mirabegron is CYP2D6 inhibitor and when used concomitantly with drugs metabolized by CYP2D6, especially narrow therapeutic index drugs, appropriate monitoring and possible dose adjustment of those drugs may be necessary (5.4, 7.1, 12.3).
                           
                              •
                              Digoxin: When initiating a combination of MYRBETRIQ® and digoxin, prescribe the lowest dose of digoxin; monitor serum digoxin concentrations to titrate digoxin dose to desired clinical effect (7.2, 12.3).
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 Drugs Metabolized by CYP2D6
                     
                        Since mirabegron is a moderate CYP2D6 inhibitor, the systemic exposure of drugs metabolized by CYP2D6 enzyme such as metoprolol and desipramine is increased when co-administered with mirabegron. Therefore, appropriate monitoring and dose adjustment may be necessary when MYRBETRIQ® is co-administered with these drugs, especially with narrow therapeutic index CYP2D6 substrates, such as thioridazine, flecainide, and propafenone [see Warnings and Precautions (5.4) and Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 Digoxin
                     
                        When given in combination, mirabegron increased mean digoxin Cmax from 1.01 to 1.3 ng/mL (29%) and AUC from 16.7 to 19.3 ng.h/mL (27%). Therefore, for patients who are initiating a combination of mirabegron and digoxin, the lowest dose for digoxin should initially be considered. Serum digoxin concentrations should be monitored and used for titration of the digoxin dose to obtain the desired clinical effect [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3 Warfarin
                     
                        The mean Cmax of S- and R-warfarin was increased by approximately 4% and AUC by approximately 9% when administered as a single dose of 25 mg after multiple doses of 100 mg mirabegron. Following a single dose administration of 25 mg warfarin, mirabegron had no effect on the warfarin pharmacodynamic endpoints such as International Normalized Ratio (INR) and prothrombin time. However, the effect of mirabegron on multiple doses of warfarin and on warfarin pharmacodynamic end points such as INR and prothrombin time has not been fully investigated [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         