
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Prussian blue insoluble, ferric hexacyanoferrate(II), acts by ion-exchange, adsorption, and mechanical trapping within the crystal structure, and has a high affinity for radioactive and non-radioactive cesium and thallium.
                        Prussian blue insoluble binds cesium and thallium isotopes in the gastrointestinal tract after these isotopes are ingested or excreted in the bile by the liver, thereby reducing gastrointestinal reabsorption (enterohepatic circulation). The rate of cesium and thallium elimination is proportional to the duration and dose of prussian blue insoluble. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        
                           Cesium-137 (137Cs)

                           
                           137Cs has a physical half-life of 30 years, with a beta energy peak at 174.0 keV. Following entry into the blood, it is distributed uniformly through all body tissues. Approximately 10% of 137Cs is eliminated rapidly with a biological half-life of 2 days; 90% is eliminated more slowly, with a biological half-life of 110 days; and less than 1% of the 137Cs is retained with a biological half-life of about 500 days. 137Cs follows the movement of potassium and is excreted into the intestine, reabsorbed from the gastrointestinal (GI) tract into the blood, then to the bile, where it is excreted again into the GI tract by bile via enterohepatic circulation. Without Radiogardase treatment, about 80% of 137Cs is excreted through the kidneys and about 20% in the feces. 
                        
                           Thallium-201 (201Tl)
                           
Radioactive thallium (201Tl) has a physical half-life of 3 days with electron and photon emissions with a gamma energy peak at 167.4 keV. Non-radioactive thallium has a biological half-life of 
                        8 – 10 days.The physiologic transport of thallium follows the same route as potasium and is excreted by bile in enterohepatic circulation. Without Radiogardase treatment, the fecal to urine excretion ratio of thallium is approximately 2:1.
                        The results of fecal analysis from patients contaminated with 137Cs and treated with Radiogardase showed higher activities of 137Cs in feces, and the associated whole body radioactivity counts showed a more rapid rate of elimination from the body. The effectiveness of Radiogardase for one patient is shown in Figure 1. The whole body content of radioactive material of 137Cs in kilo-Bequerels (kBq) is shown on the y-axis. Time in days is on the x-axis. Line “A” represents the whole body activity of 137Cs during prussian blue insoluble treatment at 10 g/day. The dotted line represents extrapolation of the whole body activity if treatment was continued. Line “B” represents the whole body activity of 137Cs, after prussian blue insoluble was stopped. 
                        
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           Figure 1 : Comparisons of 137Cs whole body activity during and after Radiogardase treatment.
                           
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        
                           Absorption/Elimination: 
Prussian blue insoluble is not absorbed through the intact gastrointestinal wall.  Its clearance from the body depends on the gastrointestinal tract transit time.
                        
                           Food Effects:
Food effect studies have not been conducted. In animal studies, Prussian blue insoluble was not significantly absorbed. Food may increase the effectiveness of prussian blue insoluble by stimulating bile secretion.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         