
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  Amoxicillin and clavulanate potassium are well absorbed from the 
gastrointestinal tract after oral administration of amoxicillin and clavulanate 
potassium for oral suspension and chewable tablets. Dosing in the fasted or fed 
state has minimal effect on the pharmacokinetics of amoxicillin. While 
amoxicillin and clavulanate potassium for oral suspension and chewable tablets 
can be given without regard to meals, absorption of clavulanate potassium when 
taken with food is greater relative to the fasted state. In one study, the 
relative bioavailability of clavulanate was reduced when amoxicillin and 
clavulanate potassium for oral suspension and chewable tablets were dosed at 30 
and 150 minutes after the start of a high fat breakfast. The safety and efficacy 
of amoxicillin and clavulanate potassium have been established in clinical 
trials where amoxicillin and clavulanate potassium for oral suspension and 
chewable tablets were taken without regard to meals.
                  Oral administration of single doses of 400 mg/57 mg amoxicillin and 
clavulanate potassium chewable tablets and 400 mg/57 mg per 5 mL suspension to 
28 adult volunteers yielded comparable pharmacokinetic data:
                  

*  Administered at the start of a light meal.



†  Mean values of 28 normal volunteers. Peak concentrations occurred approximately 
1 hour after the dose.

                  

                  Oral administration of 5 mL of amoxicillin and clavulanate potassium 250 
mg/62.5 mg suspension or the equivalent dose of 10 mL amoxicillin and 
clavulanate potassium 125 mg/31.25 mg suspension provides average peak serum 
concentrations approximately 1 hour after dosing of 6.9 mcg/mL for amoxicillin 
and 1.6 mcg/mL for clavulanic acid. The areas under the serum concentration 
curves obtained during the first 4 hours after dosing were 12.6 mcg.hr./mL for 
amoxicillin and 2.9 mcg.hr./mL for clavulanic acid when 5 mL of amoxicillin and 
clavulanate potassium 250 mg/62.5 mg suspension or equivalent dose of 10 mL of 
amoxicillin and clavulanate potassium 125 mg/31.25 mg suspension was 
administered to adult volunteers. One amoxicillin and clavulanate potassium 250 
mg/62.5 mg chewable tablet or 2 amoxicillin and clavulanate potassium 125 
mg/31.25 mg chewable tablets are equivalent to 5 mL of amoxicillin and 
clavulanate potassium 250 mg/62.5 mg suspension and provide similar serum levels 
of amoxicillin and clavulanic acid.
                  Amoxicillin serum concentrations achieved with amoxicillin and clavulanate 
potassium for oral suspension and chewable tablets are similar to those produced 
by the oral administration of equivalent doses of amoxicillin alone. The 
half-life of amoxicillin after the oral administration of amoxicillin and 
clavulanate potassium for oral suspension and chewable tablets is 1.3 hours and 
that of clavulanic acid is 1 hour. Time above the minimum inhibitory 
concentration of 1 mcg/mL for amoxicillin has been shown to be similar after 
corresponding q12h and q8h dosing regimens of amoxicillin and clavulanate 
potassium for oral suspension and chewable tablets in adults and children.
                  Approximately 50% to 70% of the amoxicillin and approximately 25% to 40% of 
the clavulanic acid are excreted unchanged in urine during the first 6 hours 
after administration of 10 mL of amoxicillin and clavulanate potassium 250 
mg/62.5 mg suspension.
                  Concurrent administration of probenecid delays amoxicillin excretion but does 
not delay renal excretion of clavulanic acid.
                  Neither component in amoxicillin and clavulanate potassium for oral 
suspension and chewable tablets is highly protein-bound; clavulanic acid has 
been found to be approximately 25% bound to human serum and amoxicillin 
approximately 18% bound.
                  Amoxicillin diffuses readily into most body tissues and fluids with the 
exception of the brain and spinal fluid. The results of experiments involving 
the administration of clavulanic acid to animals suggest that this compound, 
like amoxicillin, is well distributed in body tissues.
                  Two hours after oral administration of a single 35 mg/kg dose of amoxicillin 
and clavulanate potassium suspension to fasting children, average concentrations 
of 3 mcg/mL of amoxicillin and 0.5 mcg/mL of clavulanic acid were detected in 
middle ear effusions.
                  
                  MicrobiologyAmoxicillin is a semisynthetic antibiotic with a broad spectrum 
of bactericidal activity against many gram-positive and gram-negative 
microorganisms. Amoxicillin is, however, susceptible to degradation by 
β-lactamases and, therefore, the spectrum of activity does not include organisms 
which produce these enzymes. Clavulanic acid is a β-lactam, structurally related 
to the penicillins, which possesses the ability to inactivate a wide range of 
β-lactamase enzymes commonly found in microorganisms resistant to penicillins 
and cephalosporins. In particular, it has good activity against the clinically 
important plasmid mediated β-lactamases frequently responsible for transferred 
drug resistance.
                  The formulation of amoxicillin and clavulanic acid in amoxicillin and 
clavulanate potassium for oral suspension and chewable tablets protects 
amoxicillin from degradation by β-lactamase enzymes and effectively extends the 
antibiotic spectrum of amoxicillin to include many bacteria normally resistant 
to amoxicillin and other β-lactam antibiotics. Thus, amoxicillin and clavulanate 
potassium for oral suspension and chewable tablets possess the distinctive 
properties of a broad-spectrum antibiotic and a β-lactamase inhibitor.
                  Amoxicillin/clavulanic acid has been shown to be active against most strains 
of the following microorganisms, both in vitro and in 
clinical infections as described in the INDICATIONS AND 
USAGE section.
                  
                  GRAM-POSITIVE AEROBES
                     Staphylococcus aureus (β-lactamase and 
non-β-lactamase producing)2.
                  2
                  Staphylococci which are resistant to 
methicillin/oxacillin must be considered resistant to amoxicillin/clavulanic 
acid. 
                  GRAM-NEGATIVE AEROBES
                     Enterobacter species (Although most 
strains of Enterobacter species are resistant in-vitro, clinical efficacy has been demonstrated with 
amoxicillin and clavulanate potassium for oral suspension and chewable tablets 
in urinary tract infections caused by these organisms.) 

                     Escherichia coli (β-lactamase and non-β-lactamase 
producing)

                     Haemophilus influenzae (β-lactamase and 
non-β-lactamase producing)

                     Klebsiella species (All 
known strains are β-lactamase producing)

                     Moraxella 
catarrhalis β-lactamase and non-β-lactamase producing)
                  The following in vitro data are available, but their clinical significance is unknown.
                  
                  Amoxicillin/clavulanic acid exhibits in-vitro 
minimal inhibitory concentrations (MICs) of 2 mcg/mL or less against most 
(≥90%) strains of Streptococcus pneumoniae3; MICs of 0.06 mcg/mL 
or less against most (≥90%) strains of Neisseria 
gonorrhoeae; MICs of 4 mcg/mL or less against most (≥90%) strains of 
staphylococci and anaerobic bacteria; and MICs of 8 mcg/mL or less against most 
(≥90%) strains of other listed organisms. However, with the exception of 
organisms shown to respond to amoxicillin alone, the safety and effectiveness of 
amoxicillin/clavulanic acid in treating clinical infections due to these 
microorganisms have not been established in adequate and well-controlled 
clinical trials.
                  3Because amoxicillin has greater in-vitro activity 
against S. pneumoniae than does ampicillin or 
penicillin, the majority of S. pneumoniae strains 
with intermediate susceptibility to ampicillin or penicillin are fully 
susceptible to amoxicillin. 
                  
                  GRAM-POSITIVE AEROBES
                  
                     Enterococcus faecalis
                     4
                     

                     Staphylococcus epidermidis (β-lactamase and non-β-lactamase 
producing)

                     Staphylococcus saprophyticus 
(β-lactamase and non-β-lactamase producing)

                     Streptococcus pneumoniae
                     4/5
                     

                     Streptococcus 
pyogenes
                     4/5
                     
viridans group Streptococcus
                     4/5
                  
                  GRAM-NEGATIVE AEROBES
                  
                     Eikenella corrodens (β-lactamase and 
non-β-lactamase producing)

                     Neisseria gonorrhoeae
                     4 (β-lactamase and non-β-lactamase 
producing)

                     Proteus mirabilis
                     4 (β-lactamase and non-β-lactamase producing)
                  ANAEROBIC BACTERIA
                  
                     Bacteroides species, including Bacteroides fragilis (β-lactamase and non-β-lactamase 
producing)

                     Fusobacterium species (β-lactamase and 
non-β-lactamase producing)

                     Peptostreptococcus 
species
                     5
                  
                  4Adequate and well-controlled clinical trials have established the 
effectiveness of amoxicillin alone in treating certain clinical infections due 
to these organisms. 
5These are non-β-lactamase-producing organisms and, therefore, are 
susceptible to amoxicillin alone. 

               
               
            
         