
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        The pharmacokinetics of acyclovir after intravenous administration have been evaluated in adult patients with normal renal function during Phase 1/2 studies after single doses ranging from 0.5 to 15 mg/kg and after multiple doses ranging from 2.5 to 15 mg/kg every 8 hours.  Proportionality between dose and plasma levels is seen after single doses or at steady-state after multiple dosing.  Average steady-state peak and trough concentrations from 1-hour infusions administered every 8 hours are given in Table 1.
                        

                        
                           
                              Table 1: Acyclovir Peak and Trough Concentrations 

                              at Steady-State
                           
                        
                        


                        


Concentrations achieved in the cerebrospinal fluid are approximately 50% of plasma values.  Plasma protein binding is relatively low (9% to 33%) and drug interactions involving binding site displacement are not anticipated.
                        Renal excretion of unchanged drug is the major route of acyclovir elimination accounting for 62% to 91% of the dose.  The only major urinary metabolite detected is 9-carboxymethoxymethylguanine accounting for up to 14.1% of the dose in patients with normal renal function.
                        The half-life and total body clearance of acyclovir are dependent on renal function as shown in Table 2.
                         
                              
                              Table 2: Acyclovir Half-life and Total Body Clearance
                           
                        
                        


                        




                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Special Populations

                     
                     
                        
                           
                              Adults with Impaired Renal Function
                           
                        
                        Acyclovir was administered at a dose of 2.5 mg/kg to 6 adult patients with severe renal failure.  The peak and trough plasma levels during the 47 hours preceding hemodialysis were 8.5 mcg/mL and 0.7 mcg/mL, respectively.
                        Consult 
                              
                                 DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION
                              
                            section for recommended adjustments in dosing based upon creatinine clearance.
                         
                        
                           Pediatrics
                        
                        Acyclovir pharmacokinetics were determined in 16 pediatric patients with normal renal function ranging in age from 3 months to 16 years at doses of approximately 10 mg/kg and 20 mg/kg every 8 hours (Table 3).  Concentrations achieved at these regimens are similar to those in adults receiving 5 mg/kg and 10 mg/kg every 8 hours, respectively (Table 1).  Acyclovir pharmacokinetics were determined in 12 patients ranging in age from birth to 3 months at doses of 5 mg/kg, 10 mg/kg, and 15 mg/kg every 8 hours (Table 3).
                         
                                
                              Table 3: Acyclovir Pharmacokinetics in Pediatric Patients (Mean ± SD)
                           
                        
                        


                        


 
                        
                           
                              Geriatrics
                            
                        Acyclovir plasma concentrations are higher in geriatric patients compared to younger adults, in part due to age-related changes in renal function.  Dosage reduction may be required in geriatric patients with underlying renal impairment (see 
                              
                                 PRECAUTIONS,
                                 
                                     Geriatric Use
                                 
                              
                           ).
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Drug Interactions

                     
                     
                        Coadministration of probenecid with acyclovir has been shown to increase the mean acyclovir half-life and the area under the concentration-time curve.  Urinary excretion and renal clearance were correspondingly reduced.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         