
               
               
               
                  7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                        
                           Oral Contraceptives: Effects on gut flora may lower estrogen reabsorption and reduce efficacy of oral contraceptives. (7.1)
                           Drugs that reduce gastric acidity may lower the bioavailability of cefuroxime axetil. (7.2)
                           Co-administration with probenecid increases systemic exposure to cefuroxime axetil and is therefore not recommended. (7.3)
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 Oral Contraceptives
                     
                        Cefuroxime axetil may affect the gut flora, leading to lower estrogen reabsorption and reduced efficacy of combined oral estrogen/progesterone contraceptives. Counsel patients to consider alternate supplementary (non-hormonal) contraceptive measures during treatment.
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 Drugs that Reduce Gastric Acidity
                     
                        Drugs that reduce gastric acidity may result in a lower bioavailability of cefuroxime axetil compared with administration in the fasting state. Administration of drugs that reduce gastric acidity may negate the food effect of increased absorption of cefuroxime axetil when administered in the postprandial state. Administer cefuroxime axetil at least 1 hour before or 2 hours after administration of short-acting antacids. Histamine-2 (H2) antagonists and proton pump inhibitors should be avoided.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3 Probenecid
                     
                        Concomitant administration of probenecid with cefuroxime axetil tablets increases serum concentrations of cefuroxime [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)]. Co-administration of probenecid with cefuroxime axetil is not recommended.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4 Drug/Laboratory Test Interactions
                     
                        A false-positive reaction for glucose in the urine may occur with copper reduction tests (e.g., Benedict's or Fehling's solution), but not with enzyme-based tests for glycosuria. As a false-negative result may occur in the ferricyanide test, it is recommended that either the glucose oxidase or hexokinase method be used to determine blood/plasma glucose levels in patients receiving cefuroxime axetil. The presence of cefuroxime does not interfere with the assay of serum and urine creatinine by the alkaline picrate method.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         