
               
               
               12.	CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1  Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Local anesthetics block the generation and the conduction of nerve impulses presumably by increasing the threshold for electrical excitation in the nerve, by slowing the propagation of the nerve impulse, and by reducing the rate of rise of the action potential.  In general, the progression of anesthesia is related to the diameter, myelination, and conduction velocity of affected nerve fibers.  Clinically, the order of loss of nerve function is as follows: (1) pain, (2) temperature, (3) touch, (4) proprioception, and (5) skeletal muscle tone.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2  Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        Systemic absorption of local anesthetics produces effects on the cardiovascular and central nervous systems.  At blood concentrations achieved with normal therapeutic doses, changes in cardiac conduction, excitability, refractoriness, contractility, and peripheral vascular resistance are minimal.  However, toxic blood concentrations depress cardiac conductivity and excitability, which may lead to atrioventricular block, ventricular arrhythmias, and cardiac arrest, sometimes resulting in fatalities.  In addition, myocardial contractility is depressed and peripheral vasodilation occurs, leading to decreased cardiac output and arterial blood pressure.  Clinical reports and animal research suggest that these cardiovascular changes are more likely to occur after accidental intravascular injection of bupivacaine.
                        Following systemic absorption, local anesthetics can produce central nervous system stimulation, depression, or both.  Apparent central stimulation is manifested as restlessness, tremors, and shivering progressing to convulsions, followed by depression and coma progressing ultimately to respiratory arrest.  However, the local anesthetics have a primary depressant effect on the medulla and on higher centers.  The depressed stage may occur without a prior excited state.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3  Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        Local infiltration of EXPAREL results in significant systemic plasma levels of bupivacaine which can persist for 96 hours [See Warnings and Precautions (5.2)].  Systemic plasma levels of bupivacaine following administration of EXPAREL are not correlated with local efficacy.
                        
                           Absorption
                        
                        The rate of systemic absorption of bupivacaine is dependent upon the total dose of drug administered, the route of administration, and the vascularity of the administration site.
                        Pharmacokinetic parameters of EXPAREL after local administration were evaluated following surgical procedures.  Descriptive statistics of pharmacokinetic parameters of representative EXPAREL doses in each study are provided in Table 2.
                        


                        



                           Distribution
                        
                        After bupivacaine has been released from EXPAREL and is absorbed systemically, bupivacaine distribution is expected to be the same as for any bupivacaine HCl solution formulation.
                        Local anesthetics including bupivacaine are distributed to some extent to all body tissues, with high concentrations found in highly perfused organs such as the liver, lungs, heart, and brain.
                        Local anesthetics including bupivacaine appear to cross the placenta by passive diffusion.  The rate and degree of diffusion is governed by (1) the degree of plasma protein binding, (2) the degree of ionization, and (3) the degree of lipid solubility.  Fetal/maternal ratios of local anesthetics appear to be inversely related to the degree of plasma protein binding, because only the free, unbound drug is available for placental transfer.  Bupivacaine with a high protein binding capacity (95%) has a low fetal/maternal ratio (0.2 to 0.4).  The extent of placental transfer is also determined by the degree of ionization and lipid solubility of the drug.  Lipid soluble, non-ionized drugs such as bupivacaine readily enter the fetal blood from the maternal circulation.
                        
                           Metabolism
                        
                        Amide-type local anesthetics, such as bupivacaine, are metabolized primarily in the liver via conjugation with glucuronic acid.  Pipecolylxylidine (PPX) is the major metabolite of bupivacaine; approximately 5% of bupivacaine is converted to PPX. Elimination of drug depends largely upon the availability of plasma protein binding sites in the circulation to carry it to the liver where it is metabolized.
                        Various pharmacokinetic parameters of the local anesthetics can be significantly altered by the presence of hepatic disease. Patients with hepatic disease, especially those with severe hepatic disease, may be more susceptible to the potential toxicities of the amide-type local anesthetics.
                        
                           Excretion
                        
                        After bupivacaine has been released from EXPAREL and is absorbed systemically, bupivacaine excretion is expected to be the same as for other bupivacaine formulations.
                        The kidney is the main excretory organ for most local anesthetics and their metabolites.  Only 6% of bupivacaine is excreted unchanged in the urine.
                        Urinary excretion is affected by urinary perfusion and factors affecting urinary pH.  Acidifying the urine hastens the renal elimination of local anesthetics.  Various pharmacokinetic parameters of the local anesthetics can be significantly altered by the presence of renal disease, factors affecting urinary pH, and renal blood flow.
                        
                           Specific Populations
                        
                        
                           Hepatic Impairment
                        
                        The effects of decreased hepatic function on bupivacaine pharmacokinetics following administration of EXPAREL were studied in patients with moderate hepatic impairment.  Consistent with the hepatic clearance of bupivacaine, mean plasma concentrations were higher in patients with moderate hepatic impairment than in the healthy control volunteers with approximately 1.5- and 1.6-fold increases in the mean values for Cmax and the area under the curve (AUC), respectively.
                        Because amide-type local anesthetics, such as bupivacaine, are metabolized by the liver, these drugs should be used cautiously in patients with hepatic disease. Patients with severe hepatic disease, because of their inability to metabolize local anesthetics normally, are at a greater risk of developing toxic plasma concentrations [See Warnings and Precautions (5.1) and Use in Specific Populations (8.6)].
                        
                           Renal Impairment
                        
                        Bupivacaine is known to be substantially excreted by the kidney, and the risk of toxic reactions to this drug may be greater in patients with impaired renal function. Care should be taken in dose selection of EXPAREL [See Use in Specific Populations (8.7)].
                        
                           Age
                        
                        Various pharmacokinetic parameters of the local anesthetics such as bupivacaine can be significantly altered by the age of the patient.
                        In clinical studies, differences in various pharmacokinetic parameters have been observed between elderly and younger patients.
                        Bupivacaine is known to be substantially excreted by the kidney, and the risk of toxic reactions to this drug may be greater in patients with impaired renal function. Because elderly patients are more likely to have decreased renal function, care should be taken in dose selection of EXPAREL [See Use in Specific Populations (8.5)].
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         