
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  Parkinson’s disease is a progressive, neurodegenerative disorder of the extrapyramidal nervous system affecting the mobility and control of the skeletal muscular system. Its characteristic features include resting tremor, rigidity, and bradykinetic movements. 
               
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Mechanism of Action
                     
                        
                           
                              Levodopa
                           
                        
                        Current evidence indicates that symptoms of Parkinson's disease are related to depletion of dopamine in the corpus striatum. Administration of dopamine is ineffective in the treatment of Parkinson's disease apparently because it does not cross the blood-brain barrier. However, levodopa, the metabolic precursor of dopamine, does cross the blood-brain barrier, and presumably is converted to dopamine in the brain. This is thought to be the mechanism whereby levodopa relieves symptoms of Parkinson's disease.
                        
                           
                              Carbidopa
                           
                        
                        When levodopa is administered orally it is rapidly decarboxylated to dopamine in extracerebral tissues so that only a small portion of a given dose is transported unchanged to the central nervous system. Carbidopa inhibits the decarboxylation of peripheral levodopa, making more levodopa available for transport to the brain. When coadministered with levodopa, carbidopa increases plasma levels of levodopa and reduces the amount of levodopa required to produce a given response by about 75%. Carbidopa prolongs the plasma half‑life of levodopa from 50 minutes to 1.5 hours and decreases plasma and urinary dopamine and its major metabolite, homovanillic acid. The Tmax of levodopa, however, was unaffected by the coadministration.
                        
                           
                              Entacapone
                           
                        
                        Entacapone is a selective and reversible inhibitor of catechol-O-methyltransferase (COMT).
                        In mammals, COMT is distributed throughout various organs with the highest activities in the liver and kidney. COMT also occurs in neuronal tissues, especially in glial cells. COMT catalyzes the transfer of the methyl group of S-adenosyl-L-methionine to the phenolic group of substrates that contain a catechol structure. Physiological substrates of COMT include DOPA, catecholamines (dopamine, norepinephrine, and epinephrine) and their hydroxylated metabolites. The function of COMT is the elimination of biologically active catechols and some other hydroxylated metabolites. When decarboxylation of levodopa is prevented by carbidopa, COMT becomes the major metabolizing enzyme for levodopa, catalyzing its metabolism to 3-methoxy-4-hydroxy-L-phenylalanine (3-OMD).
                        When entacapone is given in conjunction with levodopa and carbidopa, plasma levels of levodopa are greater and more sustained than after administration of levodopa and carbidopa alone. It is believed that at a given frequency of levodopa administration, these more sustained plasma levels of levodopa result in more constant dopaminergic stimulation in the brain, leading to greater effects on the signs and symptoms of Parkinson's disease. The higher levodopa levels may also lead to increased levodopa adverse effects, sometimes requiring a decrease in the dose of levodopa.
                        When 200 mg entacapone is coadministered with levodopa and carbidopa, it increases levodopa plasma exposure (AUC) by 35% to 40% and prolongs its elimination half-life in Parkinson's disease patients from 1.3 hours to 2.4 hours. Plasma levels of the major COMT-mediated dopamine metabolite, 3-methoxy-4-hydroxy-L-phenylalanine (3-OMD), are also markedly decreased proportionally with increasing dose of entacapone.
                        In animals, while entacapone enters the CNS to a minimal extent, it has been shown to inhibit central COMT activity. In humans, entacapone inhibits the COMT enzyme in peripheral tissues. The effects of entacapone on central COMT activity in humans have not been studied.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        The pharmacokinetics of carbidopa, levodopa and entacapone tablets have been studied in healthy subjects (age 45 years old to 75 years old). Overall, following administration of corresponding doses of levodopa, carbidopa and entacapone as carbidopa, levodopa and entacapone tablets or as carbidopa and levodopa product plus entacapone tablets, the mean plasma concentrations of levodopa, carbidopa, and entacapone are comparable.
                        
                           
                              Absorption and Distribution: 
                           
                        
                        Both levodopa and entacapone are rapidly absorbed and eliminated, and their distribution volume is moderately small. Carbidopa is absorbed and eliminated slightly more slowly compared with levodopa and entacapone. There are substantial inter- and intra-individual variations in the absorption of levodopa, carbidopa and entacapone, particularly concerning its Cmax. 
                        The food-effect on the carbidopa, levodopa and entacapone tablet has not been evaluated.
                        
                           Levodopa
                        
                        The pharmacokinetic properties of levodopa following the administration of single-dose carbidopa, levodopa and entacapone tablets are summarized in Table 1.
                        


                        


Since levodopa competes with certain amino acids for transport across the gut wall, the absorption of levodopa may be impaired in some patients on a high protein diet. Meals rich in large neutral amino acids may delay and reduce the absorption of levodopa (see PRECAUTIONS).
                        Levodopa is bound to plasma protein only to a minor extent (about 10% to 30%).
                        
                           Carbidopa
                        
                        Following administration of carbidopa, levodopa and entacapone tablet as a single dose to healthy male and female subjects, the peak concentration of carbidopa was reached within 2.5 hours to 3.4 hours on average. The mean Cmax ranged from about 40 nanogram per mL to 225 nanogram per mL and the mean AUC from 170 nanogram●h per mL to 1,200 nanogram●h per mL, with different carbidopa, levodopa and entacapone tablet strengths providing 12.5 mg, 25 mg, 37.5 mg or 50 mg of carbidopa.
                        Carbidopa is approximately 36% bound to plasma protein.
                        
                           Entacapone
                        
                        Following administration of carbidopa, levodopa and Entacapone tablets as a single dose to healthy male and female subjects, the peak concentration of entacapone in plasma was reached within 0.8 hours to 1.2 hours on average. The mean Cmax of entacapone was about 1,200 nanogram per mL to 1,500 nanogram per mL and the AUC 1,250 nanogram●h per mL to 1,750 nanogram●h per mL after administration of different carbidopa, levodopa and entacapone tablet strengths all providing 200 mg of entacapone.
                        The plasma protein binding of entacapone is 98% over the concentration range of 0.4 microgram per mL to 50 microgram per mL. Entacapone binds mainly to serum albumin.
                        
                           
                              
                                 Metabolism and Elimination:
                              
                           
                           
                              
                           
                        
                        
                           Levodopa
                        
                        The elimination half-life of levodopa, the active moiety of antiparkinsonian activity, was 1.7 hours (range 1.1 hours to 3.2 hours).
                        Levodopa is extensively metabolized to various metabolites.  Two major pathways are decarboxylation by dopa decarboxylase (DDC) and O-methylation by catechol-O-methyltransferase (COMT). 
                        
                           Carbidopa
                        
                        The elimination half-life of carbidopa was on average 1.6 hours to 2 hours (range 0.7 hour to 4.0 hours).
                        Carbidopa is metabolized to two main metabolites (α-methyl-3-methoxy-4-hydroxyphenylpropionic acid and α-methyl-3,4-dihydroxyphenylpropionic acid). These 2 metabolites are primarily eliminated in the urine unchanged or as glucuronide conjugates. Unchanged carbidopa accounts for 30% of the total urinary excretion. 
                        
                           Entacapone
                        
                        The elimination half-life of entacapone was on average 0.8 hours to 1 hour (0.3 hours to 4.5 hours).
                        Entacapone is almost completely metabolized prior to excretion with only a very small amount (0.2% of dose) found unchanged in urine. The main metabolic pathway is isomerization to the cis-isomer, the only active metabolite. Entacapone and the cis-isomer are eliminated in the urine as glucuronide conjugates. The glucuronides account for 95% of all urinary metabolites (70% as parent and 25% as cis-isomer glucuronides). The glucuronide conjugate of the cis-isomer is inactive. After oral administration of a 14C-labeled dose of entacapone, 10% of labeled parent and metabolite is excreted in urine and 90% in feces.
                        Due to short elimination half-lives, no true accumulation of levodopa or entacapone occurs when they are administered repeatedly.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     Special Populations
                     
                        
                           
                              
                                 Hepatic Impairment: 
                           
                        
                        
                           Carbidopa, levodopa and entacapone tablets
                        
                        While there are no studies on the pharmacokinetics of carbidopa and levodopa in patients with hepatic impairment, a carbidopa, levodopa and entacapone tablets should be administered cautiously to patients with biliary obstruction or hepatic disease since biliary excretion appears to be the major route of excretion of entacapone and hepatic impairment had a significant effect on the pharmacokinetics of entacapone when 200 mg entacapone was administered alone.
                        
                           Entacapone
                        
                        Hepatic impairment had a significant effect on the pharmacokinetics of entacapone when 200 mg entacapone was administered alone. A single 200 mg dose of entacapone, without levodopa/dopa decarboxylase inhibitor coadministration, showed approximately two-fold higher AUC and Cmax values in patients with a history of alcoholism and hepatic impairment (n=10) compared to normal subjects (n=10). All patients had biopsy-proven liver cirrhosis caused by alcohol. According to Child-Pugh grading 7 patients with liver disease had mild hepatic impairment and 3 patients had moderate hepatic impairment. As only about 10% of the entacapone dose is excreted in urine, as parent compound and conjugated glucuronide, biliary excretion appears to be the major route of excretion of this drug. Consequently, carbidopa, levodopa and entacapone tablets should be administered with care to patients with biliary obstruction or hepatic disease.
                        
                           
                              Renal Impairment:
                        
                        
                           Carbidopa, levodopa and entacapone tablets
                        
                        Carbidopa, levodopa and entacapone tablets should be administered cautiously to patients with severe renal disease. There are no studies on the pharmacokinetics of levodopa and carbidopa in patients with renal impairment. 
                        
                           Entacapone 
                        
                        No important effects of renal function on the pharmacokinetics of entacapone were found. The pharmacokinetics of entacapone have been investigated after a single 200 mg entacapone dose, without levodopa/dopa decarboxylase inhibitor coadministration, in a specific renal impairment study. There were three groups: normal subjects (n=7; creatinine clearance greater than 1.12 mL per sec per 1.73 m2), moderate impairment (n=10; creatinine clearance ranging from 0.60 mL per sec per 1.73 m2 to 0.89 mL per sec per 1.73 m2), and severe impairment (n=7; creatinine clearance ranging from 0.20 mL per sec per 1.73 m2 to 0.44 mL per sec per 1.73 m2). 
                        
                           
                              
                                 Concurrent Diseases:
                           
                        
                        Carbidopa, levodopa and entacapone tablets should be administered cautiously to patients with biliary obstruction, hepatic disease, severe cardiovascular or pulmonary disease, bronchial asthma, renal, or endocrine disease.
                        
                           
                              
                                 Elderly:
                              
                           
                        
                        Carbidopa, levodopa and entacapone tablets have not been studied in Parkinson's disease patients or in healthy volunteers older than 75 years old. In the pharmacokinetics studies conducted in healthy volunteers following single dose of carbidopa/levodopa/entacapone (as carbidopa, levodopa and entacapone tablets or as separate carbidopa/levodopa and entacapone tablets):
                        
                           Levodopa
                        
                        The AUC of levodopa is significantly (on average 10% to 20%) higher in elderly (60 years to 75 years) than younger subjects (45 years to 60 years). There is no significant difference in the Cmax of levodopa between younger (45 years to 60 years) and elderly subjects (60 years to 75 years). 
                        
                           Carbidopa
                        
                        There is no significant difference in the Cmax and AUC of carbidopa, between younger (45 years to 60 years) and elderly subjects (60 years to 75 years).
                        
                           Entacapone
                        
                        The AUC of entacapone is significantly (on average, 15%) higher in elderly (60 years to 75 years) than younger subjects (45 years to 60 years). There is no significant difference in the Cmax of entacapone between younger (45 years to 60 years) and elderly subjects (60 years to 75 years).
                        
                           
                              Gender
                           :
                        The bioavailability of levodopa is significantly higher in females when given with or without carbidopa and/or entacapone. Following a single dose of carbidopa, levodopa and entacapone together, either as carbidopa, levodopa and entacapone tablets or as separate carbidopa/levodopa and entacapone tablets in healthy volunteers (age range 45 years to 74 years):
                        
                           Levodopa
                        
                        The plasma exposure (AUC and Cmax) of levodopa is significantly higher in females than males (on average, 40% for AUC and 30% for Cmax). These differences are primarily explained by body weight. Other published literature showed significant gender effect (higher concentrations in females) even after correction for body weight.
                        
                           Carbidopa 
                        
                        There is no gender difference in the pharmacokinetics of carbidopa.
                        
                           Entacapone 
                        
                        There is no gender difference in the pharmacokinetics of entacapone.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Drug Interactions
                     
                        
                           See PRECAUTIONS, Drug Interactions.
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Clinical Studies
                     
                        Each carbidopa, levodopa and entacapone tablet, provided in six single-dose strengths, contains carbidopa and levodopa in ratio 1:4 and a 200 mg dose of entacapone. Four carbidopa, levodopa and entacapone tablet strengths 12.5 mg per 50 mg per 200 mg, 25 mg per 100 mg per 200 mg, 37.5 mg per 150 mg per 200 mg and 50 mg per 200 mg per 200 mg have been shown to be bioequivalent to the corresponding doses of standard-release carbidopa and levodopa 25 mg per 100 mg tablets and entacapone 200 mg tablets. 
                        The effectiveness of entacapone as an adjunct to levodopa in the treatment of Parkinson's disease was established in three 24-week multicenter, randomized, double-blind placebo-controlled trials in patients with Parkinson's disease. In two of these trials, the patients' disease was "fluctuating", i.e., was characterized by documented periods of "On" (periods of relatively good functioning) and "Off" (periods of relatively poor functioning), despite optimum levodopa therapy. There was also a withdrawal period following 6 months of treatment. In the third trial patients were not required to have been experiencing fluctuations. Prior to the controlled part of these trials, patients were stabilized on levodopa for 2 weeks to 4 weeks. 
                        There is limited experience of using entacapone in patients who do not experience fluctuations.
                        In the first two studies to be described, patients were randomized to receive placebo or entacapone 200 mg administered concomitantly with each dose of carbidopa-levodopa (up to 10 times daily, but averaging 4 doses to 6 doses per day). The formal double-blind portion of both trials was 6 months long. Patients recorded the time spent in the "On" and "Off" states in home diaries periodically throughout the duration of the trial. In one study, conducted in the Nordic countries, the primary outcome measure was the total mean time spent in the "On" state during an 18-hour diary recorded day (6 a.m. to midnight). In the other study, the primary outcome measure was the proportion of awake time spent over 24 hours in the "On" state.
                        In addition to the primary outcome measure, the amount of time spent in the "Off" state was evaluated, and patients were also evaluated by subparts of the Unified Parkinson's Disease Rating Scale (UPDRS), a frequently used multi-item rating scale intended to assess mentation (Part I), activities of daily living (Part II), motor function (Part III), complications of therapy (Part IV), and disease staging (Part V and VI); an investigator's and patient's global assessment of clinical condition, a 7-point subjective scale designed to assess global functioning in Parkinson's disease; and the change in daily carbidopa-levodopa dose.
                        In one of the studies, 171 patients were randomized in 16 centers in Finland, Norway, Sweden, and Denmark (Nordic study), all of whom received concomitant levodopa plus dopa-decarboxylase inhibitor (either carbidopa-levodopa or benserazide-levodopa). In the second trial, 205 patients were randomized in 17 centers in North America (US and Canada); all patients received concomitant carbidopa-levodopa.
                        The following tables display the results of these two trials:
                        



                        


Effects on "On" time did not differ by age, sex, weight, disease severity at baseline, levodopa dose and concurrent treatment with dopamine agonists or selegiline.
                        
                           Withdrawal of entacapone:  
                        
                        In the North American study, abrupt withdrawal of entacapone, without alteration of the dose of carbidopa-levodopa, resulted in a significant worsening of fluctuations, compared to placebo. In some cases, symptoms were slightly worse than at baseline, but returned to approximately baseline severity within two weeks following levodopa dose increase on average by 80 mg. In the Nordic study, similarly, a significant worsening of parkinsonian symptoms was observed after entacapone withdrawal, as assessed two weeks after drug withdrawal. At this phase, the symptoms were approximately at baseline severity following levodopa dose increase by about 50 mg.
                        In the third placebo-controlled trial, a total of 301 patients were randomized in 32 centers in Germany and Austria. In this trial, as in the other two trials, entacapone 200 mg was administered with each dose of levodopa/dopa decarboxylase inhibitor (up to 10 times daily) and UPDRS Parts II and III and total daily "On" time were the primary measures of effectiveness. The following results were seen for the primary measures, as well as for some secondary measures:
                        


