
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  Enter section text here
               
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Pharmacodynamics
                     CNS agents of the 1,4 benzodiazepine class presumably exert their effects by 
binding at stereo specific receptors at several sites within the central nervous 
system. Their exact mechanism of action is unknown. Clinically, all 
benzodiazepines cause a dose-related central nervous system depressant activity 
varying from mild impairment of task performance to hypnosis.
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        AbsorptionFollowing oral administration, alprazolam is readily absorbed. 
Peak concentrations in the plasma occur in one to two hours following 
administration. Plasma levels are proportionate to the dose given; over the dose 
range of 0.5 to 3 mg, peak levels of 8 to 37 ng/mL were observed. Using a 
specific assay methodology, the mean plasma elimination half-life of alprazolam 
has been found to be about 11.2 hours (range: 6.3 to 26.9 hours) in healthy 
adults.
                        
                        Distribution
                           In vitro, alprazolam is bound (80 
percent) to human serum protein. Serum albumin accounts for the majority of the 
binding.
                        
                        Metabolism/EliminationAlprazolam is extensively metabolized in humans, primarily by 
cytochrome P450 3A4 (CYP3A4), to two major metabolites in the plasma: 
4-hydroxyalprazolam and α-hydroxyalprazolam. A benzophenone derived from 
alprazolam is also found in humans. Their half-lives appear to be similar to 
that of alprazolam. The plasma concentrations of 4-hydroxyalprazolam and 
α-hydroxyalprazolam relative to unchanged alprazolam concentration were always 
less than 4%. The reported relative potencies in benzodiazepine receptor binding 
experiments and in animal models of induced seizure inhibition are 0.2 and 0.66, 
respectively, for 4-hydroxyalprazolam and α-hydroxyalprazolam. Such low 
concentrations and the lesser potencies of 4-hydroxyalprazolam and 
α-hydroxyalprazolam suggest that they are unlikely to contribute much to the 
pharmacological effects of alprazolam. The benzophenone metabolite is 
essentially inactive. 
                        Alprazolam and its metabolites are excreted primarily in the urine.
                        
                        Special PopulationsChanges in the absorption, distribution, metabolism and excretion 
of benzodiazepines have been reported in a variety of disease states including 
alcoholism, impaired hepatic function and impaired renal function. Changes have 
also been demonstrated in geriatric patients. A mean half-life of alprazolam of 
16.3 hours has been observed in healthy elderly subjects (range: 9 to 26.9 
hours, n = 16) compared to 11 hours (range: 6.3 to 15.8 hours, n = 16) in 
healthy adult subjects. In patients with alcoholic liver disease the half-life 
of alprazolam ranged between 5.8 and 65.3 hours (mean: 19.7 hours, n = 17) as 
compared to between 6.3 and 26.9 hours (mean = 11.4 hours, n = 17) in healthy 
subjects. In an obese group of subjects the half-life of alprazolam ranged 
between 9.9 and 40.4 hours (mean = 21.8 hours, n = 12) as compared to between 
6.3 and 15.8 hours (mean = 10.6 hours, n = 12) in healthy subjects.
                        Because of its similarity to other benzodiazepines, it is assumed that 
alprazolam undergoes transplacental passage and that it is excreted in human 
milk.
                        
                        RaceMaximal concentrations and half-life of alprazolam are 
approximately 15% and 25% higher in Asians compared to Caucasians.
                        
                        PediatricsThe pharmacokinetics of alprazolam in pediatric patients have not 
been studied.
                        
                        GenderGender has no effect on the pharmacokinetics of alprazolam.
                        
                        Cigarette SmokingAlprazolam concentrations may be reduced by up to 50% in smokers 
compared to non-smokers.
                     
                  
               
            
         