
               
               
               Clinical Pharmacology Section
               
                  
                  The mechanism of action of quetiapine fumarate, as with other drugs having efficacy in the treatment of schizophrenia and bipolar disorder, is unknown. However, it has been proposed that the efficacy of quetiapine fumarate in schizophrenia and its mood stabilizing properties in bipolar depression and mania are mediated through a combination of dopamine type 2 (D
                  
                     2
                  
                  ) and serotonin type 2 (5HT
                  
                     2
                  
                  ) antagonism. Antagonism at receptors other than dopamine and 5HT
                  
                     2
                  
                   with similar receptor affinities may explain some of the other effects of quetiapine fumarate.
                   
                  Quetiapine fumarate’s antagonism of histamine H
                  
                     1 
                  
                  receptors may explain the somnolence observed with this drug.
                  Quetiapine fumarate’s antagonism of adrenergic α
                  
                     1
                  
                   receptors may explain the orthostatic hypotension observed with this drug.
                  
 

                  
                  Quetiapine fumarate is an antagonist at multiple neurotransmitter receptors in the brain: serotonin 5HT1A and 5HT2 (IC50s=717 & 148nM, respectively), dopamine D1 and D2 (IC50s=1268 & 329nM, respectively), histamine H1 (IC50=30nM), and adrenergic α1 and α2 receptors (IC50s=94 & 271nM, respectively). Quetiapine fumarate has no appreciable affinity at cholinergic muscarinic and benzodiazepine receptors (IC50s>5000 nM).
                  
 

                  
                  
                     Adults
                  
                   
                  Quetiapine fumarate activity is primarily due to the parent drug. The multiple-dose pharmacokinetics of quetiapine are dose-proportional within the proposed clinical dose range, and quetiapine accumulation is predictable upon multiple dosing. Elimination of quetiapine is mainly via hepatic metabolism with a mean terminal half-life of about 6 hours within the proposed clinical dose range. Steady-state concentrations are expected to be achieved within two days of dosing. Quetiapine is unlikely to interfere with the metabolism of drugs metabolized by cytochrome P450 enzymes.
                  
                     
                        

                        
Children and Adolescents
 

                     
                  
                  
                     Pharmacokinetic information in patients (10 to 17 years of age) is approved for AstraZeneca Pharmaceuticals LP’s quetiapine fumarate drug product labeling. However, due to AstraZeneca Pharmaceuticals LP’s marketing exclusivity rights; this drug product is not labeled for such use in those patients.
                  
                   
                  
                     Absorption
                  
                   
                  Quetiapine fumarate is rapidly absorbed after oral administration, reaching peak plasma concentrations in 1.5 hours. The tablet formulation is 100% bioavailable relative to solution. The bioavailability of quetiapine is marginally affected by administration with food, with C
                  
                     max
                  
                   and AUC values increased by 25% and 15%, respectively.
                  
                     
                        

                        
Distribution
 

                     
                  
                  Quetiapine is widely distributed throughout the body with an apparent volume of distribution of 10±4 L/kg. It is 83% bound to plasma proteins at therapeutic concentrations. 
                  
                     In vitro
                  
                  , quetiapine did not affect the binding of warfarin or diazepam to human serum albumin. In turn, neither warfarin nor diazepam altered the binding of quetiapine.
                  
                     
                        

                        
Metabolism and Elimination
 

                     
                  
                  Following a single oral dose of 
                  
                     14
                  
                  C-quetiapine, less than 1% of the administered dose was excreted as unchanged drug, indicating that quetiapine is highly metabolized. Approximately 73% and 20% of the dose was recovered in the urine and feces, respectively.
                   
                  Quetiapine is extensively metabolized by the liver. The major metabolic pathways are sulfoxidation to the sulfoxide metabolite and oxidation to the parent acid metabolite; both metabolites are pharmacologically inactive. 
                  
                     In vitro
                  
                   studies using human liver microsomes revealed that the cytochrome P450 3A4 isoenzyme is involved in the metabolism of quetiapine to its major, but inactive, sulfoxide metabolite and in the metabolism of its active metabolite N-desalkyl quetiapine.
                  
                     
                        

                        
Age
 

                     
                  
                  Oral clearance of quetiapine was reduced by 40% in elderly patients (≥ 65 years, n=9) compared to young patients (n=12), and dosing adjustment may be necessary 
                  
                     [see Dosage and Administration (2)]
                  
                  .
                  
                     
                        

                        
Gender
 

                     
                  
                  There is no gender effect on the pharmacokinetics of quetiapine.
                  
                     
                        

                        
Race
 

                     
                  
                  There is no race effect on the pharmacokinetics of quetiapine.
                  
                     
                        

                        
Smoking
 

                     
                  
                  Smoking has no effect on the oral clearance of quetiapine.
                  
                     
                        

                        
Renal Insufficiency
 

                     
                  
                  Patients with severe renal impairment (Clcr=10 to 30 mL/min/1.73 m
                  
                     2
                  
                  , n=8) had a 25% lower mean oral clearance than normal subjects (Clcr > 80 mL/min/1.73 m
                  
                     2
                  
                  , n=8), but plasma quetiapine concentrations in the subjects with renal insufficiency were within the range of concentrations seen in normal subjects receiving the same dose. Dosage adjustment is therefore not needed in these patients.
                  
                     
                        

                        
Hepatic Insufficiency
 

                     
                  
                  Hepatically impaired patients (n=8) had a 30% lower mean oral clearance of quetiapine than normal subjects. In two of the 8 hepatically impaired patients, AUC and C
                  
                     max
                  
                   were 3 times higher than those observed typically in healthy subjects. Since quetiapine is extensively metabolized by the liver, higher plasma levels are expected in the hepatically impaired population, and dosage adjustment may be needed 
                  
                     [see Dosage and Administration (2)]
                  
                  .
                  
                     
                        

                        
Drug-Drug Interactions
 

                     
                  
                  
                     In vitro
                  
                   enzyme inhibition data suggest that quetiapine and 9 of its metabolites would have little inhibitory effect on 
                  
                     in vivo
                  
                   metabolism mediated by cytochromes P450 1A2, 2C9, 2C19, 2D6 and 3A4.
                   
                  Quetiapine oral clearance is increased by the prototype cytochrome P450 3A4 inducer, phenytoin, and decreased by the prototype cytochrome P450 3A4 inhibitor, ketoconazole. Dose adjustment of quetiapine will be necessary if it is coadministered with phenytoin or ketoconazole 
                  
                     [see Drug Interactions (7.1)]
                  
                  .
                   
                  Quetiapine oral clearance is not inhibited by the non-specific enzyme inhibitor, cimetidine.
                  Quetiapine at doses of 750 mg/day did not affect the single dose pharmacokinetics of antipyrine, lithium or lorazepam 
                  
                     [see Drug Interactions (7.2)]
                  
                  .
                  
 

               
               
            
         