
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Central Nervous System
                     
                        Oxycodone is a semisynthetic pure opioid agonist whose
                                    principal therapeutic action is analgesia. Other pharmacological
                                    effects of oxycodone include anxiolysis, euphoria and feelings
                                    of relaxation. These effects are mediated by receptors
                                    (notably μ and κ) in the central nervous
                                    system for endogenous opioid-like compounds such as endorphins
                                    and enkephalins. Oxycodone produces respiratory depression
                                    through direct activity at respiratory centers in the brain stem
                                    and depresses the cough reflex by direct effect on the center of
                                    the medulla.
                        
                        Aspirin (acetylsalicylic acid) works by inhibiting the
                                    body’s production of prostaglandins, including
                                    prostaglandins involved in inflammation. Prostaglandins cause
                                    pain sensations by stimulating muscle contractions and dilating
                                    blood vessels throughout the body. In the CNS, aspirin works on
                                    the hypothalamus heat-regulating center to reduce fever,
                                    however, other mechanisms may be involved.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Gastrointestinal Tract and Other Smooth Muscle
                     
                        Oxycodone reduces motility by increasing smooth muscle
                                    tone in the stomach and duodenum. In the small intestine,
                                    digestion of food is delayed by decreases in propulsive
                                    contractions. Other opioid effects include contraction of
                                    biliary tract smooth muscle, spasm of the Sphincter of Oddi,
                                    increased ureteral and bladder sphincter tone, and a reduction
                                    in uterine tone. 
                        
                        Aspirin can produce gastrointestinal injury (lesions,
                                    ulcers) through a mechanism that is not yet completely
                                    understood, but may involve a reduction in eicosanoid synthesis
                                    by the gastric mucosa. Decreased production of prostaglandins
                                    may compromise the defenses of the gastric mucosa and the
                                    activity of substances involved in tissue repair and ulcer
                                    healing. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Cardiovascular System
                     
                        Oxycodone may produce a release of histamine and may be
                                    associated with orthostatic hypotension, and other symptoms,
                                    such as pruritus, flushing, red eyes, and sweating.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Platelet Aggregation
                     
                        Aspirin affects platelet aggregation by irreversibly
                                    inhibiting prostaglandin cyclo-oxygenase. This effect lasts for
                                    the life of the platelet and prevents the formation of the
                                    platelet aggregating factor thromboxane A2. Nonacetylated
                                    salicylates do not inhibit this enzyme and have no effect on
                                    platelet aggregation. At somewhat higher doses, aspirin
                                    reversibly inhibits the formation of prostaglandin 12
                                    (prostacyclin), which is an arterial vasodilator and inhibits
                                    platelet aggregation.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        Absorption and Distribution
                        The mean absolute oral bioavailability of oxycodone in
                                    cancer patients was reported to be about 87%. Oxycodone has been
                                    shown to be 45% bound to human plasma proteins in vitro. The volume of
                                    distribution after intravenous administration is 211.9
                                    ±186.6 L. 
                        Aspirin is hydrolyzed primarily to salicylic acid in the
                                    gut wall and during first-pass metabolism through the liver.
                                    Salicylic acid is absorbed rapidly from the stomach, but most of
                                    the absorption occurs in the proximal small intestine. Following
                                    absorption, salicylate is distributed to most body tissues and
                                    fluids, including fetal tissues, breast milk, and the CNS. High
                                    concentrations are found in the liver and kidneys. Salicylate is
                                    variably bound to serum proteins, particularly albumin.
                        Metabolism and Elimination
                        A high portion of oxycodone is N-dealkylated to
                                    noroxycodone during first-pass metabolism. Oxymorphone, is
                                    formed by the O-demethylation of oxycodone. The metabolism of
                                    oxycodone to oxymorphone is catalyzed by CYP2D6. Free and
                                    conjugated noroxycodone, free and conjugated oxycodone, and
                                    oxymorphone are excreted in human urine following a single oral
                                    dose of oxycodone. Approximately 8% to 14% of the dose is
                                    excreted as free oxycodone over 24 hours after administration.
                                    Following a single, oral dose of oxycodone, the mean ±
                                    SD elimination half-life is 3.51 ± 1.43 hours.
                        The biotransformation of aspirin occurs primarily in the
                                    liver by the microsomal enzyme system. With a plasma half-life
                                    of approximately 15 minutes, aspirin is rapidly hydrolyzed to
                                    salicylate. At low doses, salicylate elimination follows
                                    first-order kinetics. The plasma half-life of salicylate is
                                    approximately 2 to 3 hours.
                        Approximately 10% of aspirin is excreted as unchanged
                                    salicylate in the urine. The major metabolites excreted in the
                                    urine are salicyluric acid (75%), salicyl phenolic glucuronide
                                    (10%), salicyl acyl glucuronide (5%), and gentisic and
                                    gentisuric acid (less than 1%) each. Eighty to 100% of a single
                                    dose is excreted in the urine within 24 to 72 hours.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         