
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Amoxicillin and clavulanate potassium is an antibacterial drug [see Microbiology (
                           
                              12.4)].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        Mean amoxicillin and clavulanate potassium pharmacokinetic parameters in normal adults following administration of amoxicillin and clavulanate potassium tablets are shown in Table 3 and following administration of amoxicillin and clavulanate potassium for oral suspension and chewable tablets are shown in Table 4. 
                        
                           Table 3: Mean (±S.D.) Amoxicillin and 
                           Clavulanate
                            Potassium Pharmacokinetic 
                           Parametersa
                           
                           
                              ,b
                           
                            with Amoxicillin and 
                           Clavulanate
                            Potassium Tablets 
                        
                        


                        



                           a Mean (± standard deviation) values of 14 normal adults (N=15 for clavulanate potassium in the low-dose regimens). Peak concentrations occurred approximately 1.5 hours after the dose.  
                        
                           b Amoxicillin and clavulanate potassium administered at the start of a light meal. 
                        
                           Table 4: Mean (±S.D.) Amoxicillin and 
                           Clavulanate
                            Potassium Pharmacokinetic 
                           Parametersa
                           
                           
                              ,b
                           
                            with Amoxicillin and 
                           Clavulanate
                            Potassium for Oral Suspension and Chewable Tablets
                        
                        


                        



                           a Mean (± standard deviation) values of 28 normal adults. Peak concentrations occurred approximately 1 hour after the dose.  
                        
                           b Amoxicillin and clavulanate potassium administered at the start of a light meal. 
                        Oral administration of 5 mL of 250 mg/62.5 mg/5 mL suspension of amoxicillin and clavulanate potassium or the equivalent dose of 10 mL of 125 mg/31.25 mg/5 mL suspension of amoxicillin and clavulanate potassium provides average peak serum concentrations approximately 1 hour after dosing of 6.9 mcg/mL for amoxicillin and 1.6 mcg/mL for clavulanic acid. The areas under the serum concentration curves obtained during the first 4 hours after dosing were 12.6 mcg*h/mL for amoxicillin and 2.9 mcg*h/mL for clavulanic acid when 5 mL of 250 mg/62.5 mg/5 mL suspension of amoxicillin and clavulanate potassium or equivalent dose of 10 mL of 125 mg/31.25 mg/5 mL suspension of amoxicillin and clavulanate potassium were administered to normal adults. One 250 mg/62.5 mg chewable tablet of amoxicillin and clavulanate potassium or two 125 mg/31.25 mg chewable tablets of amoxicillin and clavulanate potassium are equivalent to 5 mL of 250 mg/62.5 mg/5 mL suspension of amoxicillin and clavulanate potassium and provide similar serum concentrations of amoxicillin and clavulanic acid. 
                        Amoxicillin serum concentrations achieved with amoxicillin and clavulanate potassium are similar to those produced by the oral administration of equivalent doses of amoxicillin alone. Time above the minimum inhibitory concentration of 1 mcg/mL for amoxicillin has been shown to be similar after corresponding every 12 hour and every 8 hour dosing regimens of amoxicillin and clavulanate potassium in adults and children. 
                        
                           
                              Absorption
                           
                        
                        Dosing in the fasted or fed state has minimal effect on the pharmacokinetics of amoxicillin. While amoxicillin and clavulanate potassium can be given without regard to meals, absorption of clavulanate potassium when taken with food is greater relative to the fasted state. In one study, the relative bioavailability of clavulanate was reduced when amoxicillin and clavulanate potassium was dosed at 30 and 150 minutes after the start of a high-fat breakfast. 
                        
                           
                              Distribution
                           
                        
                        Neither component in amoxicillin and clavulanate potassium is highly protein-bound; clavulanic acid is approximately 25% bound to human serum and amoxicillin approximately 18% bound.   
                        Amoxicillin diffuses readily into most body tissues and fluids with the exception of the brain and spinal fluid.  
                        Two hours after oral administration of a single 35 mg/kg dose of suspension of amoxicillin and clavulanate potassium to fasting children, average concentrations of 3 mcg/mL of amoxicillin and 0.5 mcg/mL of clavulanic acid were detected in middle ear effusions.
                        
                        
                           
                              Metabolism and Excretion
                           
                        
                        The half-life of amoxicillin after the oral administration of amoxicillin and clavulanate potassium is 1.3 hours and that of clavulanic acid is 1 hour.
                        Approximately 50% to 70% of the amoxicillin and approximately 25% to 40% of the clavulanic acid are excreted unchanged in urine during the first 6 hours after administration of a single 250 mg/125 mg or 500 mg/125 mg tablet of amoxicillin and clavulanate potassium.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.4 Microbiology    
                     
                        Amoxicillin is a semisynthetic antibiotic with in vitro bactericidal activity against Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria. Amoxicillin is, however, susceptible to degradation by beta-lactamases, and therefore, the spectrum of activity does not include organisms which produce these enzymes. Clavulanic acid is a beta-lactam, structurally related to the penicillins, which possesses the ability to inactivate some beta-lactamase enzymes commonly found in microorganisms resistant to penicillins and cephalosporins. In particular, it has good activity against the clinically important plasmid-mediated beta-lactamases frequently responsible for transferred drug resistance. 
                        The formulation of amoxicillin and clavulanic acid in amoxicillin and clavulanate potassium protects amoxicillin from degradation by some beta-lactamase enzymes and extends the antibiotic spectrum of amoxicillin to include many bacteria normally resistant to amoxicillin. 
                        Amoxicillin and clavulanic acid has been shown to be active against most isolates of the following bacteria, both in vitro and in clinical infections as described in the INDICATIONS AND USAGE section. 
                        
                           Gram-positive bacteria 
                        
                        
                           Staphylococcus aureus 
                        
                        
                           Gram-negative bacteria 
                        
                        
                           Enterobacter species 
                        
                           Escherichia coli 
                        
                        
                           Haemophilus influenzae 
                        
                        
                           Klebsiella
                           species 
                        
                           Moraxella 
                           catarrhalis
                           
                        
                        The following in vitro data are available, but their clinical significance is unknown. At least 90 percent of the following bacteria exhibit an in vitro minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) less than or equal to the susceptible breakpoint for amoxicillin and clavulanic acid. However, the efficacy of amoxicillin and clavulanic acid in treating clinical infections due to these bacteria has not been established in adequate and well-controlled clinical trials. 
                        
                           Gram-positive bacteria 
                        
                        
                           Enterococcus 
                           faecalis
                           
                        
                        
                           Staphylococcus epidermidis 
                        
                        
                           Staphylococcus 
                           saprophyticus
                           
                        
                        
                           Streptococcus 
                           pneumoniae
                           
                        
                        
                           Streptococcus 
                           pyogenes
                           
                        
                        Viridans group Streptococcus 
                        
                        
                           Gram-negative bacteria 
                        
                        
                           Eikenella
                           
                           corrodens
                           
                        
                        
                           Proteus mirabilis 
                        
                        
                           Anaerobic bacteria 
                        
                        
                           Bacteroides
                           species including Bacteroides
                           
                           fragilis
                           
                        
                        
                           Fusobacterium
                           species 
                        
                           Peptostreptococcus
                           species 
                        
                           
                              Susceptibility Test Methods 
                           
                        
                        When available, the clinical microbiology laboratory should provide the results of in vitro susceptibility test results for antimicrobial drug products used in resident hospitals to the physician as periodic reports that describe the susceptibility profile of nosocomial and community-acquired pathogens. These reports should aid the physician in selecting an antibacterial drug product for treatment. 
                        
                           Dilution techniques 
                        
                        Quantitative methods are used to determine antimicrobial minimum inhibitory concentrations (MICs). These MICs provide estimates of the susceptibility of bacteria to antimicrobial compounds. The MICs should be determined using a standardized test method2
                           ,3
                           (broth and/or agar). The MIC values should be interpreted according to criteria provided in Table 5.
                        
                        
                           Diffusion techniques
                        
                        Quantitative methods that require measurement of zone diameters can also provide reproducible estimates of the susceptibility of bacteria to antimicrobial compounds. The zone size provides an estimate of the susceptibility of bacteria to antimicrobial compounds. The zone size should be determined using a standardized test method3
                           ,4. This procedure uses paper disks impregnated with 30 mcg amoxicillin and clavulanic acid (20 mcg amoxicillin plus 10 mcg clavulanic acid) to test the susceptibility of bacteria to amoxicillin and clavulanic acid. The disc diffusion interpretive criteria are provided in Table 5.
                        
                           Table 5: Susceptibility Test Interpretive Criteria for Amoxicillin 
                           Clavulanic
                            Acid 
                        
                        


                        



                           Quality Control 
                        
                        Standardized susceptibility test procedures require the use of laboratory controls to monitor and ensure the accuracy and precision of supplies and reagents used in the assay, and the techniques of the individuals performing the test2
                           ,3,4. Standard amoxicillin and clavulanic acid powder should provide the following range of MIC values noted in Table 6 for the diffusion technique using the 30 mcg amoxicillin and clavulanic acid (20 mcg amoxicillin plus 10 mcg clavulanic acid) disk, the criteria in Table 6 should be achieved.
                        
                           Table 6: Acceptable Quality Control Ranges for Amoxicillin and 
                           Clavulanic
                            Acid 
                        
                        


