
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY 
               
                  Immediately following intravenous injection, more than 80% of the albumin aggregated is trapped in the pulmonary alveolar capillary bed.  The imaging procedure can thus be started as soon as the injection is complete.  Assuming that a sufficient number of radioactive particles has been used, the distribution of radioactive aggregated particles in the normally perfused lung is uniform throughout the vascular bed, and will produce a uniform image.  Areas of reduced perfusion will be revealed by a corresponding decreased accumulation of the radioactive particles, and are imaged as areas of reduced photon density. 

                     
Organ selectivity is a direct result of particle size.  Below 1 to10 micrometers, the material is taken up by the reticuloendothelial system.  Above 10 micrometers, the aggregates become lodged in the lung by a purely mechanical process. Distribution of particles in the lungs is a function of regional pulmonary blood flow. 

                     
The albumin aggregated is sufficiently fragile for the capillary micro-occlusion to be temporary. Erosion and fragmentation reduce the particle size, allowing passage of the aggregates through the pulmonary alveolar capillary bed.  The fragments are then accumulated by the reticuloendothelial system. 

                     
Lung to liver ratios greater than 20:1 are obtained in the first few minutes post-injection.  Elimination of the technetium Tc-99m aggregated albumin from the lungs occurs with a half-life of about 2 to 3 hours.  Cumulative urinary excretion studies show an average of 20% elimination of the injected technetium Tc-99m dose 24 hours post-administration.

                     
Following administration of technetium Tc-99m albumin aggregated by intraperitoneal injection, the radiopharmaceutical mixes with the peritoneal fluid. Clearance from the peritoneal cavity varies from insignificant, which may occur with complete shunt blockage, to very rapid clearance with subsequent transfer into the systemic circulation when the shunt is patent.
 
Serial images should be obtained of both the shunt and lung (target organ).  However, an adequate evaluation of the difference between total blockage of the shunt and partial blockage may not be feasible in all cases.
               
               
            
         