
                     
                     
                     Drug Interactions
                     
                        Clinically meaningful drug interactions have occurred with concomitant medications and include, but are not limited to the following:
                        
                           Agents Highly Bound to Plasma Protein:
                        
                        Carbamazepine is not highly bound to plasma proteins; therefore, administration of Carbatrol® to a patient taking another drug that is highly protein bound should not cause increased free concentrations of the other drug.
                        
                           Agents that Inhibits Cytochrome P450 Isoenzymes and/or Epoxide Hydrolase:
                        
                        Carbamazepine is metabolized mainly by cytochrome P450 (CYP) 3A4 to the active carbamazepine 10,11-epoxide, which is further metabolized to the trans-diol by epoxide hydrolase. Therefore, the potential exists for interaction between carbamazepine and any agent that inhibits CYP3A4 and/or epoxide hydrolase. Agents that are CYP3A4 inhibitors that have been found, or are expected, to increase plasma levels of Carbatrol® are the following:
                        
                           Acetazolamide, azole antifungals, cimetidine, clarithromycin(1), dalfopristin, danazol, delavirdine, diltiazem, erythromycin(1), fluoxetine, fluvoxamine, grapefruit juice, isoniazid, itraconazole, ketoconazole, loratadine, nefazodone, niacinamide, nicotinamide, protease inhibitors, propoxyphene, quinine, quinupristin, troleandomycin, valproate(1), verapamil, zileuton.
                        
                        
                           (1)also inhibits epoxide hydrolase resulting in increased levels of the active metabolite carbamazepine 10, 11- epoxide
                        Thus, if a patient has been titrated to a stable dosage of Carbatrol®, and then begins a course of treatment with one of these CYP3A4 or epoxide hydrolase inhibitors, it is reasonable to expect that a dose reduction for Carbatrol® may be necessary.
                        
                           Agents that Induce Cytochrome P450 Isoenzymes:
                        
                        Carbamazepine is metabolized by CYP3A4. Therefore, the potential exists for interaction between carbamazepine and any agent that induces CYP3A4. Agents that are CYP inducers that have been found, or are expected, to decrease plasma levels of Carbatrol® are the following:
                        
                           Cisplatin, doxorubicin HCL, felbamate, rifampin, phenobarbital, phenytoin(2), primidone, methsuximide, and theophylline
                        
                        
                           (2)Phenytoin plasma levels have also been reported to increase and decrease in the presence of carbamazepine, see below.
                        Thus, if a patient has been titrated to a stable dosage on Carbatrol®, and then begins a course of treatment with one of these CYP3A4 inducers, it is reasonable to expect that a dose increase for Carbatrol® may be necessary.
                        
                           Agents with Decreased Levels in the Presence of Carbamazepine due to Induction of Cytochrome P450 Enzymes:
                        
                        Carbamazepine is known to induce CYP1A2 and CYP3A4. Therefore, the potential exists for interaction between carbamazepine and any agent metabolized by one (or more) of these enzymes. Agents that have been found, or are expected to have decreased plasma levels in the presence of Carbatrol® due to induction of CYP enzymes are the following:
                        
                           Acetaminophen, alprazolam, amitriptyline, bupropion, buspirone, citalopram, clobazam, clonazepam, clozapine, cyclosporin, delavirdine, desipramine, diazepam, dicumarol, doxycycline, ethosuximide, felbamate, felodipine, glucocorticoids, haloperidol, itraconazole, lamotrigine, levothyroxine, lorazepam, methadone, midazolam, mirtazapine, nefazodone(7), nortriptyline, olanzapine, oral and other hormonal contraceptives(3), oxcarbazepine, phenytoin(4), praziquantel, protease inhibitors, quetiapine, risperidone, theophylline, topiramate, tiagabine, tramadol, triazolam, trazodone(5), valproate, warfarin(6), ziprasidone, and zonisamide.
                        
                        
                           (3)Concomitant use of Carbatrol® with hormonal contraceptive products (e.g., oral and levonorgestrel subdermal implant contraceptives) may render the contraceptives less effective because the plasma concentrations of the hormones may be decreased.  Breakthrough bleeding and unintended pregnancies have been reported with carbamazepine.  Alternative or back-up methods of contraception should be considered. 
                        
                           (4)Phenytoin has also been reported to increase in the presence of carbamazepine. Careful monitoring of phenytoin plasma levels following co-medication with carbamazepine is advised.
                        
                           (5)Following co-administration of carbamazepine 400mg/day with trazodone 100mg to 300mg daily, carbamazepine reduced trough plasma concentrations of trazodone (as well as meta-chlorophenylpiperazine [mCPP]) by 76 and 60% respectively, compared to precarbamazepine values.
                        
                           (6)Warfarin's anticoagulant effect can be reduced in the presence of carbamazepine.
                        
                           (7) Coadministration of carbamazepine and nefazodone may result in insufficient plasma concentrations of nefazodone and its active metabolite to achieve a therapeutic effect. Coadministration of carbamazepine with nefazodone is contraindicated (see 
                              CONTRAINDICATIONS
                           ).
                        Thus, if a patient has been titrated to a stable dosage on one of the agents in this category, and then begins a course of treatment with Carbatrol®, it is reasonable to expect that a dose increase for the concomitant agent may be necessary.
                        
                           Agents with Increased Levels in the Presence of Carbamazepine:
                        
                        Carbatrol® increases the plasma levels of the following agents:
                        
                           Clomipramine HCl, phenytoin(8), and primidone
                        
                        
                           (8)Phenytoin has also been reported to decrease in the presence of carbamazepine. Careful monitoring of phenytoin plasma levels following co-medication with carbamazepine is advised.
                        Thus, if a patient has been titrated to a stable dosage on one of the agents in this category, and then begins a course of the treatment with Carbatrol®, it is reasonable to expect that a dose decrease for the concomitant agent may be necessary.
                        
                           Pharmacological/Pharmacodynamic Interactions with Carbamazepine:
                        
                        Coadministration of Carbatrol® with delavirdine may lead to loss of virologic response and possible resistance to delavirdine or to the class of non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors (see 
                              CONTRAINDICATIONS
                           ).
                        Concomitant administration of carbamazepine and lithium may increase the risk of neurotoxic side effects.
                        Given the anticonvulsant properties of carbamazepine, Carbatrol® may reduce the thyroid function as has been reported with other anticonvulsants. Additionally, anti-malarial drugs, such as chloroquine and mefloquine, may antagonize the activity of carbamazepine.
                        Thus if a patient has been titrated to a stable dosage on one of the agents in this category, and then begins a course of treatment with Carbatrol®, it is reasonable to expect that a dose adjustment may be necessary.
                        Because of its primary CNS effect, caution should be used when Carbatrol® is taken with other centrally acting drugs and alcohol.
                     
                     
                  
               