
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  Mechanism of Action: Brimonidine Tartrate Ophthalmic Solution, 0.15% is an alpha-2 
adrenergic receptor agonist. It has a peak ocular hypotensive effect occurring 
at two hours post-dosing. Fluorophotometric studies in animals and humans 
suggest that brimonidine tartrate has a dual mechanism of action by reducing 
aqueous humor production and increasing uveoscleral outflow.
                  
                  
                  Pharmacokinetics: In a pharmacokinetic study, 14 healthy subjects (4 males and 
10 females) received a single topical ocular administration of Brimonidine 
Tartrate Ophthalmic Solution, 0.15%, one drop per eye. The peak plasma 
concentrations (Cmax) and AUC 
0-inf were 73 ± 19 pg/mL and 375 ± 89 pg•hr/mL, respectively. Tmax was 1.7 ± 0.7 hours after dosing. The systemic half-life 
was approximately 2.1 hours.
                  Brimonidine is metabolized primarily by the liver. In 
vitro metabolism data from human microsomal fractions and liver slices 
indicate that brimonidine undergoes extensive hepatic metabolism.
                  Urinary excretion is the major route of elimination of brimonidine and its 
metabolites. Approximately 87% of an orally administered radioactive dose of 
brimonidine was eliminated within 120 hours, with 74% of the radioactivity 
recovered in the urine.
                  
                     Special Populations
                  
                  Brimonidine Tartrate Ophthalmic Solution, 0.15% has not been studied in 
patients with hepatic or renal impairment. Because of the low systemic drug 
exposure following topical ocular administration of Brimonidine Tartrate 
Ophthalmic Solution, 0.15%, no dose adjustment is necessary when treating 
patients with hepatic or renal impairment.
                  
                  
                  Clinical Evaluations: Elevated IOP presents a major risk factor in glaucomatous field 
loss. The higher the level of IOP, the greater the likelihood of optic nerve 
damage and visual field loss. Brimonidine tartrate has the action of lowering 
intraocular pressure with minimal effect on cardiovascular and pulmonary 
parameters.
                  A clinical study was conducted to evaluate the safety and efficacy of 
Brimonidine Tartrate Ophthalmic Solution, 0.15% compared to Alphagan® P** 
administered three-times-daily in patients with open-angle glaucoma or ocular 
hypertension. The results indicated that Brimonidine Tartrate Ophthalmic 
Solution, 0.15% is equivalent in IOP-lowering effect to Alphagan® P (brimonidine 
tartrate ophthalmic solution), 0.15%, and effectively lowers IOP in patients 
with open-angle glaucoma or ocular hypertension by 2 - 6 mm Hg.
               
               
            
         