
                     
                     
                     Drug Interactions
                     
                        FUROSEMIDE TABLET may increase the ototoxic potential of aminoglycoside antibiotics, especially in the presence of impaired renal function. Except in life-threatening situations, avoid this combination.
                        FUROSEMIDE TABLET should not be used concomitantly with ethacrynic acid because of the possibility of ototoxicity. Patients receiving high doses of salicylates concomitantly with FUROSEMIDE TABLET, as in rheumatic disease, may experience salicylate toxicity at lower doses because of competitive renal excretory sites.
                        FUROSEMIDE TABLET has a tendency to antagonize the skeletal muscle relaxing effect of tubocurarine and may potentiate the action of succinylcholine.
                        Lithium generally should not be given with diuretics because they reduce lithium's renal clearance and add a high risk of lithium toxicity.
                        FUROSEMIDE TABLET may add to or potentiate the therapeutic effect of other antihypertensive drugs. Potentiation occurs with ganglionic or peripheral adrenergic blocking drugs.
                        FUROSEMIDE TABLET may decrease arterial responsiveness to norepinephrine. However, norepinephrine may still be used effectively.
                        Simultaneous administration of sucralfate and FUROSEMIDE TABLET may reduce the natriuretic and antihypertensive effects of FUROSEMIDE TABLET. Patients receiving both drugs should be observed closely to determine if the desired diuretic and/or antihypertensive effect of FUROSEMIDE TABLET is achieved. The intake of FUROSEMIDE TABLET and sucralfate should be separated by at least two hours.
                        One study in six subjects demonstrated that the combination of furosemide and acetylsalicylic acid temporarily reduced creatinine clearance in patients with chronic renal insufficiency. There are case reports of patients who developed increased BUN, serum creatinine and serum potassium levels, and weight gain when furosemide was used in conjunction with NSAIDs.
                        Literature reports indicate that coadministration of indomethacin may reduce the natriuretic and antihypertensive effects of FUROSEMIDE TABLET (furosemide) in some patients by inhibiting prostaglandin synthesis. Indomethacin may also affect plasma renin levels, aldosterone excretion, and renin profile evaluation. Patients receiving both indomethacin and FUROSEMIDE TABLET should be observed closely to determine if the desired diuretic and/or antihypertensive effect of FUROSEMIDE TABLET is achieved.
                     
                     
                  
               