
               
               
               DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
                  

                  

                  Many drugs affect thyroid hormone pharmacokinetics and metabolism 
(e.g., absorption, synthesis, secretion, catabolism, protein binding, and target 
tissue response) and may alter the therapeutic response to Levothyroxine sodium 
tablets, USP. In addition, thyroid hormones and thyroid status have varied 
effects on the pharmacokinetics and actions of other drugs. A listing of 
drug-thyroidal axis interactions is contained in Table 2.
                  The list of drug-thyroidal axis interactions in Table 2 may not be 
comprehensive due to the introduction of new drugs that interact with the 
thyroidal axis or the discovery of previously unknown interactions. The 
prescriber should be aware of this fact and should consult appropriate reference 
sources (e.g., package inserts of newly approved drugs, medical literature) for 
additional information if a drug-drug interaction with levothyroxine is 
suspected.
                  


                  



                  

                  
                     Oral anticoagulants- Levothyroxine increases the 
response to oral anticoagulant therapy. Therefore, a decrease in the dose of 
anticoagulant may be warranted with correction of the hypothyroid state or when 
the Levothyroxine sodium tablets, USP dose is increased. Prothrombin time should 
be closely monitored to permit appropriate and timely dosage adjustments (see 

                           Table 
2
                     ).
                  
                     Digitalis glycosides- The therapeutic effects of 
digitalis glycosides may be reduced by levothyroxine. Serum digitalis glycoside 
levels may be decreased when a hypothyroid patient becomes euthyroid, 
necessitating an increase in the dose of digitalis glycosides (see 
                           Table 
2
                     ).
                  
                  Drug-Food InteractionsConsumption of certain foods may affect levothyroxine absorption 
thereby necessitating adjustments in dosing. Soybean flour (infant formula), 
cotton seed meal, walnuts, and dietary fiber may bind and decrease the 
absorption of levothyroxine sodium from the GI tract.
                  

                  Drug-Laboratory Test InteractionsChanges in TBG concentration must be considered when interpreting 
T4 and T3 values, which 
necessitates measurement and evaluation of unbound (free) hormone and/or 
determination of the free-T4 index (FT4I). Pregnancy, infectious hepatitis, estrogens, 
estrogen-containing oral contraceptives, and acute intermittent porphyria 
increase TBG concentrations. Decreases in TBG concentrations are observed in 
nephrosis, severe hypoproteinemia, severe liver disease, acromegaly, and after 
androgen or corticosteroid therapy (see also 
                           Table 2
                     ). Familial 
hyper- or hypo-thyroxine binding globulinemias have been described, with the 
incidence of TBG deficiency approximating 1 in 9000.
                  
                  Carcinogenesis, Mutagenesis, and Impairment of 
FertilityAnimal studies have not been performed to evaluate the 
carcinogenic potential, mutagenic potential or effects on fertility of 
levothyroxine. The synthetic T4 in Levothyroxine sodium 
tablets, USP is identical to that produced naturally by the human thyroid gland. 
Although there has been a reported association between prolonged thyroid hormone 
therapy and breast cancer, this has not been confirmed. Patients receiving 
Levothyroxine sodium tablets, USP for appropriate clinical indications should be 
titrated to the lowest effective replacement dose.
                  
                     

                  
                  
                  
               
               
            
         