
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Palonosetron is a 5-HT3 receptor antagonist with a strong binding affinity for this receptor and little or no affinity for other receptors.
                         Cancer chemotherapy may be associated with a high incidence of nausea and vomiting, particularly when certain agents, such as cisplatin, are used. 5- HT3 receptors are located on the nerve terminals of the vagus in the periphery and centrally in the chemoreceptor trigger zone of the area postrema. It is thought that chemotherapeutic agents produce nausea and vomiting by releasing serotonin from the enterochromaffin cells of the small intestine and that the released serotonin then activates 5-HT3 receptors located on vagal afferents to initiate the vomiting reflex.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        In non-clinical studies palonosetron possesses the ability to block ion channels involved in ventricular de- and re-polarization and to prolong action potential duration.
                        The effect of palonosetron on QTc interval was evaluated in a double blind, randomized, parallel, placebo and positive (moxifloxicin) controlled trial in adult men and women. The objective was to evaluate the ECG effects of intravenously administered palonosetron at single doses of 0.25 mg, 0.75 mg or 2.25 mg in 221 healthy subjects. The study demonstrated no significant effect on any ECG interval including QTc duration (cardiac repolarization) at doses up to 2.25 mg.
                        Clinical trials revealed that oral palonosetron had comparable effects on blood pressure, heart rate, and ECG parameters as intravenous palonosetron.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        
                           Absorption
                        
                        Following oral administration, palonosetron is well absorbed with its absolute bioavailability reaching 97%. After single oral doses using buffered solution mean maximum palonosetron concentrations (Cmax) and area under the concentration-time curve (AUC0-∞) were dose proportional over the dose range of 3.0 to 80 µg/kg in healthy subjects.
                        In 36 healthy male and female subjects given a single oral dose of ALOXI Capsules 0.5 mg, maximum plasma palonosetron concentration (Cmax) was 0.81±1.66 ng/mL (mean ± SD) and time to maximum concentration (Tmax) was 5.1± 1.7 hours. In female subjects (n=18), the mean AUC was 35% higher and the mean Cmax was 26% higher than in male subjects (n=18).
                        In 12 cancer patients given a single oral dose of palonosetron 0.5 mg one hour prior to chemotherapy, Cmax was 0.93±0.34 ng/mL and Tmax was 5.1± 5.9 hours. The AUC was 30% higher in cancer patients than in healthy subjects. The mean PK parameters after a single oral dose of 0.5 mg palonosetron are compared between healthy subjects and cancer patients (Table 2).
                        


                        



                           1 a cross-study comparison
                        A high fat meal did not affect the Cmax and AUC of oral palonosetron. Therefore, ALOXI Capsules may be taken without regard to meals.
                        
                           Distribution

                           Palonosetron has a volume of distribution of approximately 8.3 ± 2.5 L/kg. Approximately 62% of palonosetron is bound to plasma proteins.
                        
                           Metabolism

                           Palonosetron is eliminated by multiple routes with approximately 50% metabolized to form two primary metabolites: N-oxide-palonosetron and 6-S- hydroxy-palonosetron. These metabolites each have less than 1% of the 5-HT3 receptor antagonist activity of palonosetron. In vitro metabolism studies have suggested that CYP2D6 and to a lesser extent, CYP3A4 and CYP1A2 are involved in the metabolism of palonosetron. However, clinical pharmacokinetic parameters are not significantly different between poor and extensive metabolizers of CYP2D6 substrates.
                        
                           Elimination

                           Following administration of a single oral 0.75 mg dose of [14C]- palonosetron to six healthy subjects, 85% to 93% of the total radioactivity was excreted in urine, and 5% to 8% was eliminated in feces. The amount of unchanged palonosetron excreted in the urine represented approximately 40% of the administered dose. In healthy subjects given ALOXI Capsules 0.5 mg, the terminal elimination half-life (t½) of palonosetron was 37 ± 12 hours (mean ± SD), and in cancer patients, t½ was 48 ± 19 hours. After a single- dose of approximately 0.75 mg intravenous palonosetron, the total body clearance of palonosetron in healthy subjects was 160 ± 35 mL/h/kg (mean ± SD) and renal clearance was 66.5 ± 18.2 mL/h/kg.
                        
                           Special Populations
                        
                        
                           [see USE IN SPECIFIC POPULATIONS (8.5-8.9)]
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         