
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        In MRI, visualization of normal and pathological tissue depends in part on variations in the radiofrequency signal intensity that occurs with:
                        
                           
                              •Differences in proton density
                           
                              •Differences of the spin-lattice or longitudinal relaxation times (T1)
                           
                              •Differences in the spin-spin or transverse relaxation time (T2)
                        
                        When placed in a magnetic field, Gadavist shortens the T1 and T2 relaxation times. The extent of decrease of T1 and T2 relaxation times, and therefore the amount of signal enhancement obtained from Gadavist, is based upon several factors including the concentration of Gadavist in the tissue, the field strength of the MRI system, and the relative ratio of the longitudinal and transverse relaxation times. At the recommended dose, the T1 shortening effect is observed with greatest sensitivity in T1-weighted magnetic resonance sequences. In T2*-weighted sequences the induction of local magnetic field inhomogeneities by the large magnetic moment of gadolinium and at high concentrations (during bolus injection) leads to a signal decrease. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        Gadavist leads to distinct shortening of the relaxation times even in low concentrations. At pH 7, 37°C and 1.5 T, the relaxivity (r1) - determined from the influence on the relaxation times (T1) of protons in plasma - is 5.2 L/(mmol·sec) and the relaxivity (r2) - determined from the influence on the relaxation times (T2) - is 6.1 L/(mmol·sec). These relaxivities display only slight dependence on the strength of the magnetic field. The T1 shortening effect of paramagnetic contrast agents is dependent on concentration and r1 relaxivity (see Table 3). This may improve tissue visualization. 
                        


                        


 r1 relaxivity in plasma at 37°C  
                        Compared to 0.5 molar gadolinium-based contrast agents, the higher concentration of Gadavist results in half the volume of administration and a more compact contrast bolus.
                        Gadavist is a highly water-soluble, extremely hydrophilic compound with a partition coefficient between n-butanol and buffer at pH 7.6 of about 0.006. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Distribution
                           
                              After intravenous administration, gadobutrol is rapidly distributed in the extracellular space. After a gadobutrol dose of 0.1 mmol/kg body weight, an average level of 0.59 mmol gadobutrol/L was measured in plasma 2 minutes after the injection and 0.3 mmol gadobutrol/L 60 minutes after the injection. Gadobutrol does not display any particular protein binding. In rats, gadobutrol does not penetrate the intact blood-brain barrier. 
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Metabolism
                           
                              Gadobutrol is not metabolized. 
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Elimination
                           
                              Values for AUC, body weight normalized plasma clearance and half-life are given in Table 4, below.
                              Gadobutrol is excreted in an unchanged form via the kidneys. In healthy subjects, renal clearance of gadobutrol is 1.1 to 1.7 mL/(min∙kg) and thus comparable to the renal clearance of inulin, confirming that gadobutrol is eliminated by glomerular filtration.
                              Within two hours after intravenous administration more than 50% and within 12 hours more than 90% of the given dose is eliminated via the urine. Extra-renal elimination is negligible. 
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Specific Populations
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    Gender
                                 
                                 
                                    Gender has no clinically relevant effect on the pharmacokinetics of gadobutrol. 
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    Geriatric
                                 
                                 
                                    A single IV dose of 0.1 mmol/kg Gadavist was administered to 15 elderly and 16 non-elderly subjects. AUC was slightly higher and clearance slightly lower in elderly subjects as compared to non-elderly subjects [see Use in Specific Populations (8.5)]. 
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    Pediatric
                                 
                                 
                                    The pharmacokinetics of gadobutrol were evaluated in two studies in a total of 130 patients age 2 to less than 18 years and in 43 patients less than 2 years of age (including term neonates). Patients received a single intravenous dose of 0.1 mmol/kg of Gadavist. The pharmacokinetic profile of gadobutrol in pediatric patients is similar to that in adults, resulting in similar values for AUC, body weight normalized plasma clearance, as well as elimination half-life. Approximately 99% (median value) of the dose was recovered in urine within 6 hours (this information was derived from the 2 to less than 18 year old age group). 
                                    


                                 



                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    Renal Impairment
                                 
                                 
                                    In patients with impaired renal function, the serum half-life of gadobutrol is prolonged and correlated with the reduction in creatinine clearance. 
                                    After intravenous injection of 0.1 mmol gadobutrol/kg body weight, the elimination half-life was 5.8 ± 2.4 hours in mild to moderately impaired patients (80 > CLCR > 30 mL/min) and 17.6 ± 6.2 hours in severely impaired patients not on dialysis (CLCR < 30 mL/min). The mean AUC of gadobutrol in patients with normal renal function was 1.1 ± 0.1 mmol∙h/L, compared to 4.0 ± 1.8 mmol∙h/L in patients with mild to moderate renal impairment and 11.5 ± 4.3 mmol∙h/L in patients with severe renal impairment.
                                    Complete recovery in the urine was seen in patients with mild or moderate renal impairment within 72 hours. In patients with severely impaired renal function about 80% of the administered dose was recovered in the urine within 5 days. 
                                    For patients receiving hemodialysis, physicians may consider the prompt initiation of hemodialysis following the administration of Gadavist in order to enhance the contrast agent’s elimination. Sixty-eight percent (68%) of gadobutrol is removed from the body after the first dialysis, 94% after the second dialysis, and 98% after the third dialysis session. [See Warnings and Precautions (5.1) and Use in Specific Populations (8.6).]
                                    
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         