
               
               
               
                  CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
                  Pharmacodynamics
                  Benign Prostatic Hyperplasia (BPH)Benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH) is a common cause of urinary 
outflow obstruction in aging males. Severe BPH may lead to urinary retention and 
renal damage. A static and a dynamic component contribute to the symptoms and 
reduced urinary flow rate associated with BPH. The static component is related 
to an increase in prostate size caused, in part, by a proliferation of smooth 
muscle cells in the prostatic stroma. However, the severity of BPH symptoms and 
the degree of urethral obstruction do not correlate well with the size of the 
prostate. The dynamic component of BPH is associated with an increase in smooth 
muscle tone in the prostate and bladder neck. The degree of tone in this area is 
mediated by the alpha1 adrenoceptor, which is present in 
high density in the prostatic stroma, prostatic capsule and bladder neck. 
Blockade of the alpha1 receptor decreases urethral 
resistance and may relieve the obstruction and BPH symptoms. In the human 
prostate, doxazosin antagonizes phenylephrine (alpha1 
agonist)-induced contractions,in vitro, and binds 
with high affinity to the alpha1c adrenoceptor. The 
receptor subtype is thought to be the predominant functional type in the 
prostate. Doxazosin acts within 1 to 2 weeks to decrease the severity of BPH 
symptoms and improve urinary flow rate. Since alpha1 
adrenoceptors are of low density in the urinary bladder (apart from the bladder 
neck), doxazosin should maintain bladder contractility.
                  

                  In BPH patients (N = 450) treated for up to 2 years in open-label studies, 
doxazosin therapy resulted in significant improvement above baseline in urinary 
flow rates and BPH symptoms. The significant effects of doxazosin were 
maintained over the entire treatment period.
                  Although blockade of alpha1 adrenoceptors also lowers 
blood pressure in hypertensive patients with increased peripheral vascular 
resistance, doxazosin treatment of normotensive men with BPH did not result in a 
clinically significant blood pressure lowering effect (Table 2). The proportion 
of normotensive patients with a sitting systolic blood pressure less than 90 
mmHg and/or diastolic blood pressure less than 60 mmHg at any time during 
treatment with doxazosin 1 to 8 mg once daily was 6.7% with doxazosin and not 
significantly different (statistically) from that with placebo (5%).
                  HypertensionThe mechanism of action of doxazosin mesylate is selective 
blockade of the alpha1 (postjunctional) subtype of 
adrenergic receptors. Studies in normal human subjects have shown that doxazosin 
competitively antagonized the pressor effects of phenylephrine (an alpha1 agonist) and the systolic pressor effect of norepinephrine. 
Doxazosin and prazosin have similar abilities to antagonize phenylephrine. The 
antihypertensive effect of doxazosin results from a decrease in systemic 
vascular resistance. The parent compound doxazosin is primarily responsible for 
the antihypertensive activity. The low plasma concentrations of known active and 
inactive metabolites of doxazosin (2-piperazinyl, 6'- and 7'-hydroxy and 6- and 
7-O-desmethyl compounds) compared to parent drug indicate that the contribution 
of even the most potent compound (6'-hydroxy) to the antihypertensive effect of 
doxazosin in man is probably small. The 6'- and 7'-hydroxy metabolites have 
demonstrated antioxidant properties at concentrations of 5 mcM, in vitro.
                  Administration of doxazosin results in a reduction in systemic vascular 
resistance. In patients with hypertension there is little change in cardiac 
output. Maximum reductions in blood pressure usually occur 2 to 6 hours after 
dosing and are associated with a small increase in standing heart rate. Like 
other alpha1-adrenergic blocking agents, doxazosin has a 
greater effect on blood pressure and heart rate in the standing position.
                  In a pooled analysis of placebo-controlled hypertension studies with about 
300 hypertensive patients per treatment group, doxazosin, at doses of 1 to 16 mg 
given once daily, lowered blood pressure at 24 hours by about 10/8 mmHg compared 
to placebo in the standing position and about 9/5 mmHg in the supine position. 
Peak blood pressure effects (1 to 6 hours) were larger by about 50 to 75% (i.e., 
trough values were about 55 to 70% of peak effect), with the larger peak-trough 
differences seen in systolic pressures. There was no apparent difference in the 
blood pressure response of caucasians and blacks or of patients above and below 
age 65. In these predominantly normocholesterolemic patients doxazosin produced 
small reductions in total serum cholesterol (2 to 3%), LDL cholesterol (4%), and 
a similarly small increase in HDL/total cholesterol ratio (4%). The clinical 
significance of these findings is uncertain. In the same patient population, 
patients receiving doxazosin gained a mean of 0.6 kg compared to a mean loss of 
0.1 kg for placebo patients.
                  
                  PharmacokineticsAfter oral administration of therapeutic doses, peak plasma 
levels of doxazosin mesylate occur at about 2 to 3 hours. Bioavailability is 
approximately 65%, reflecting first pass metabolism of doxazosin by the liver. 
The effect of food on the pharmacokinetics of doxazosin was examined in a 
crossover study with 12 hypertensive subjects. Reductions of 18% in mean maximum 
plasma concentration and 12% in the area under the concentration-time curve 
occurred when doxazosin was administered with food. Neither of these differences 
was statistically or clinically significant.
                  Doxazosin is extensively metabolized in the liver, mainly by O-demethylation 
of the quinazoline nucleus or hydroxylation of the benzodioxan moiety. Although 
several active metabolites of doxazosin have been identified, the 
pharmacokinetics of these metabolites have not been characterized. In a study of 
two subjects administered radiolabelled doxazosin 2 mg orally and 1 mg 
intravenously on two separate occasions, approximately 63% of the dose was 
eliminated in the feces and 9% of the dose was found in the urine. On average 
only 4.8% of the dose was excreted as unchanged drug in the feces and only a 
trace of the total radioactivity in the urine was attributed to unchanged drug. 
At the plasma concentrations achieved by therapeutic doses approximately 98% of 
the circulating drug is bound to plasma proteins.
                  Plasma elimination of doxazosin is biphasic, with a terminal elimination 
half-life of about 22 hours. Steady-state studies in hypertensive patients given 
doxazosin doses of 2 to 16 mg once daily showed linear kinetics and dose 
proportionality. In two studies, following the administration of 2 mg orally 
once daily, the mean accumulation ratios (steady-state AUC vs. first dose AUC) 
were 1.2 and 1.7. Enterohepatic recycling is suggested by secondary peaking of 
plasma doxazosin concentrations.
                  In a crossover study in 24 normotensive subjects, the pharmacokinetics and 
safety of doxazosin were shown to be similar with morning and evening dosing 
regimens. The area under the curve after morning dosing was, however, 11% less 
than that after evening dosing and the time to peak concentration after evening 
dosing occurred significantly later than that after morning dosing (5.6 hr vs. 
3.5 hr).
                  

               
               
            
         