
                     
                     
                     Drug interactions
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           ACE inhibitors
                           
                              Concomitant administration of ACE inhibitors with potassium-sparing diuretics has been associated with severe hyperkalemia.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Alcohol, barbiturates, or narcotics
                           
                              Potentiation of orthostatic hypotension may occur.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Antidiabetic drugs (e.g., oral agents, insulin)
                           
                              Dosage adjustment of the antidiabetic drug may be required.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Corticosteroids, ACTH
                           
                              Intensified electrolyte depletion, particularly hypokalemia, may occur.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Pressor amines (e.g., norepinephrine)
                           
                              Both spironolactone and hydrochlorothiazide reduce the vascular responsiveness to norepinephrine. Therefore, caution should be exercised in the management of patients subjected to regional or general anesthesia while they are being treated with spironolactone and hydrochlorothiazide tablets.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Skeletal muscle relaxants, nondepolarizing (e.g., tubocurarine)
                           
                              Possible increased responsiveness to the muscle relaxant may result.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Lithium
                           
                              Lithium generally should not be given with diuretics. Diuretic agents reduce the renal clearance of lithium and add a high risk of lithium toxicity.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs)
                           
                              In some patients, the administration of an NSAID can reduce the diuretic, natriuretic, and antihypertensive effects of loop, potassium-sparing, and thiazide diuretics. Combination of NSAIDs, eg, indomethacin, with potassium-sparing diuretics has been associated with severe hyperkalemia. Therefore, when spironolactone and hydrochlorothiazide tablets and NSAIDs are used concomitantly, the patient should be observed closely to determine if the desired effect of the diuretic is obtained.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Digoxin
                           
                              Spironolactone has been shown to increase the half-life of digoxin. This may result in increased serum digoxin levels and subsequent digitalis toxicity. It may be necessary to reduce the maintenance and digitalization doses when spironolactone is administered, and the patient should be carefully monitored to avoid over- or underdigitalization.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               