
                     
                     
                     Drug-Drug Interactions

                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Substrates of Microsomal Enzymes:  In vitro studies indicated that at concentrations exceeding those associated with efficacy, memantine does not induce the cytochrome P450 isozymes CYP1A2, CYP2C9, CYP2E1 and CYP3A4/5.  In addition, in vitro studies have shown that memantine produces minimal inhibition of CYP450 enzymes CYP1A2, CYP2A6, CYP2C9, CYP2D6, CYP2E1, and CYP3A4. These data indicate that no pharmacokinetic interactions with drugs metabolized by these enzymes are expected.

                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Inhibitors of Microsomal Enzymes: Since memantine undergoes minimal metabolism, with the majority of the dose excreted unchanged in urine, an interaction between memantine and drugs that are inhibitors of  CYP450 enzymes is unlikely. Coadministration of Namenda with the AChE inhibitor donepezil HCl does not affect the pharmacokinetics of either compound.

                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Drugs Eliminated via Renal Mechanisms: Memantine is eliminated in part by tubular secretion. In vivo studies have shown that multiple doses of the diuretic hydrochlorothiazide/triamterene (HCTZ/TA) did not affect the AUC of memantine at steady state.  Memantine did not affect the bioavailability of TA, and decreased AUC and Cmax of HCTZ by about 20%.  Coadministration of memantine with the antihyperglycemic drug Glucovance® (glyburide and metformin HCl) did not affect the pharmacokinetics of memantine, metformin and glyburide. Memantine did not modify the serum glucose lowering effects of Glucovance®, indicating the absence of a pharmacodynamic interaction.

                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Drugs that make the urine alkaline: The clearance of memantine was reduced by about 80% under alkaline urine conditions at pH 8. Therefore, alterations of urine pH towards the alkaline state may lead to an accumulation of the drug with a possible increase in adverse effects. Drugs that alkalinize the urine (e.g. carbonic anhydrase inhibitors, sodium bicarbonate) would be expected to reduce renal elimination of memantine.

                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Drugs highly bound to plasma proteins:  Because the plasma protein binding of memantine is low (45%), an interaction with drugs that are highly bound to plasma proteins, such as warfarin and digoxin, is unlikely.

                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               