
                     
                     
                     
                     
                        Drug Interactions
                        When given concurrently the following drugs may interact
                                    with thiazide diuretics.
                        
                           Alcohol, barbiturates, or
                                            narcotics - potentiation of orthostatic hypotension may
                                    occur.
                        
                           Antidiabetic drugs (oral agents and insulin) - dosage adjustment
                                    of the antidiabetic drug may be required.
                        
                           Other antihypertensive
                                            drugs - additive effect or potentiation.
                        
                           Cholestyramine and colestipol
                                            resins - Both cholestyramine and colestipol resins have the
                                    potential of binding thiazide diuretics and reducing diuretic
                                    absorption from the gastrointestinal tract.
                        
                           Corticosteroids,
                                            ACTH - intensified electrolyte depletion, particularly
                                    hypokalemia.
                        
                           Pressor amines (e.g.,
                                            norepinephrine) - possible decreased response to pressor amines but
                                    not sufficient to preclude their use.
                        
                           Skeletal muscle relaxants,
                                            nondepolarizing (e.g., tubocurarine) -
                                        possible increased responsiveness to the muscle
                                    relaxant.
                        
                           Lithium - generally should not be given with diuretics.
                                    Diuretic agents reduce the renal clearance of lithium and add a
                                    high risk of lithium toxicity. Refer to the package insert for
                                    lithium preparations before use of such preparations with
                                    DIURIL.
                        
                           Non-steroidal
                                            Anti-inflammatory Drugs Including Selective
                                            Cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) Inhibitors - In some patients, the administration of a
                                    non-steroidal anti-inflammatory agent including a selective
                                    COX-2 inhibitor can reduce the diuretic, natriuretic, and
                                    antihypertensive effects of loop, potassium-sparing and thiazide
                                    diuretics. Therefore, when DIURIL and non-steroidal
                                    anti-inflammatory agents or selective COX-2 inhibitors are used
                                    concomitantly, the patient should be observed closely to
                                    determine if the desired effect of the diuretic is
                                    obtained.
                        In some patients with compromised renal function (e.g.,
                                    elderly patients or patients who are volume-depleted, including
                                    those on diuretic therapy) who are being treated with
                                    non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, including selective COX-2
                                    inhibitors, the co-administration of angiotensin II receptor
                                    antagonists or ACE inhibitors may result in a further
                                    deterioration of renal function, including possible acute renal
                                    failure. These effects are usually reversible.
                        These interactions should be considered in patients
                                    taking NSAIDs including selective COX-2 inhibitors concomitantly
                                    with diuretics and angiotensin II antagonists or ACE inhibitors.
                                    Therefore, the combination should be administered with caution,
                                    especially in the elderly.
                     
                     
                  
               