
               
               
               
                  7
                    
                  DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  Focalin XR should not be used in patients being treated (currently or within the preceding two weeks) with MAO Inhibitors [see Contraindications
                      
                     (4.
                     5
                     )].
                  Because of possible effects on blood pressure, Focalin XR should be used cautiously with pressor agents. 
                  Methylphenidate may decrease the effectiveness of drugs used to treat hypertension. 
                  Dexmethylphenidate is metabolized primarily to d-ritalinic acid by de-esterification and not through oxidative pathways.
                  The effects of gastrointestinal pH alterations on the absorption of dexmethylphenidate from Focalin XR have not been studied. Since the modified release characteristics of Focalin XR are pH dependent, the coadministration of antacids or acid suppressants could alter the release of dexmethylphenidate.
                  Human pharmacologic studies have shown that racemic methylphenidate may inhibit the metabolism of coumarin anticoagulants, anticonvulsants (e.g., phenobarbital, phenytoin, primidone), and tricyclic drugs (e.g., imipramine, clomipramine, desipramine). Downward dose adjustments of these drugs may be required when given concomitantly with methylphenidate. It may be necessary to adjust the dosage and monitor plasma drug concentration (or, in the case of coumarin, coagulation times), when initiating or discontinuing methylphenidate. 
               
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           Focalin XR should not be used in patients being treated (currently or within the preceding two weeks) with MAO Inhibitors (4.5)

                           
                           Focalin XR should be used cautiously with pressor agents (7)

                           
                           Antacids or acid suppressants could alter the release of Focalin XR (7)

                           
                           Racemic methylphenidate may inhibit the metabolism of coumarin anticoagulants, anticonvulsants, and tricyclic drugs (7)
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         