


Drug/Drug Interactions 






Reserpine 
MAO inhibitors should be avoided or used with extreme caution.     
	Reserpine should be used cautiously with digitalis and quinidine, since cardiac arrhythmias have occurred with rauwolfia preparations.     
	Concurrent use of tricyclic antidepressants may decrease the antihypertensive effect of reserpine (see CONTRAINDICATIONS).     
	Concurrent use of reserpine and direct or indirect-acting sympathomimetics should be closely monitored. The action of direct-acting amines (epinephrine, isoproterenol, phenylephrine, metaraminol) may be prolonged when given to patients taking reserpine. The action of indirect-acting amines (ephedrine, tyramine, amphetamines) is inhibited. 







Hydralazine
MAO inhibitors should be used with caution in patients receiving hydralazine. When other potent parenteral antihypertensive drugs, such as diazoxide, are used in combination with hydralazine, patients should be continuously observed for several hours for any excessive fall in blood pressure. Profound hypotensive episodes may occur when diazoxide injections and hydralazine are used concomitantly.







Hydrochlorothiazide
Hypokalemia can sensitize or exaggerate the response of the heart to the toxic effects of digitalis (e.g., increased ventricular irritability).     
	Hypokalemia may develop during concomitant use of steroids or ACTH. Insulin requirements in diabetic patients may be increased, decreased, or unchanged.     
	Thiazides may decrease arterial responsiveness to norepinephrine, but not enough to preclude effectiveness of the pressor agent for therapeutic use.     
	Thiazides may increase the responsiveness to tubocurarine.      
	Lithium renal clearance is reduced by thiazides, increasing the risk of lithium toxicity.      
	There have been rare reports in the literature of hemolytic anemia occurring with the concomitant use of hydrochlorothiazide and methyldopa.     
	Concurrent administration of some nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory agents may reduce the diuretic, natriuretic and antihypertensive effects of thiazide diuretics.     
	Cholestyramine and colestipol resins: Absorption of hydrochlorothiazide is impaired in the presence of anionic exchange resins. Single doses of either cholestyramine or colestipol resins bind the hydrochlorothiazide and reduce its absorption from the gastrointestinal tract by up to 85% and 43%, respectively. 




