
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY

               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action

                     
                        The primary mode of action of Suclear is the osmotic effect of the unabsorbed polyethylene glycol (PEG) and sulfate salts. Sulfate salts provide sulfate anions, which are poorly absorbed.  The osmotic effect of unabsorbed sulfate anions and the associated cations causes water to be retained within the gastrointestinal tract.

                        PEG is also a largely unabsorbed osmotic agent which causes water to be retained within the gastrointestinal tract.

                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics

                     
                        The osmotic effect of the unabsorbed PEG or sulfate ions, when ingested, produces a copious watery diarrhea.

                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics

                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Oral sulfates:  Following oral administration of oral sulfate solution, approximately 20% of dose undergoes systemic absorption, with the remainder of the dose excreted in feces.  Renal elimination appears to be the predominant route of clearance for absorbed sulfate.  After administration of Suclear (only the 6-oz bottle of sulfate salts) to six healthy volunteers, the time at which serum sulfate reached its highest point (Tmax) was approximately 5.5 hours after the first dose of sulfates. Serum sulfate levels declined with a half-life of 8.5 hours.

                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              PEG3350:  The pharmacokinetics of PEG3350 following administration of Suclear were not assessed.  Available pharmacokinetic information for oral PEG3350 suggests that it is poorly absorbed, primarily excreted in feces, and, to the extent it is absorbed it is eliminated in urine.

                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Pharmacokinetic Studies in Patients with Hepatic Impairment or Renal Impairment
                              
                              The disposition of sulfate after ingestion of one 6-oz bottle of the Suclear sulfate solution was studied in patients (N=6) with mild-moderate hepatic impairment [Child-Pugh grades A (n = 5) and B (n = 1)] and in patients (N=6) with moderate renal impairment (creatinine clearance of 30 to 49 mL/min).  Following administration of one 6-oz dose of sulfates, the renal impairment group had the highest serum sulfate levels, followed by the hepatic impairment group, and then by healthy subjects.  Renal impairment resulted in 43% higher mean Cmax than healthy subjects. Urinary excretion of sulfate over 30 hours in subjects who received two 6-oz doses of sulfates was similar between hepatic patients and normal volunteers, but was approximately 16% lower in moderate renal impairment patients than in healthy volunteers. The mean sulfate levels of all three groups returned to their respective baseline levels by Day 6 after dose initiation.

                              PK for PEG3350 at the recommended dose was not assessed in patients with organ impairment.

                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         