
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Gadopentetate dimeglumine is a paramagnetic agent and, as such, it develops a magnetic moment when placed in a magnetic field.  The relatively large magnetic moment produced by the paramagnetic agent results in a relatively large local magnetic field, which can enhance the relaxation rates of water protons in the vicinity of the paramagnetic agent.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        In magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), visualization of normal and pathological brain tissue depends in part on variations in the radiofrequency signal intensity that occur with 1) changes in proton density; 2) alteration of the spin-lattice or longitudinal relaxation time (T1); and 3) variation of the spin-spin or transverse relaxation time (T2).  When placed in a magnetic field, gadopentetate dimeglumine decreases the T1 and T2 relaxation time in tissues where it accumulates.  At usual doses, the effect is primarily on the T1 relaxation time.
                        Gadopentetate dimeglumine does not cross the intact blood-brain barrier and, therefore, does not accumulate in normal brain or in lesions that do not have an abnormal blood-brain barrier, e.g., cysts, mature post-operative scars, etc.  However, disruption of the blood-brain barrier or abnormal vascularity allows accumulation of gadopentetate dimeglumine in lesions such as neoplasms, abscesses, and subacute infarcts.  The pharmacokinetic parameters of Magnevist in various lesions are not known.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        The pharmacokinetics of intravenously administered gadopentetate dimeglumine in normal subjects conforms to a two compartment open-model with mean distribution and elimination half-lives (reported as mean ± SD) of about 0.2 ± 0.13 hours and 1.6 ± 0.13 hours, respectively.
                        Upon injection, the meglumine salt is completely dissociated from the gadopentetate dimeglumine complex.  Gadopentetate is exclusively eliminated in the urine with 83 ± 14% (mean ± SD) of the dose excreted within 6 hours and 91 ± 13% (mean ± SD) by 24 hours, post-injection.  There was no detectable biotransformation or decomposition of gadopentetate dimeglumine.
                        The renal and plasma clearance rates (1.76 ± 0.39 mL/min/kg and 1.94 ± 0.28 mL/min/kg, respectively) of gadopentetate are essentially identical, indicating no alteration in elimination kinetics on passage through the kidneys and that the drug is essentially cleared through the kidney.  The volume of distribution (266 ± 43 mL/kg) is equal to that of extracellular water and clearance is similar to that of substances which are subject to glomerular filtration.
                        
                           In vitro laboratory results indicate that gadopentetate does not bind to human plasma protein.  In vivo protein binding studies have not been done.
                        
                           Renal Impairment
                        
                        Gadopentetate dimeglumine is excreted via the kidneys, even in patients with impaired renal function.  In patients with impaired renal function, the serum half-life of gadopentetate dimeglumine is prolonged.  Mean serum elimination half-lives of a single intravenous dose of gadopentetate dimeglumine (0.1 mmol/kg) were 2.6 ± 1.2 h, 4.2 ± 2.0 h and 10.8 ± 6.9 h, for mildly (creatinine clearance, CLCR = 60 to < 90 mL/min), moderately (CLCR = 30 to < 60 mL/min) and severely (CLCR = < 30 mL/min) impaired patients, respectively, as compared with 1.6 ± 0.1 h in healthy subjects.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         