
               
               
               
7 DRUG INTERACTIONS

               
               
                  
                     
                        Cytochrome (CYP) 3A4 inhibitors, epoxide hydrolase inhibitors, CYP3A4 inducers, drugs metabolized by CYP1A2 or CYP3A4 (oral contraceptives, delavirdine, nefazodone), phenytoin, CNS depressants, lithium, chloroquine, mefloquine (7.1, 7.2, 7.3)
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
7.1 Pharmacokinetic Effects of other Drugs on EQUETRO

                     
                        
                           Drugs that Inhibit Cytochrome P450 3A4 (CYP3A4)
                        
                        EQUETRO is metabolized primarily by CYP3A4 to the active carbamazepine-10,11-epoxide, which is further metabolized to the trans-diol by epoxide hydrolase. Inhibitors of CYP 3A4 and/or epoxide hydrolase can increase plasma levels of EQUETRO and its active metabolites, increasing plasma concentrations of EQUETRO and the risk of adverse reactions. It may be necessary to reduce the EQUETRO dose if used concomitantly with inhibitors of CYP3A4 and/or epoxide hydrolase. The following drugs are CYP3A4 inhibitors:
                        
                           Acetazolamide, azole antifungals, cimetidine, clarithromycin, dalfopristin, danazol, delavirdine, diltiazem, erythromycin, fluoxetine, fluvoxamine, grapefruit juice, isoniazid, itraconazole, ketoconazole, loratadine, nefazodone, niacinamide, nicotinamide, protease inhibitors, propoxyphene, quinine, quinupristin, troleandomycin, valproate, verapamil, zileuton.
                        
                        
                           Drugs that Inhibit Epoxide Hydrolase and CYP3A4
                        
                        Clarithromycin, erythromycin, and valproate also inhibit epoxide hydrolase, resulting in increased levels of the active metabolite carbamazepine-10,11-epoxide.
                        
                           Drugs that Induce CYP3A4
                        
                        CYP3A4 inducers can decrease serum concentrations of EQUETRO and decrease its effectiveness. It may be necessary to increase the dose of EQUETRO if used concomitantly with a CYP3A4 inducer. Such drugs include the following:
                        
                           Cisplatin, doxorubicin, felbamate, rifampin, phenobarbital, phenytoin, primidone, methsuximide, and theophylline.
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
7.2 Pharmacokinetic Effects of EQUETRO on other Drugs

                     
                        
                           EQUETRO decreases the concentrations of the following drugs through induction of their metabolism:
                        
                           Oral Contraceptives (CYP3A4 Substrates)
                        
                        EQUETRO is a strong inducer of CYP3A4. EQUETRO can increase the metabolism of certain oral contraceptives (through CYP3A4 induction), leading to significantly lower concentrations. This can cause contraceptive failure or breakthrough bleeding. Consider alternatives to oral contraceptives that are significantly affected by induction of CYP3A4; or consider alternatives to EQUETRO.
                        
                           Delavirdine and other Non-Nucleoside Reverse Transcriptase Inhibitors (CYP3A4 Substrates)
                        
                        Through induction of CYP3A4, EQUETRO increases the metabolism of delavirdine and other non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors and significantly reduces the plasma concentrations of these drugs. This can cause inadequate antiviral activity, loss of virologic response, and possible resistance to delavirdine or other non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors. Therefore, the use of EQUETRO with non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors is contraindicated [see Contraindications (4) and Warnings and Precautions (5.9)]
                        
                        
                           Nefazodone (CYP3A4 Substrate)
                        
                        The use of EQUETRO is contraindicated with the use of nefazodone because the concomitant use may result in insufficient plasma concentrations of nefazodone and its active metabolite to achieve a therapeutic effect of nefazodone.
                        
                           Warfarin (CYP1A2 and CYP3A4 Substrate)
                        
                        Through induction of CYP1A2 and CYP3A4, EQUETRO decreases the concentration of warfarin and decreases it's anticoagulant effectiveness.
                        
                           Other CYP1A2 and CYP3A4 Substrates
                        
                        EQUETRO induces CYP1A2 and CYP3A4, leading to decreased concentrations of drugs metabolized by CYP3A4 or CYP1A2. It may be necessary to increase the doses of such drugs when used concomitantly with EQUETRO. Drugs metabolized by CYP3A4 or CYP1A2 include the following:
                        Acetaminophen, alprazolam, amitriptyline, bupropion, buspirone, citalopram, clobazam, clonazepam, clozapine, cyclosporin, delavirdine, desipramine, diazepam, dicumarol, doxycycline, ethosuximide, felbamate, felodipine, glucocorticoids, haloperidol, itraconazole, lamotrigine, levothyroxine, lorazepam, methadone, midazolam, mirtazapine, nefazodone, nortriptyline, olanzapine, oral contraceptives, oxcarbazepine, phenytoin, praziquantel, protease inhibitors, quetiapine, risperidone, theophylline, topiramate, tiagabine, tramadol, triazolam, trazodone, valproate, warfarin , ziprasidone, and zonisamide.
                        
                           EQUETRO increases the plasma levels of the following drugs by inhibition of their metabolism:
                        
                           Clomipramine, Phenytoin, and Primidone
                        
                        EQUETRO can increase the concentrations of clomipramine, phenytoin, and primidone. If a patient has been titrated to a stable dosage on one of these agents in this category, and then begins treatment with EQUETRO, it may be necessary to decrease the dose of these drugs.
                        
                           Phenytoin
                        
                        Phenytoin levels have been reported to increase or decrease in the presence of carbamazepine. There are multiple pharmacokinetic mechanisms for changes in phenytoin levels when used concomitantly with EQUETRO. Monitor phenytoin serum levels carefully when used concomitantly with EQUETRO.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
7.3 Pharmacodynamic Drug Interactions

                     
                        
                           Monoamine Oxidase Inhibitors
                        
                        Concomitant treatment with EQUETRO is contraindicated during use of an MAOI or within 14 days after discontinuing an MAOI. Concomitant use can cause serotonin syndrome.
                        
                           Lithium
                        
                        Concomitant administration of EQUETRO and lithium can increase the risk of neurotoxic adverse reactions. Consider reducing the dose of lithium or EQUETRO when using these drugs concomitantly.
                        
                           CNS Depressants
                        
                        The concomitant use of EQUETRO and other CNS depressants can increase the risk of respiratory depression, profound sedation, hypotension, and syncope. CNS depressants include: alcohol, opioid analgesics, benzodiazepines, tricyclic antidepressants, sedative/hypnotics, anticonvulsants, antipsychotics, antihistamines, anticholinergics, alpha and beta blockers, general anesthetics, muscle relaxants, and illicit CNS depressants. Consider reducing the dose of CNS depressants or EQUETRO when using these drugs concomitantly.
                        
                           Chloroquine and Mefloquine
                        
                        The anti-malarial drugs chloroquine and mefloquine can antagonize the activity of EQUETRO.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         