
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY:
               
                  After intramuscular administration of gentamicin sulfate, peak serum concentrations usually occur between 30 and 60 minutes and serum levels are measurable for 6 to 8 hours.  In infants, a single dose of 2.5 mg/kg usually provides a peak serum level in the range of 3 to 5 mcg/mL.  When gentamicin is administered by intravenous infusion over a two-hour period, the serum concentrations are similar to those obtained by intramuscular administration.  Age markedly affects the peak concentrations: in one report, a 1 mg/kg dose produced mean peak concentrations of 1.58, 2.03, and 2.81 mcg/mL in patients six months to five years old, 5 to 10 years old, and over 10 years old, respectively.
                  In infants one week to six months of age, the half-life is 3 to 3 ½ hours.  In full-term and large premature infants less than one week old, the approximate serum half-life of gentamicin is 5 ½ hours.  In small premature infants, the half-life is inversely related to birth weight.  In premature infants weighing less than 1,500 grams, the half-life is 11 ½ hours; in those weighing 1,500 to 2,000 grams, the half-life is eight hours; in those weighing over 2,000 grams, the half-life is approximately five hours.  While some variation is to be expected due to a number of variables such as age, body temperature, surface area and physiologic differences, the individual patient given the same dose tends to have similar levels in repeated determinations.
                  Gentamicin, like all aminoglycosides, may accumulate in the serum and tissues of patients treated with higher doses and/or for prolonged periods, particularly in the presence of impaired or immature renal function.  In patients with immature or impaired renal function, gentamicin is cleared from the body more slowly than in patients with normal renal function.  The more severe the impairment, the slower the clearance.  (Dosage must be adjusted.)
                  Since gentamicin is distributed in extracellular fluid, peak serum concentrations may be lower than usual in patients who have a large volume of this fluid.  Serum concentrations of gentamicin in febrile patients may be lower than those in afebrile patients given the same dose.  When body temperature returns to normal, serum concentrations of the drug may rise.  Febrile and anemic states may be associated with a shorter than usual serum half-life.  (Dosage adjustment is usually not necessary.)  In severely burned patients, the half-life may be significantly decreased and resulting serum concentrations may be lower than anticipated from the mg/kg dose.
                  Protein-binding studies have indicated that the degree of gentamicin binding is low, depending upon the methods used for testing, this may be between 0 and 30%.
                  In neonates less than three days old, approximately 10% of the administered dose is excreted in 12 hours; in infants 5 to 40 days old, approximately 40% is excreted over the same period.  Excretion of gentamicin correlates with postnatal age and creatinine clearance.  Thus, with increasing postnatal age and concomitant increase in renal maturity, gentamicin is excreted more rapidly.  Little, if any, metabolic transformation occurs; the drug is excreted principally by glomerular filtration.  After several days of treatment, the amount of gentamicin excreted in the urine approaches, but does not equal, the daily dose administered.  As with other aminoglycosides, a small amount of the gentamicin dose may be retained in the tissues, especially in the kidneys.  Minute quantities of aminoglycosides have been detected in the urine of some patients weeks after drug administration was discontinued.  Renal clearance of gentamicin is similar to that of endogenous creatinine.
                  In patients with marked impairment of renal function, there is a decrease in the concentration of aminoglycosides in urine and in their penetration into defective renal parenchyma.  This decreased drug excretion, together with the potential nephrotoxicity of aminoglycosides, should be considered when treating such patients who have urinary tract infections.
                  Probenecid does not affect renal tubular transport of gentamicin.
                  The endogenous creatinine clearance rate and the serum creatinine level have a high correlation with the half-life of gentamicin in serum.  Results of these tests may serve as guides for adjusting dosage in patients with renal impairment (see 
                        DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION
                     ).
                  Following parenteral administration, gentamicin can be detected in serum, lymph, tissues, sputum, and in pleural, synovial, and peritoneal fluids.  Concentrations in renal cortex sometimes may be eight times higher than the usual serum levels.  Concentrations in bile, in general, have been low and have suggested minimal biliary excretion.  Gentamicin crosses the peritoneal as well as the placental membranes.  Since aminoglycosides diffuse poorly into the subarachnoid space after parenteral administration, concentrations of gentamicin in cerebrospinal fluid are often low and dependent upon dose, rate of penetration, and degree of meningeal inflammation.  There is minimal penetration of gentamicin into ocular tissues following intramuscular or intravenous administration.
               
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Microbiology
                     
                        
                           Mechanism of Action
                        
                        Gentamicin, an aminoglycoside, binds to the prokaryotic ribosome, inhibiting protein synthesis in susceptible bacteria.  It is bactericidal in vitro against Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria.
                        
                           
                        
                        
                           Drug Resistance
                        
                        Bacterial resistance to gentamicin is generally developed slowly.  Bacteria resistant to one aminoglycoside may be resistant to one or more other aminoglycosides.  The following bacteria are usually resistant to the aminoglycosides, including gentamicin: most streptococcal species (including Streptococcus pneumoniae and the Group D streptococci), most enterococcal species (including Enterococcus faecalis, E. faecium, and E. durans), and anaerobic organisms, such as Bacteroides species and Clostridium species.
Aminoglycosides are known to be not effective against Salmonella and Shigella species in patients.  Therefore, in vitro susceptibility test results should not be reported.
                        
                           Interactions with Other Antimicrobials
                        
                        
                           In vitro studies show that an aminoglycoside combined with an antibiotic that interferes with cell wall synthesis may act synergistically against some enterococcal strains. The combination of gentamicin and penicillin G has a synergistic bactericidal effect against strains of Enterococcus faecalis, E. faecium and E. durans.  An enhanced killing effect against many of these strains has also been shown in vitro with combinations of gentamicin and ampicillin, carbenicillin, nafcillin or oxacillin.
                        The combined effect of gentamicin and carbenicillin is synergistic for many strains of Pseudomonas aeruginosa.  In vitro synergism against other Gram-negative organisms has been shown with combinations of gentamicin and cephalosporins.  
                        Gentamicin may be active against clinical isolates of bacteria resistant to other aminoglycosides.
                        
                           Antibacterial Activity
                        
                        Gentamicin has been shown to be active against most of the following bacteria, both in vitro and in clinical infections (see 
                              INDICATIONS AND USAGE
                           ).
                        
                           Gram-Positive Bacteria
                        
                        
                           Staphylococcus species
                        
                           Gram-Negative Bacteria 
                        
                        
                           Citrobacter species
                        
                           Enterobacter species
                        
                           Escherichia  coli
                        
                        
                           Klebsiella species
                        
                           Proteus species
                        
                           Serratia species
                        
                           Pseudomonas aeruginosa
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Susceptibility Test Methods
                     
                        When available, the clinical microbiology laboratory should provide cumulative results of the
                           in vitro susceptibility tests for antimicrobial drugs used in local hospitals and practice areas to the physician as periodic reports that describe the susceptibility profile of nosocomial and community-acquired pathogens.  These reports should aid the physician in selecting the most effective antimicrobial.
                              
                           
                        
                        Dilution Technique 
                        Quantitative methods are used to determine antimicrobial minimal inhibitory concentrations (MICs).  These MICs provide estimates of the susceptibility of bacteria to antimicrobial compounds.  The MICs should be determined using a standardized test method.1, 3 Standardized procedures are based on a dilution method(broth or agar) or equivalent with standardized inoculum concentrations and standardized concentrations of gentamicin powder.  The MIC values should be interpreted according to the criteria provided in Table 1.
                        Diffusion Technique 
                        Quantitative methods that require measurement of zone diameters also provide reproducible estimates of the susceptibility of bacteria to antimicrobial compounds.  One such standardized procedure requires the use of standardized inoculum concentrations and paper disks impregnated with 10 mcg of gentamicin. 2, 3  The disk diffusion values should be interpreted according to the criteria provided in Table 1.
                        
                           Table 1: Susceptibility Interpretive Criteria for Gentamicin
                        
                        

                        


                        


     S = Susceptible, I = Intermediate, R = Resistant
                            aFor Salmonella and Shigella spp., aminoglycosides may appear active in vitro but are not 
                              effective clinically; the results should not be reported as susceptible
                            bFor staphylococci that test susceptible, aminoglycosides are used only in combination with 
                              other active agents that test susceptible
                        A report of “Susceptible” indicates that the antimicrobial is likely to inhibit growth of the pathogen if the antimicrobial compound reaches the concentration at the infection site necessary to inhibit growth of the pathogen.  A report of “Intermediate” indicates that the result should be considered equivocal, and if the microorganism is not fully susceptible to alternative clinically feasible drugs, the test should be repeated.  This category implies possible clinical applicability in body sites where the drug is physiologically concentrated.  This category also provides a buffer zone that prevents small uncontrolled technical factors from causing major discrepancies in interpretation.  A report of “Resistant” indicates that the antimicrobial is not likely to inhibit growth of the pathogen if the antimicrobial compound reaches the concentrations usually achievable at the infection site; other therapy should be selected.
                        
                           Quality Control
                        
                        Standardized susceptibility test procedures require the use of laboratory controls to monitor and ensure the accuracy and precision of the supplies and reagents used in the assay, and the techniques of the individuals performing the test.1, 2, 3 Standard gentamicin powder should provide the following range of MIC values provided in Table 2.  For the diffusion technique using the 10-mcg gentamicin disk the criteria provided in Table 2 should be achieved. 
                        

                        
                           Table 2:  Acceptable Quality Control Ranges for Susceptibility Testing
                           
                        
                        


                        


Note: For control organisms for gentamicin high-level aminoglycoside screen tests for enterococci, see Table 2D Supplemental Table 1 in CLSI document M100-S233
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         