
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  Cefepime is an antibacterial agent belonging to the cephalosporin class of antibacterials with in vitro antibacterial activity against facultative Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria.
               
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Cefepime is an antibacterial drug. [See Microbiology (12.4)] 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        Similar to other beta-lactam antimicrobial agents, the time that the unbound plasma concentration of cefepime exceeds the MIC of the infecting organism has been shown to best correlate with efficacy in animal models of infection. However, the pharmacokinetic/pharmacodynamic relationship for cefepime has not been evaluated in patients.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        The average plasma concentrations of cefepime observed in healthy adult male volunteers (n=9) at various times following single 30-minute intravenous infusions of cefepime 500 mg, 1 g, and 2 g are summarized in Table 6. Elimination of cefepime is principally via renal excretion with an average (±SD) half-life of 2 (±0.3) hours and total body clearance of 120 (±8) mL/min in healthy volunteers. Cefepime pharmacokinetics are linear over the range 250 mg to 2 g. There is no evidence of accumulation in healthy adult male volunteers (n=7) receiving clinically relevant doses for a period of 9 days.
                        


                     



                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Distribution
                              
                              The average steady-state volume of distribution of cefepime is 18.0 (±2.0) L. The serum protein binding of cefepime is approximately 20% and is independent of its concentration in serum.
                              Cefepime is excreted in human milk. A nursing infant consuming approximately 1000 mL of human milk per day would receive approximately 0.5 mg of cefepime per day [see Use in Specific Populations (8.3)].
                              Concentrations of cefepime achieved in specific tissues and body fluids are listed in Table 7.
                              


                              


Data suggest that cefepime does cross the inflamed blood-brain barrier. The clinical relevance of these data is uncertain at this time.
                              
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Metabolism and Excretion
                              
                              Cefepime is metabolized to N-methylpyrrolidine (NMP), which is rapidly converted to the N-oxide (NMP-N-oxide). Urinary recovery of unchanged cefepime accounts for approximately 85% of the administered dose. Less than 1% of the administered dose is recovered from urine as NMP, 6.8% as NMP-N-oxide, and 2.5% as an epimer of cefepime. Because renal excretion is a significant pathway of elimination, patients with renal dysfunction and patients undergoing hemodialysis require dosage adjustment [see Dosage and Administration (2)].
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Specific Populations
                              
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Patients with Renal Impairment
                                    
                                    Cefepime pharmacokinetics have been investigated in patients with various degrees of renal impairment (n=30). The average half-life in patients requiring hemodialysis was 13.5 (±2.7) hours and in patients requiring continuous peritoneal dialysis was 19 (±2.0) hours. Cefepime total body clearance decreased proportionally with creatinine clearance in patients with abnormal renal function, which serves as the basis for dosage adjustment recommendations in this group of patients [see Dosage and Administration (2)].
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Patients with Hepatic Impairment
                                    
                                    The pharmacokinetics of cefepime were unaltered in patients with hepatic impairment who received a single 1 g dose (n=11).
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Geriatric Patients
                                    
                                    Cefepime pharmacokinetics have been investigated in elderly (65 years of age and older) men (n=12) and women (n=12) whose mean (SD) creatinine clearance was 74.0 (±15.0) mL/min. There appeared to be a decrease in cefepime total body clearance as a function of creatinine clearance. Therefore, dosage administration of cefepime in the elderly should be adjusted as appropriate if the patient’s creatinine clearance is 60 mL/min or less [see Dosage and Administration (2)]. 
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Pediatric Patients
                                    
                                    Cefepime pharmacokinetics have been evaluated in pediatric patients from 2 months to 11 years of age following single and multiple doses on every 8 hours (n=29) and every 12 hours (n=13) schedules. Following a single intravenous dose, total body clearance and the steady-state volume of distribution averaged 3.3 (±1.0) mL/min/kg and 0.3 (±0.1) L/kg, respectively. The urinary recovery of unchanged cefepime was 60.4 (±30.4)% of the administered dose, and the average renal clearance was 2.0 (±1.1) mL/min/kg. There were no significant effects of age or gender (25 male vs. 17 female) on total body clearance or volume of distribution, corrected for body weight. No accumulation was seen when cefepime was given at 50 mg per kg every 12 hours (n=13), while Cmax, AUC, and t1/2 were increased about 15% at steady state after 50 mg per kg every 8 hours. The exposure to cefepime following a 50 mg per kg intravenous dose in a pediatric patient is comparable to that in an adult treated with a 2 g intravenous dose.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.4 Microbiology
                     
                        Mechanism of Action
                        Cefepime is a bactericidal agent that acts by inhibition of bacterial cell wall synthesis. Cefepime has a broad spectrum of in vitro activity that encompasses a wide range of Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria. Cefepime has a low affinity for chromosomally-encoded beta-lactamases. Cefepime is highly resistant to hydrolysis by most beta-lactamases and exhibits rapid penetration into Gram-negative bacterial cells. Within bacterial cells, the molecular targets of cefepime are the penicillin binding proteins (PBP). 
                        Cefepime has been shown to be active against most isolates of the following microorganisms, both in vitro and in clinical infections as described in the INDICATIONS AND USAGE section.
                        Gram-negative bacteria 
                        
                             Enterobacter spp.
                         Escherichia coli
                        
                         Klebsiella pneumoniae
                        
                         Proteus mirabilis
                        
                         Pseudomonas aeruginosa
                        
                        Gram-positive bacteria
                         Staphylococcus aureus (methicillin-susceptible isolates only)
                         Streptococcus pneumoniae
                        
                         Streptococcus pyogenes (Lancefield’s Group A streptococci)
                         Viridans group streptococci
                        The following in vitro data are available, 
                              but their clinical significance is unknown
                           . At least 90 percent of the following bacteria exhibit an in vitro minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) less than or equal to the susceptible breakpoint for cefepime.  However, the efficacy of cefepime in treating clinical infections due to these bacteria has not been established in adequate and well-controlled clinical trials.
                        Gram-positive bacteria
                         Staphylococcus epidermidis (methicillin-susceptible isolates only)
                         Staphylococcus saprophyticus
                        
                         Streptococcus agalactiae (Lancefield’s Group B streptococci)
                        NOTE: Most isolates of enterococci, eg, Enterococcus faecalis, and methicillin-resistant staphylococci are resistant to cefepime.
                        Gram-negative bacteria
                         Acinetobacter calcoaceticus subsp. lwoffii
                        
                         Citrobacter diversus
                        
                         Citrobacter freundii
                        
                         Enterobacter agglomerans
                        
                         Haemophilus influenzae
                        
                         Hafnia alvei
                        
                         Klebsiella oxytoca
                        
                         Moraxella catarrhalis
                        
                         Morganella morganii
                        
                         Proteus vulgaris
                        
                         Providencia rettgeri
                        
                         Providencia stuartii
                        
                         Serratia marcescens
                        
                        NOTE: Cefepime is inactive against many isolates of Stenotrophomonas (formerly Xanthomonas maltophilia and Pseudomonas maltophilia). 
                        
                           Susceptibility Test Methods
                        
                        When available, the clinical microbiology laboratory should provide the results of in vitro susceptibility test results for antimicrobial drug products used in resident hospitals to the physician as periodic reports that describe the susceptibility profile of nosocomial and community-acquired pathogens.  These reports should aid the physician in selecting an antibacterial drug product for treatment.
                        
                           Dilution techniques
                        
                        Quantitative methods are used to determine antimicrobial minimum inhibitory concentrations (MICs). These MICs provide estimates of the susceptibility of bacteria to antimicrobial compounds.  The MICs should be determined using a standardized test method2 (broth and/or agar).  The MIC should be interpreted according to criteria provided in Table 8.
                        
                           Diffusion techniques
                        
                        Quantitative methods that require the measurement of zone diameters can also provide reproducible estimates of the susceptibility of bacteria to antimicrobial compounds.  The zone size provides an estimate of the susceptibility of bacteria to antimicrobial compounds.  The zone size should be determined using a standardized test method.2,3  This procedure uses paper discs impregnated with 30 mcg cefepime to test the susceptibility of microorganisms to cefepime.  The disc diffusion interpretive criteria are provided in Table 8.
                        


                        


Susceptibility of staphylococci to cefepime may be deduced from testing only penicillin and either cefoxitin or oxacillin.
                        A report of Susceptible indicates that the antimicrobial is likely to inhibit growth of the pathogen if the antimicrobial compound reaches the concentrations at the infection site necessary to inhibit growth of the pathogen.  A report of Intermediate indicates that the results should be considered equivocal, and, if the microorganism is not fully susceptible to alternative, clinically feasible drugs, the test should be repeated.  This category implies possible clinical applicability in body sites where the drug product is physiologically concentrated or in situations where a high dosage of the drug can be used.  This category also provides a buffer zone that prevents small uncontrolled technical factors from causing major discrepancies in interpretation.  A report of Resistant indicates that the antimicrobial is not likely to inhibit growth of the pathogen if the antimicrobial compound reaches the concentrations usually achievable at the infection site; other therapy should be selected.
                        
                           Quality Control
                        
                        Standardized susceptibility test procedures require the use of laboratory controls to monitor and ensure the accuracy and precision of supplies and reagents used in the assay, and the techniques of the individual performing the test. 2,3 Standard cefepime powder should provide the following range of MIC values noted in Table 8. For the diffusion technique using the 30 mcg disc, the criteria in Table 9 should be achieved. 
                        


