
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
                  
                     See also Dosage and Administration (2), Warnings and Precautions (5.1), and Clinical Pharmacology (12.3).
                  
               
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           CYP3A Inducers:  Can lower the concentrations of elvitegravir leading to loss of therapeutic effect.  (7.1)
                           Protease inhibitors and ritonavir: May increase concentration of drugs metabolized by CYP3A. (7.2)
                           Consult full prescribing information prior to and during treatment for potential drug-drug interactions. (5.1, 7, 12.3)
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1	Effect of Concomitant Drugs on the Pharmacokinetics of Elvitegravir
                     
                        Elvitegravir is metabolized by CYP3A. Drugs that induce CYP3A activity are expected to increase the clearance of elvitegravir, as well as ritonavir. This may result in decreased plasma concentrations of elvitegravir and/or a concomitantly administered protease inhibitor and lead to loss of therapeutic effect and to possible resistance. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2	Established and Other Potentially Significant Interactions
                     
                        Table 4 provides dosing recommendations as a result of potentially clinically significant drug interactions with VITEKTA. These recommendations are based on either drug-drug interaction studies or predicted interactions due to the expected magnitude of interaction and potential for serious adverse events or loss of therapeutic effect. 
                        For additional drug-drug interactions related to protease inhibitors coadministered with ritonavir, consult the prescribing information of the coadministered protease inhibitor and ritonavir. 
                        The table is not all-inclusive [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3), Tables 6
                           –
                              7]
                           .
                        
                        


                     



                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3 	Drugs without Clinically Significant Interactions with Elvitegravir
                     
                        Based on drug interaction studies conducted with elvitegravir, no clinically significant drug interactions have been either observed or expected when elvitegravir is combined with the following drugs: abacavir, darunavir, emtricitabine, etravirine, fosamprenavir, maraviroc, stavudine, tipranavir, tenofovir disoproxil fumarate, zidovudine; H2-receptor antagonists such as famotidine; proton-pump inhibitors such as omeprazole; and the HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors atorvastatin, pravastatin, and rosuvastatin.
                        When any of the above drugs are used concomitantly with VITEKTA in combination with a protease inhibitor coadministered with ritonavir, consult the prescribing information of the protease inhibitor for dosing recommendation for these drugs.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         