
                     
                     
                     
                        Drug Interactions

                     
                     
                        Since nicardipine hydrochloride injection may be administered to patients already being treated with other medications, including other antihypertensive agents, careful monitoring of these patients is necessary to detect and promptly treat any undesired effects from concomitant administration.
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                              Beta-Blockers

                           
                           
                              In most patients, nicardipine hydrochloride injection can safely be used concomitantly with beta-blockers. However, caution should be exercised when using nicardipine hydrochloride injection in combination with a beta-blocker in congestive heart failure patients (see WARNINGS).
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                              Cimetidine

                           
                           
                              Cimetidine has been shown to increase nicardipine plasma concentrations with nicardipine hydrochloride capsule administration. Patients receiving the two drugs concomitantly should be carefully monitored. Data with other histamine-2 antagonists are not available.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                              Digoxin

                           
                           
                              Studies have shown that nicardipine hydrochloride capsules usually do not alter digoxin plasma concentrations. However, as a precaution, digoxin levels should be evaluated when concomitant therapy with nicardipine hydrochloride injection is initiated.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                              Fentanyl Anesthesia

                           
                           
                              Hypotension has been reported during fentanyl anesthesia with concomitant use of a beta-blocker and a calcium channel blocker. Even though such interactions were not seen during clinical studies with nicardipine hydrochloride injection, an increased volume of circulating fluids might be required if such an interaction were to occur.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                              Cyclosporine

                           
                           
                              Concomitant administration of nicardipine hydrochloride capsules and cyclosporine results in elevated plasma cyclosporine levels. Plasma concentrations of cyclosporine should therefore be closely monitored during nicardipine hydrochloride injection administration, and the dose of cyclosporine reduced accordingly.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                              In Vitro Interaction

                           
                           
                              The plasma protein binding of nicardipine was not altered when therapeutic concentrations of furosemide, propranolol, dipyridamole, warfarin, quinidine, or naproxen were added to human plasma in vitro.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               