
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  Hyperlyte® CR provides a source of intra- and extracellular electrolytes in suitable amounts, to help maintain normal cellular metabolism during total parenteral nutrition (TPN) and other parenteral therapy in adults. Use of properly diluted Hyperlyte® CR meets most adult daily electrolyte requirements and provides adjunctive therapy for replenishment of depleted electrolyte stores.
                  Sodium, the major cation of the extracellular fluid, functions primarily in the control of water distribution, fluid balance, and osmotic pressure of body fluids. Sodium is also associated with chloride and bicarbonate in the regulation of the acid-base equilibrium of body fluid.
                  Potassium is the chief cation of body cells (160 mEq/liter of intracellular water) and is concerned with the maintenance of body fluid composition and electrolyte balance. Potassium participates in carbohydrate utilization and protein synthesis, and is critical in the regulation of nerve conduction and muscle contraction, particularly in the heart.
                  Chloride, the major extracellular anion, closely follows the metabolism of sodium, and changes in the acid-base balance of the body are reflected by changes in the chloride concentration.
                  Calcium, an important cation, provides the framework of bones and teeth in the form of calcium phosphate and calcium carbonate. In the ionized form, calcium is essential for the functional mechanism of the clotting of blood, normal cardiac function, and regulation of neuromuscular irritability.
                  Magnesium, a principal cation of soft tissue, is primarily involved in enzyme activity associated with the metabolism of carbohydrates and protein. Magnesium is also involved in neuromuscular irritability.
                  Acetate is an organic ion which is a hydrogen ion acceptor, contributes bicarbonate during its metabolism to carbon dioxide and water, and serves as an alkalinizing agent.
               
               
            
         