
                     
                     
                     Drug Interactions
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           Cholestyramine
                           
                              Cholestyramine has been reported to reduce intestinal absorption of fat-soluble vitamins; as such it may impair intestinal absorption of calcitriol (see 
                                    WARNINGS 
                                 and 
                                    PRECAUTIONS: General).
                              
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           Phenytoin/Phenobarbital
                           
                              The coadministration of phenytoin or phenobarbital will not affect plasma concentrations of calcitriol, but may reduce endogenous plasma levels of 25(OH)D3 by accelerating metabolism. Since blood level of calcitriol will be reduced, higher doses of calcitriol may be necessary if these drugs are administered simultaneously.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           Thiazides
                           
                              Thiazides are known to induce hypercalcemia by the reduction of calcium excretion in urine. Some reports have shown that the concomitant administration of thiazides with calcitriol causes hypercalcemia. Therefore, precaution should be taken when coadministration is necessary.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           Digitalis
                           
                              Calcitriol dosage must be determined with care in patients undergoing treatment with digitalis, as hypercalcemia in such patients may precipitate cardiac arrhythmias (see 
                                    PRECAUTIONS: General
                                 ).
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           Ketoconazole
                           
                              Ketoconazole may inhibit both synthetic and catabolic enzymes of calcitriol. Reductions in serum endogenous calcitriol concentrations have been observed following the administration of 300 mg/day to 1200 mg/day ketoconazole for a week to healthy men. However, in vivo drug interaction studies of ketoconazole with calcitriol have not been investigated.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           Corticosteroids
                           
                              A relationship of functional antagonism exists between vitamin D analogues, which promote calcium absorption, and corticosteroids, which inhibit calcium absorption.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           Phosphate-Binding Agents
                           
                              Since calcitriol also has an effect on phosphate transport in the intestine, kidneys and bones, the dosage of phosphate-binding agents must be adjusted in accordance with the serum phosphate concentration.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           Vitamin D
                           
                              Since calcitriol is the most potent active metabolite of vitamin D3, pharmacological doses of vitamin D and its derivatives should be withheld during treatment with calcitriol to avoid possible additive effects and hypercalcemia (see 
                                    WARNINGS). 
                              
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           Calcium Supplements
                           
                              Uncontrolled intake of additional calcium-containing preparations should be avoided (see 
                                    PRECAUTIONS: General).
                              
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           Magnesium
                           
                              Magnesium-containing preparations (eg, antacids) may cause hypermagnesemia and should therefore not be taken during therapy with calcitriol by patients on chronic renal dialysis.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               