
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              Atazanavir: Do not co-administer with atazanavir. (7.1)
                           
                              Drugs with pH-Dependent Absorption: May interfere with the absorption of drugs where gastric pH is important for bioavailability. (7.1)
                           
                              Warfarin: Concomitant warfarin use may require monitoring for increases in INR and prothrombin time. (7.2)
                           
                              Tacrolimus: Concomitant tacrolimus use may increase tacrolimus whole blood concentrations. (7.3)
                           
                              Theophylline: Titration of theophylline dosage may be required when concomitant PREVACID use is started or stopped. (7.4)
                           
                              Methotrexate: PREVACID may increase serum levels of methotrexate. (7.6)
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 Drugs with pH-Dependent Absorption Kinetics
                     
                        PREVACID causes long-lasting inhibition of gastric acid secretion. PREVACID and other PPIs are likely to substantially decrease the systemic concentrations of the HIV protease inhibitor atazanavir, which is dependent upon the presence of gastric acid for absorption, and may result in a loss of therapeutic effect of atazanavir and the development of HIV resistance. Therefore, PREVACID and other PPIs should not be co-administered with atazanavir [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                        
                        PREVACID and other PPIs may interfere with the absorption of other drugs where gastric pH is an important determinant of oral bioavailability (e.g., ampicillin esters, digoxin, iron salts, ketoconazole) [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 Warfarin
                     
                        In a study of healthy subjects, co-administration of single or multiple 60 mg doses of PREVACID and warfarin did not affect the pharmacokinetics of warfarin nor prothrombin time [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)]. However, there have been reports of increased INR and prothrombin time in patients receiving PPIs and warfarin concomitantly. Increases in INR and prothrombin time may lead to abnormal bleeding and even death. Patients treated with PPIs and warfarin concomitantly may need to be monitored for increases in INR and prothrombin time [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3 Tacrolimus
                     
                        Concomitant administration of lansoprazole and tacrolimus may increase whole blood levels of tacrolimus, especially in transplant patients who are intermediate or poor metabolizers of CYP2C19.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4 Theophylline
                     
                        A minor increase (10%) in the clearance of theophylline was observed following the administration of PREVACID concomitantly with theophylline. Although the magnitude of the effect on theophylline clearance is small, individual patients may require additional titration of their theophylline dosage when PREVACID is started or stopped to ensure clinically effective blood levels [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.5 Clopidogrel
                     
                        Concomitant administration of lansoprazole and clopidogrel in healthy subjects had no clinically important effect on exposure to the active metabolite of clopidogrel or clopidogrel-induced platelet inhibition [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)]. No dose adjustment of clopidogrel is necessary when administered with an approved dose of PREVACID.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.6 Methotrexate
                     
                        Case reports, published population pharmacokinetic studies, and retrospective analyses suggest that concomitant administration of PPIs and methotrexate (primarily at high dose; see methotrexate prescribing information) may elevate and prolong serum levels of methotrexate and/or its metabolite hydroxymethotrexate.  However, no formal drug interaction studies of high dose methotrexate with PPIs have been conducted [see Warnings and Precautions (5.4)].
                        
                         In a study of rheumatoid arthritis patients receiving low-dose methotrexate, PREVACID and naproxen, no effect on pharmacokinetics of methotrexate was observed see
                               clinical Pharmacology (12.3)]
                           .
                        For information on drug interactions for amoxicillin or clarithromycin, refer to their full prescribing information, DRUG INTERACTIONS sections.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         