
               
               
               7. DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
                  No clinically significant adverse interactions with commonly used preanesthetic drugs, or drugs used during anesthesia (muscle relaxants, intravenous agents, and local anesthetic agents) were reported in clinical trials. The effect of desflurane on the disposition of other drugs has not been determined. Similar to isoflurane, desflurane does not predispose to premature ventricular arrhythmias in the presence of exogenously infused epinephrine in swine.
               
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           Concomitant use of N2O, benzodiazepines and/or opioids reduces the MAC of Suprane (desflurane, USP). Adjust dose accordingly. (7.1, 7.3)
                           Suprane (desflurane, USP) decreases the doses of neuromuscular blocking agents required. Adjust dose accordingly. (7.2)
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 Benzodiazepines and Opioids (MAC Reduction)
                     
                        Benzodiazepines and opioids decrease the amount of desflurane (MAC) needed to produce anesthesia. This effect is shown in Table 3 for intravenous midazolam (25-50 ug/kg) and intravenous fentanyl (3-6 ug/kg) in patients of two different age groups.
                        
                           
                        
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           Table3
                           
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 Neuromuscular Blocking Agents
                     
                        Anesthetic concentrations of desflurane at equilibrium (administered for 15 or more minutes before testing) reduced the ED95 of succinylcholine by approximately 30% and that of atracurium and pancuronium by approximately 50% compared to N2O/opioid anesthesia ﻿(see Table 4). ﻿The effect of desflurane on duration of nondepolarizing neuromuscular blockade has not been studied.
                        
                           
                        
                        Dosage reduction of neuromuscular blocking agents during induction of anesthesia may result in delayed onset of conditions suitable for endotracheal intubation or inadequate muscle relaxation, because potentiation of neuromuscular blocking agents requires equilibration of muscle with the delivered partial pressure of desflurane.
                        Among nondepolarizing drugs, pancuronium, atracurium, and vecuronium interactions have been studied. In the absence of specific guidelines:
                        
                           For endotracheal intubation, do not reduce the dose of nondepolarizing muscle relaxants or succinylcholine.
                           During maintenance of anesthesia, the dose of nondepolarizing muscle relaxants is likely to be reduced compared to that during N2O/opioid anesthesia. Administration of supplemental doses of muscle relaxants should be guided by the response to nerve stimulation.
                        
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           Table4
                           
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3 Concomitant Use with N2O
                     
                        Concomitant administration of N2O reduces the MAC of SUPRANE (desflurane, USP) 
                              ﻿[see Dosage and Administration (2), Table 1].
                           
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         