
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  Flumazenil, an imidazobenzodiazepine derivative, antagonizes the 
actions of benzodiazepines on the central nervous system. Flumazenil 
competitively inhibits the activity at the benzodiazepine recognition site on 
the GABA/benzodiazepine receptor complex. Flumazenil is a weak partial agonist 
in some animal models of activity, but has little or no agonist activity in 
man.
                  Flumazenil does not antagonize the central nervous system effects of drugs 
affecting GABA-ergic neurons by means other than the benzodiazepine receptor 
(including ethanol, barbiturates, or general anesthetics) and does not reverse 
the effects of opioids.
                  In animals pretreated with high doses of benzodiazepines over several weeks, 
flumanzenil elicited symptoms of benzodiazepines withdrawal, including seizures. 
A similar effect was seen in adult human subjects.
                  
                  
                  PharmacodynamicsIntravenous flumazenil has been shown to antagonize sedation, 
impairment of recall, psychomotor impairment and ventilatory depression produced 
by benzodiazepines in healthy human volunteers.
                  The duration and degree of reversal of sedative benzodiazepine effects are 
related to the dose and plasma concentrations of flumazenil as shown in the 
following data from a study in normal volunteers.
                  
                  
                  Generally, doses of approximately 0.1 mg to 0.2 mg (corresponding to peak 
plasma levels of 3 to 6 ng/mL) produce partial antagonism, whereas higher doses 
of 0.4 to 1 mg (peak plasma levels of 12to 28 ng/mL) usually produce complete 
antagonism in patients who have received the usual sedating doses of 
benzodiazepines. The onset of reversal is usually evident within 1 to 2 minutes 
after the injection is completed. Eighty percent response will be reached within 
3 minutes, with the peak effect occurring at 6 to 10 minutes. The duration and 
degree of reversal are related to the plasma concentration of the sedating 
benzodiazepine as well as the dose of flumazenil given.
                  In healthy volunteers, flumazenil did not alter intraocular pressure when 
given alone and reversed the decrease in intraocular pressure seen after 
administration of midazolam.
                  
                  
                  PharmacokineticsAfter IV administration, plasma concentrations of flumazenil 
follow a two-exponential decay model. The pharmacokinetics of flumazenil are 
dose-proportional up to 100 mg.
                  
                  
                  DistributionFlumazenil is extensively distributed in the extravascular space 
with an initial distribution half-life of 4 to 11 minutes and a terminal 
half-life of 40 to 80 minutes. Peak concentrations of flumazenil are 
proportional to dose, with an apparent initial volume of distribution of 0.5 
L/kg. The volume of distribution at steady-state is 0.9 to 1.1 L/kg. Flumazenil 
is a weak lipophilic base. Protein binding is approximately 50% and the drug 
shows no preferential partitioning into red blood cells. Albumin accounts for 
two thirds of plasma protein binding.
                  
                  
                  MetabolismFlumazenil is completely (99%) metabolized. Very little unchanged 
flumazenil (less than 1%) is found in the urine. The major metabolites of flumazenil 
indentified in urine are the de-ethylated free acid and its glucuronide 
conjugate. In preclinical studies there was no evidence of pharmacologic 
activity exhibited by the de-ethylated free acid.
                  
                  
                  EliminationElimination of radiolabeled drug is essentially complete within 
72 hours, with 90% to 95% of the radioactivity appearing in urine and 5% to 10% 
in feces. Clearance of flumazenil occurs primarily by hepatic metabolism and is 
dependent on hepatic blood flow. In pharmacokinetic studies of normal 
volunteers, total clearance ranged from 0.8 to 1.0 L/hr/kg.
                  Pharmacokinetic parameters following a 5-minute infusion of a total of 1 mg 
of flumazenil mean (coefficient of variation, range):
                  


                  


Food Effects Ingestion of food during an intravenous infusion of the drug 
results in a 50% increase in clearance, most likely due to the increased hepatic 
blood flow that accompanies a meal.
                  
                  
                  Special Populations
                  
                  
                  The Elderly
                  The pharmacokinetics of flumazenil are not significantly altered 
in the elderly.
                  
                  
                  
                  Gender
                  The pharmacokinetics of flumazenil are not different in male and 
female subjects. 
                  
                  
                  
                  Renal Failure (creatinine 
clearance less than 10 mL/min) and Hemodialysis
                  The pharmacokinetics of flumazenil are not significantly 
affected.
                  
                  
                  
                  Patients With Liver 
Dysfunction
                  For patients with moderate liver dysfunction, their mean total 
clearance is decreased to 40% to 60% and in patients with severe liver 
dysfunction, it is decreased to 25% of normal value, compared with age-matched 
healthy subjects. This results in a prolongation of the half-life to 1.3 hours 
in patients with moderate hepatic impairment and 2.4 hours in severely impaired 
patients. Caution should be exercised with initial and/or repeated dosing to 
patients with liver disease.
                  
                  
                  
                  Drug-Drug Interaction
                  The pharmacokinetic profile of flumazenil is unaltered in the 
presence of benzodiazepine agonists and the kinetic profiles of those 
benzodiazepines studied (i.e., diazepam, flunitrazepam, lormetazepam, and 
midazolam) are unaltered by flumazenil. During the 4-hour steady-state and post 
infusion of ethanol, there were no pharmacokinetic interactions on ethanol mean 
plasma levels as compared to placebo when flumazenil doses were given 
intravenously (at 2.5 hours and 6 hours) nor were interactions of ethanol on the 
flumazenil elimination half-life found.
                  
                  
                  
                  Pharmacokinetics in Pediatric 
Patients
                  The pharmacokinetics of flumazenil have been evaluated in 29 
pediatric patients ranging in age from 1 to 17 years who had undergone minor 
surgical procedures. The average doses administered were 0.53 mg (0.044 mg/kg) 
in patients aged 1 to 5 years, 0.63 mg (0.020 mg/kg) in patients aged 6 to 12 
years, and 0.8 mg (0.014 mg/kg) in patients aged 13 to 17 years. Compared to 
adults, the elimination half-life in pediatric patients was more variable, 
averaging 40 minutes (range: 20 to 75 minutes). Clearance and volume of 
distribution, normalized for body weight, were in the same range as those seen 
in adults, although more variability was seen in the pediatric patients.
                  
                  
                  CLINICAL TRIALSFlumazenil has been administered in adults to reverse the effects 
of benzodiazepines in conscious sedation, general anesthesia, and the management 
of suspected benzodiazepine overdose. Limited information from uncontrolled 
studies in pediatric patients is available regarding the use of flumazenil to 
reverse the effects of benzodiazepines in conscious sedation only.
                  
                  
                  
                  Conscious Sedation in Adults
                  Flumazenil was studied in four trials in 970 patients who 
received an average of 30 mg diazepam or 10 mg midazolam for sedation (with or 
without a narcotic) in conjunction with both inpatient and outpatient diagnostic 
or surgical procedures. Flumazenil was effective in reversing the sedating and 
psychomotor effects of the benzodiazepine; however, amnesia was less completely 
and less consistently reversed. In these studies, flumazenil was administered as 
an initial dose of 0.4 mg IV (two doses of 0.2 mg) with additional 0.2 mg doses 
as needed to achieve complete awakening, up to a maximum total dose of 1 mg.
                  Seventy-eight percent of patients receiving flumazenil responded by becoming 
completely alert. Of those patients, approximately half responded to doses of 
0.4 mg to 0.6 mg, while the other half responded to doses of 0.8 mg to 1 mg. 
Adverse effects were infrequent in patients who received 1 mg of flumazenil or 
less, although injection site pain, agitation and anxiety did occur. Reversal of 
sedation was not associated with any increase in the frequency of inadequate 
analgesia or increase in narcotic demand in these studies. While most patients 
remained alert throughout the 3-hour postprocedure observation period, 
resedation was observed to occur in 3% to 9% of the patients, and was most 
common in patients who had received high doses of benzodiazepines (see PRECAUTIONS).
                  
                  
                  
                  General Anesthesia in Adults
                  Flumazenil was studied in four trials in 644 patients who 
received midazolam as an induction and/or maintenance agent in both balanced and 
inhalational anesthesia. Midazolam was generally administered in doses ranging 
from 5 mg to 80 mg, alone and/or in conjunction with muscle relaxants, nitrous 
oxide, regional or local anesthetics, narcotics and/or inhalational anesthetics. 
Flumazenil was given as an initial dose of 0.2 mg IV, with additional 0.2 mg 
doses as needed to reach a complete response, up to a maximum total dose of 1 
mg. These doses were effective in reversing sedation and restoring psychomotor 
function, but did not completely restore memory as tested by picture recall. 
Flumazenil was not as effective in the reversal of sedation in patients who had 
received multiple anesthetic agents in addition to benzodiazepines.
                  Eighty-one percent of patients sedated with midazolam responded to flumazenil 
by becoming completely alert or just slightly drowsy. Of those patients, 36% 
responded to doses of 0.4 mg to 0.6 mg, while 64% responded to doses of 0.8 mg 
to 1 mg.
                  Resedation in patients who responded to flumazenil occurred in 10% to 15% of 
patients studied and was more common with larger doses of midazolam (greater than 20 mg), 
long procedures (greater than 60 minutes) and use of neuromuscular blocking agents (see 
PRECAUTIONS).
                  
                  
                  
                  Management of Suspected 
Benzodiazepine Overdose in Adults
                  Flumazenil was studied in two trials in 497 patients who were 
presumed to have taken an overdose of a benzodiazepine, either alone or in 
combination with a variety of other agents. In these trials, 299 patients were 
proven to have taken a benzodiazepine as part of the overdose, and 80% of the 
148 who received flumazenil responded by an improvement in level of 
consciousness. Of the patients who responded to flumazenil, 75% responded to a 
total dose of 1 mg to 3 mg.
                  Reversal of sedation was associated with an increased frequency of symptoms 
of CNS excitation. Of the patients treated with flumazenil, 1% to 3% were 
treated for agitation or anxiety. Serious side effects were uncommon, but six 
seizures were observed in 446 patients treated with flumazenil in these studies. 
Four of these 6 patients had ingested a large dose of cyclic antidepressants, 
which increased the risk of seizures (see WARNINGS).
                  
                  
                  INDIVIDUALIZATION OF DOSAGE
                  
                  
                  General Principles
                  The serious adverse effects of flumazenil are related to the 
reversal of benzodiazepine effects. Using more than the minimally effective dose 
of flumazenil is tolerated by most patients but may complicate the management of 
patients who are physically dependent on benzodiazepines or patients who are 
depending on benzodiazepines for therapeutic effect (such as suppression of 
seizures in cyclic antidepressant overdose).
                  In high-risk patients, it is important to administer the smallest amount of 
flumazenil that is effective. The 1-minute wait between individual doses in the 
dose-titration recommended for general clinical populations may be too short for 
high-risk patients. This is because it takes 6 to 10 minutes for any single dose 
of flumazenil to reach full effects. Practitioners should slow the rate of 
administration of flumazenil administered to high-risk patients as recommended 
below.
                  
                  
                  
                  Anesthesia and Conscious Sedation in 
Adult Patients
                  Flumazenil is well tolerated at the recommended doses in 
individuals who have no tolerance to (or dependence on) benzodiazepines. The 
recommended doses and titration rates in anesthesia and conscious sedation (0.2 
mg to 1 mg given at 0.2 mg/min) are well tolerated in patients receiving the 
drug for reversal of a single benzodiazepine exposure in most clinical settings 
(see ADVERSE 
REACTIONS). The major risk will be resedation because the duration of effect 
of a long-acting (or large dose of a short-acting) benzodiazepine may exceed 
that of flumazenil. Resedation may be treated by giving a repeat dose at no less 
than 20-minute intervals. For repeat treatment, no more than 1 mg (at 0.2 mg/min 
doses) should be given at any one time and no more than 3 mg should be given in 
any one hour.
                  
                  
                  
                  Benzodiazepine Overdose in Adult 
Patients
                  The risk of confusion, agitation, emotional lability and 
perceptual distortion with the doses recommended in patients with benzodiazepine 
overdose (3 mg to 5 mg administered as 0.5 mg/min) may be greater than that 
expected with lower doses and slower administration. The recommended doses 
represent a compromise between a desirable slow awakening and the need for 
prompt response and a persistent effect in the overdose situation. If 
circumstances permit, the physician may elect to use the 0.2 mg/minute titration 
rate to slowly awaken the patient over 5 to 10 minutes, which may help to reduce 
signs and symptoms on emergence.
                  Flumazenil has no effect in cases where benzodiazepines are not responsible 
for sedation. Once doses of 3 mg to 5 mg have been reached without clinical 
response, additional flumazenil is likely to have no effect.
                  
                  
                  
                  Patients Tolerant to 
Benzodiazepines
                  Flumazenil may cause benzodiazepine withdrawal symptoms in 
individuals who have been taking benzodiazepines long enough to have some degree 
of tolerance. Patients who had been taking benzodiazepines prior to entry into 
the flumazenil trials, who were given flumazenil in doses over 1 mg, experienced 
withdrawal like events 2 to 5 times more frequently than patients who received 
less than 1 mg.
                  In patients who may have tolerance to benzodiazepines, as indicated by 
clinical history or by the need for larger than usual doses of benzodiazepines, 
slower titration rates of 0.1 mg/min and lower total doses may help reduce the 
frequency of emergent confusion and agitation. In such cases, special care must 
be taken to monitor the patients for resedation because of the lower doses of 
flumazenil used.
                  
                  
                  
                  Patients Physically Dependent on 
Benzodiazepines
                  Flumazenil is known to precipitate withdrawal seizures in 
patients who are physically dependent on benzodiazepines, even if such 
dependence was established in a relatively few days of high-dose sedation in 
Intensive Care Unit (ICU) environments. The risk of either seizures or 
resedation in such cases is high and patients have experienced seizures before 
regaining consciousness. Flumazenil should be used in such settings with extreme 
caution, since the use of flumazenil in thissituation has not been studied and 
no information as to dose and rate of titration is available. Flumazenil should 
be used in such patients only if the potential benefits of using the drug 
outweigh the risks of precipitated seizures. Physicians are directed to the 
scientific literature for the most current information in this area.
                  
               
               
               
                  
                     Table
                     
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         