
               
               
               
                  CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
                     Morphine is a pure opioid agonist whose principal 
therapeutic action is analgesia. Other members of the class known as opioid 
agonists include substances such as oxycodone, hydromorphone, fentanyl, codeine, 
and hydrocodone. Pharmacological effects of opioid agonists include anxiolysis, 
euphoria, feelings of relaxation, respiratory depression, constipation, miosis, 
cough suppression, and analgesia. Like all pure opioid agonist analgesics, with 
increasing doses there is increasing analgesia, unlike with mixed 
agonist/antagonists or non-opioid analgesics, where there is a limit to the 
analgesic effect with increasing doses. With pure opioid agonist analgesics, 
there is no defined maximum dose; the ceiling to analgesic effectiveness is 
imposed only by side effects, the more serious which may include somnolence and 
respiratory depression.
                  
                  
                  
                  Central Nervous SystemThe principal actions of therapeutic value of morphine are 
analgesia and sedation (i.e., sleepiness and anxiolysis).
                  The precise mechanism of the analgesic action is unknown. However, specific 
CNS opiate receptors for endogenous compounds with opioid-like activity have 
been identified throughout the brain and spinal cord and are likely to play a 
role in the expression of analgesic effects.
                  Morphine produces respiratory depression by direct action on brain stem 
respiratory centers. The mechanism of respiratory depression involves a 
reduction in the responsiveness of the brain stem respiratory centers to 
increases in carbon dioxide tension, and to electrical stimulation.
                  Morphine depresses the cough reflex by direct effect on the cough center in 
the medulla. Antitussive effects may occur with doses lower than those usually 
required for analgesia. Morphine causes miosis, even in total darkness. Pinpoint 
pupils are a sign of narcotic overdose but are not pathognomonic (e.g., pontine 
lesions of hemorrhagic or ischemic origins may produce similar findings). Marked 
mydriasis rather than miosis may be seen with worsening hypoxia. 
                  
                  
                  Gastrointestinal Tract and Other Smooth MuscleMorphine causes a reduction in motility associated with an 
increase in smooth muscle tone in the antrum of the stomach and in the duodenum. 
Digestion of food is delayed in the small intestine and propulsive contractions 
are decreased. Propulsive peristaltic waves in the colon are decreased, while 
tone may be increased to the point of spasm resulting in constipation. Other 
opioid-induced effects may include a reduction in gastric, biliary and 
pancreatic secretions, spasm of the sphincter of Oddi, and transient elevations 
in serum amylase.
                  
                  
                  Cardiovascular SystemMorphine produces peripheral vasodilation which may result in 
orthostatic hypotension. Release of histamine can occur and may contribute to 
opioid-induced hypotension. Manifestations of histamine release and/or 
peripheral vasodilation may include pruritus, flushing, red eyes, and 
sweating.
                  
                  
                  Endocrine SystemOpioids have been shown to have a variety of effects on the 
secretion of hormones. Opioids inhibit the secretion of ACTH, cortisol, and 
luteinizing hormone (LH) in humans. They also stimulate prolactin, growth 
hormone (GH) secretion, and pancreatic secretion of insulin and glucagons in 
humans and other species, rats and dogs. Thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH) has 
been shown to be both inhibited and stimulated by opioids.
                  
                  
                  Immune SystemOpioids have been shown to have a variety of effects on 
components of the immune system in in vitro and animal models. The clinical 
significance of these findings is unknown.
               
               
            
         