
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  

                  

                  Dicyclomine relieves smooth muscle spasm of the gastrointestinal 
tract. Animal studies indicate that this action is achieved via a dual 
mechanism: (1) a specific anticholinergic effect (antimuscarinic) at the 
acetylcholine- receptor sites with approximately 1/8 the milligram potency of 
atropine (in vitro, guinea pig ileum); and (2) a 
direct effect upon smooth muscle (musculotropic) as evidenced by dicyclomine's 
antagonism of bradykinin- and histamine-induced spasms of the isolated guinea 
pig ileum. Atropine did not affect responses to these two agonists. In vivo studies in cats and dogs showed dicyclomine to be 
equally potent against acetylcholine (ACh)- or barium chloride (BaCI2)- induced intestinal spasm while atropine was at least 200 
times more potent against effects of ACh than BaCI2. 
Tests for mydriatic effects in mice showed that dicyclomine was approximately 
1/500 as potent as atropine; antisialogogue tests in rabbits showed dicyclomine 
to be 1/300 as potent as atropine.
                  In man, dicyclomine is rapidly absorbed after oral administration, reaching 
peak values within 60-90 minutes. The principal route of elimination is via the 
urine (79.5% of the dose). Excretion also occurs in the feces, but to a lesser 
extent (8.4%). Mean half-life of plasma elimination in one study was determined 
to be approximately 1.8 hours when plasma concentrations were measured for 9 
hours after a single dose. In subsequent studies, plasma concentrations were 
followed for up to 24 hours after a single dose, showing a secondary phase of 
elimination with a somewhat longer half-life. Mean volume of distribution for a 
20 mg oral dose is approximately 3.65 L/kg suggesting extensive distribution in 
tissues.
                  In controlled clinical trials involving over 100 patients who received drug, 
82% of patients treated for functional bowel/irritable bowel syndrome with 
dicyclomine hydrochloride at initial doses of 160 mg daily (40 mg q.i.d.) 
demonstrated a favorable clinical response compared with 55% treated with 
placebo (p greater then .05). In these trials, most of the side effects were typically 
anticholinergic in nature (see table) and were reported by 61% 
of the patients.
                  
                  


                  


Nine percent (9%) of patients were discontinued from the drug because of one 
or more of these side effects (compared with 2% in the placebo group). In 41% of 
the patients with side effects, side effects disappeared or were tolerated at 
the 160 mg daily dose without reduction. A dose reduction from 160 mg daily to 
an average daily dose of 90 mg was required in 46% of the patients with side 
effects who then continued to experience a favorable clinical response; their 
side effects either disappeared or were tolerated. (See ADVERSE REACTIONS.)
                  
                     

                  
                  

               
               
            
         