
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  
              Pharmacokinetics

                  Multiple dose ribavirin pharmacokinetic data are available for HCV patients who received ribavirin in combination with peginterferon alfa-2a. Following administration of 1200 mg/day with food for 12 weeks meanngand Cmax was 2748ng/mL. The average time to reach Cmax was 2 hours. Trough ribavirin plasma concentrations following 12 weeks of dosing with food were 1662ng/mL in HCV infected patients who received 800 mg/day (n=89), and 2112
The terminal half-life of ribavirin following administration of a single oral dose of ribavirin is about 120 to 170 hours. The total apparent clearance following administration of a single oral dose of ribavirin is about 26 L/h. There is extensive accumulation of ribavirin after multiple dosing (twice daily) such that the Cmax at steady state was four-fold higher than that of a single dose.
Effect of Food on Absorption of Ribavirin
Bioavailability of a single oral dose of ribavirin was increased by co-administration with a high-fat meal. The absorption was slowed (Tmax was doubled) and the AUC0-192h and Cmax increased by 42% and 66%, respectively, when ribavirin was taken with a high-fat meal compared with fasting conditions (seePRECAUTIONSandDOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION).

                  

                  
              Elimination and Metabolism

                  The contribution of renal and hepatic pathways to ribavirin elimination after administration of ribavirin is not known. In vitro studies indicate that ribavirin is not a substrate of CYP450 enzymes.

                  

                  
              Special Populations

                  
                  

                  
              Race

                  A pharmacokinetic study in 42 subjects demonstrated there is no clinically significant difference in ribavirin pharmacokinetics among Black (n=14), Hispanic (n=13) and Caucasian (n=15) subjects.

                  

                  
              Renal Dysfunction

                  The pharmacokinetics of ribavirin following administration of ribavirin have not been studied in patients with renal impairment and there are limited data from clinical trials on administration of ribavirin in patients with creatinine clearance <50 mL/min. Therefore, patients with creatinine clearance <50 mL/min should not be treated with ribavirin (seeWARNINGSandDOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION).

                  

                  
              Hepatic Impairment

                  The effect of hepatic impairment on the pharmacokinetics of ribavirin following administration of ribavirin has not been evaluated. The clinical trials of ribavirin were restricted to patients with Child-Pugh class A disease.

                  

                  
              Pediatric Patients

                  Pharmacokinetic evaluations in pediatric patients have not been performed.

                  

                  
              Elderly Patients

                  Pharmacokinetic evaluations in elderly patients have not been performed.

                  

                  
              Gender

                  Ribavirin pharmacokinetics, when corrected for weight, are similar in male and female patients.

                  

                  
              Drug Interactions

                  In vitro studies indicate that ribavirin does not inhibit CYP450 enzymes.

                  

                  
              Nucleoside Analogues

                  In vitro data indicate ribavirin reduces phosphorylation of lamivudine, stavudine, and zidovudine.
In vitro, didanosine or its active metabolite (dideoxyadenosine 5'triphosphate) is increased when didanosine is cowith ribavirin, which could cause or worsen clinical toxicities (seePRECAUTIONS: Drug Interactions).

                  

                  
              Drugs Metabolized by Cytochrome P450

                  There was no effect on the pharmacokinetics of representative drugs metabolized by CYP 2C9, CYP 2C19, CYP 2D6 or CYP 3A4.
Treatment with peginterferon alfa-2a once weekly for 4 weeks in healthy subjects was associated with an inhibition of P450 1A2 and a 25% increase in theophylline AUC (seePRECAUTIONS: Drug Interactions).

                  

               
               
            
         