
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  Intramuscular administration of a single dose of 600 mg of lincomycin produces average peak serum levels of 11.6 µg/mL at 60 minutes and maintains therapeutic levels for 17 to 20 hours for most susceptible gram-positive organisms. Urinary excretion after this dose ranges from 1.8 to 24.8 percent (mean: 17.3 percent).
                  A two hour intravenous infusion of 600 mg of lincomycin achieves average peak serum levels of 15.9 µg/mL and yields therapeutic levels for 14 hours for most susceptible gram-positive organisms. Urinary excretion ranges from 4.9 to 30.3 percent (mean: 13.8 percent).
                  The biological half-life after intramuscular or intravenous administration is 5.4 ± 1.0 hours. The serum half-life of lincomycin may be prolonged in patients with severe impairment of renal function compared to patients with normal renal function. In patients with abnormal hepatic function, serum half-life may be twofold longer than in patients with normal hepatic function. Hemodialysis and peritoneal dialysis are not effective in removing lincomycin from the serum.
                  Tissue level studies indicate that bile is an important route of excretion. Significant levels have been demonstrated in the majority of body tissues. Although lincomycin appears to diffuse into cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), levels of lincomycin in the CSF appear inadequate for the treatment of meningitis.
               
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Microbiology
                     
                        Lincomycin has been shown to be active against most strains of the following organisms both in vitro and in clinical infections: (see 
                              INDICATIONS AND USAGE
                           ).
  Staphylococcus aureus
                           
  Streptococcus pneumoniae
                        
                        The following in vitro data are available; but their clinical significance is unknown.
                        
                        Lincomycin has been shown to be active in vitro against the following microorganisms; however, the safety and efficacy of LINCOCIN in treating clinical infections due to these organisms have not been established in adequate and well controlled trials.
                        Gram-positive bacteria:
  Corynebacterium diphtheriae
  Streptococcus pyogenes
                           
  Viridans group streptococci
                        Anaerobic bacteria:
  Clostridium tetani
                           
  Clostridium perfringens
                        
                        Cross resistance has been demonstrated between clindamycin and lincomycin. Resistance is most often due to methylation of specific nucleotides in the 23S RNA of the 50S ribosomal subunit, which can determine cross resistance to macrolides and streptogramins B (MLSB phenotype). Macrolide-resistant isolates of these organisms should be tested for inducible resistance to lincomycin/clindamycin using the D-zone test or other appropriate method.
                        There are currently no antimicrobial susceptibility testing (AST) interpretive criteria for LINCOCIN.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         