
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  Zorbtive® [somatropin (rDNA origin) for injection] is an anabolic and anticatabolic agent which exerts its influence by interacting with specific receptors on a variety of cell types including myocytes, hepatocytes, adipocytes, lymphocytes, and hematopoietic cells. Some, but not all of its effects, are mediated by insulin-like growth factor-1 (IGF-1).
               
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     MECHANISM OF ACTION – IN SHORT BOWEL SYNDROME (SBS) PATIENTS
                     
                        Intestinal mucosa contains receptors for growth hormone and for insulin-like growth factor-1 (IGF-1), which is known to mediate many of the cellular actions of growth hormone. Thus, the actions of growth hormone on the gut may be direct or mediated via the local or systemic production of IGF-1.
                        In human clinical studies the administration of growth hormone has been shown to enhance the transmucosal transport of water, electrolytes, and nutrients.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     PHARMACOKINETICS
                     
                        Subcutaneous Absorption:  The absolute bioavailability of Zorbtive® [somatropin (rDNA origin) for injection] after subcutaneous administration of a formulation not equivalent to the marketed formulation was determined to be 70-90%. The t½ (Mean ± SD) after subcutaneous administration is significantly longer than that seen after intravenous administration in normal male volunteers down-regulated with somatostatin (3.94 ± 3.44 hrs. vs. 0.58 ± 0.08 hrs.), indicating that the subcutaneous absorption of the clinically tested formulation of the compound is slow and rate-limiting.
                        
                           Distribution:  The steady-state volume of distribution (Mean ± SD) following IV administration of Zorbtive® in healthy volunteers is 12.0 ± 1.08 L.
                        
                           Metabolism:  Although the liver plays a role in the metabolism of GH, GH is primarily cleaved in the kidney. GH undergoes glomerular filtration and, after cleavage within the renal cells, the peptides and amino acids are returned to the systemic circulation.
                        
                           Elimination:  The t½ (Mean ± SD) in nine patients with HIV-associated wasting with an average weight of 56.7 ± 6.8 kg, given a fixed dose of 6.0 mg recombinant hGH (r-hGH) subcutaneously was 4.28 ± 2.15 hrs. The renal clearance of r-hGH after subcutaneous administration in nine patients with HIV-associated wasting was 0.0015 ± 0.0037 L/h. No significant accumulation of r-hGH appears to occur after 6 weeks of dosing as indicated.
                        
                           Special Populations:
                        
                        
                           Pediatric:  Available evidence suggests that r-hGH clearances are similar in adults and children, but no pharmacokinetic studies have been conducted in children with short bowel syndrome.
                        
                           Gender:  Biomedical literature indicates that a gender-related difference in the mean clearance of r-hGH could exist (clearance of r-hGH in males > clearance of r-hGH in females). However, no gender-based analysis is available in normal volunteers or patients with short bowel syndrome.
                        
                           Race:  No data are available.
                        
                           Renal Insufficiency:  It has been reported that individuals with chronic renal failure tend to have decreased r-hGH clearance compared to normals, but there are no data on Zorbtive® use in the presence of renal insufficiency.
                        
                           Hepatic Insufficiency:  A reduction in r-hGH clearance has been noted in patients with severe liver dysfunction. However, the clinical significance of this in short bowel syndrome patients is unknown.
                        
                           CLINICAL STUDIES
                        
                        A randomized, double-blind, controlled, parallel-group Phase III clinical study evaluated the efficacy and safety of the administration of Zorbtive® in subjects with Short Bowel Syndrome (SBS) who were dependent on intravenous parenteral nutrition (IPN) for nutritional support. The primary endpoint was the change in weekly total IPN volume defined as the sum of the volumes of IPN, supplemental lipid emulsion (SLE), and intravenous hydration fluid. The secondary endpoints were the change in weekly IPN caloric content and the change in the frequency of IPN administration per week. Subjects received either Zorbtive® placebo with the nutritional supplement, glutamine (n=9), Zorbtive® without glutamine (n=16) or Zorbtive® with glutamine (n=16). All 3 groups received a specialized diet. Following a two-week equilibration period, treatment was administered in a double-blind manner over a further period of four weeks. The dosing of Zorbtive® was approximately 0.1 mg/kg/day for 4 weeks. During the double-blind treatment portion of the trial, the glutamine was given at a daily dose of 30 g. The mean baseline IPN volume, mean IPN caloric content, and mean frequency of IPN administration are provided in Table 1. Mean reductions in IPN volume, IPN caloric content and the frequency of IPN administration in each patient group were significantly greater in both Zorbtive®-treated groups than in the group treated with Zorbtive® placebo. These changes are tabulated in Table 1.
                        


