
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                         
Corticosteroids play a role in cellular signaling, immune function, inflammation, 
and protein regulation; however, the precise mechanism of action of CUTIVATE® Ointment in corticosteroid-responsive dermatoses
is unknown.

                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Vasoconstrictor Assay
                              
                              
Studies performed with CUTIVATE® Ointment indicate
that it is in the medium range of potency as demonstrated
in vasoconstrictor trials in healthy subjects when
compared with other topical corticosteroids. However,
similar blanching scores do not necessarily imply
therapeutic equivalence.
				
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        
                           Absorption
                           

The extent of percutaneous absorption of topical corticosteroids is determined by many factors, 
including the vehicle and the integrity of the epidermal barrier. Occlusive dressing enhances penetration. 
Topical corticosteroids can be absorbed from normal intact skin. Inflammation and/or other disease processes in the skin increase percutaneous absorption.
			
                        
In a study of 6 healthy subjects applying 25 g of
fluticasone propionate ointment 0.005% twice daily
to the trunk and legs for up to 5 days under occlusion,
plasma levels of fluticasone ranged from 0.08 to
0.22 ng/mL.
			
                        
                           Distribution
                           
 
The percentage of fluticasone propionate bound to human plasma proteins averaged 91%. 
Fluticasone propionate is weakly and reversibly bound to erythrocytes. 
Fluticasone propionate is not significantly bound to human transcortin. 
			
                        
                           Metabolism
                           
 
No metabolites of fluticasone propionate were detected in an in vitro study of 
radiolabeled fluticasone propionate incubated in a human skin homogenate. 

			
                        
Fluticasone propionate is metabolized in the liver by cytochrome P450 3A4-mediated hydrolysis 
of the 5-fluoromethyl carbothiolate grouping. This transformation occurs in 1 metabolic step to 
produce the inactive 17β-carboxylic acid metabolite, the only known metabolite detected in man. 
This metabolite has approximately 2000 times less affinity than the parent drug 
for the glucocorticoid receptor of human lung cytosol in vitro and negligible pharmacological activity in animal studies. 
Other metabolites detected in vitro using cultured human hepatoma cells have not been detected in man.
			
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         