
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           Calcium supplements/antacids or oral medications containing multivalent cations interfere with absorption of alendronate. (2.3, 7.1)
                           Use caution when co-prescribing aspirin/nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs that may worsen gastrointestinal irritation. (7.2, 7.3)
                           Some drugs may impair the absorption or increase the catabolism of cholecalciferol (vitamin D3). Additional vitamin D supplementation should be considered. (7.4, 7.5, 12.3)
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 Calcium Supplements/Antacids
                     
                        Co-administration of FOSAMAX PLUS D and calcium, antacids, or oral medications containing multivalent cations will interfere with absorption of alendronate. Therefore, instruct patients to wait at least one-half hour after taking FOSAMAX PLUS D before taking any other oral medications.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 Aspirin
                     
                        In clinical studies, the incidence of upper gastrointestinal adverse events was increased in patients receiving concomitant therapy with daily doses of FOSAMAX greater than 10 mg and aspirin-containing products.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3 Nonsteroidal Anti-Inflammatory Drugs
                     
                        FOSAMAX PLUS D may be administered to patients taking nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs). In a 3-year, controlled, clinical study (n=2027) during which a majority of patients received concomitant NSAIDs, the incidence of upper gastrointestinal adverse events was similar in patients taking FOSAMAX 5 or 10 mg/day compared to those taking placebo. However, since NSAID use is associated with gastrointestinal irritation, caution should be used during concomitant use with FOSAMAX PLUS D.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4 Drugs that May Impair the Absorption of Cholecalciferol
                     
                        Olestra, mineral oils, orlistat, and bile acid sequestrants (e.g., cholestyramine, colestipol) may impair the absorption of vitamin D. Additional vitamin D supplementation should be considered [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.5 Drugs that May Increase the Catabolism of Cholecalciferol
                     
                        Anticonvulsants, cimetidine, and thiazides may increase the catabolism of vitamin D. Additional vitamin D supplementation should be considered [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         