
               
               
               
                  CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  Allergenic extracts for diagnostic testing produce erythema or erythema and wheal reactions in patients with significant IgE-mediated sensitivity to the relevant allergen. This allergic inflammatory response, although not completely understood, is thought to begin with the reaction of antigen with IgE on the surface of basofils, or mast cells, which initiates a series of biochemical events resulting in the production of histamine and other mediators. These, in turn, produce the immediate-type “wheal and flare” skin reaction. The more mediator released, the larger the reaction.  Because of a variety of factors, including the types of allergen extracts, delayed skin reactions can occur and usually disappear within a couple of days. The type of extract, size of the reaction and timing of the reaction are all factors used in determining a patient’s sensitivity to an allergen. 
                  Allergen immunotherapy (also known as desensitization, hyposensitization, allergy vaccination, or allergy shots) involves treating a patient with increasing dosage of the allergens to which he is allergic, eventually reaching a dose plateau whereas the patient experiences an increased tolerance upon re-exposure to the allergens. The patient may or may not need to receive continued treatment to demonstrate the desensitization. The exact mechanisms of reaction of desensitization with allergens, which involve the allergen, IgE and IgG antibodies, mast cells and basophils and possibly other mediators, are not completely understood. However, efficacy has been shown in numerous well-controlled studies using specific common allergens.
                  The goals of allergen immunotherapy are to decrease the production of IgE antibodies, initiate the production of IgG antibodies and stabilize mast cells and basophils. Overproduction of IgE in response to an allergen can induce other cells, particularly mast cells and basophils, to initiate a complex chain reaction that results in allergy symptoms. Numerous IgE receptor sites are located on mast cells as well as basophil cells. These cells are among the first cells to be encountered by the antigen. They contain potent chemical mediators (histamine and leukotriene, for example) of inflammation that are released when IgE and a specific allergen cross-link on the cell surface. The release of the chemical mediators results in inflammation and allergy symptoms. As a response to immunotherapy, the production of IgG is believed to work by blocking IgE from binding to mast cells and basophils. Thus IgG, the blocking antibody, may prevent the release of chemical mediators that produce allergy symptoms.
               
               
            
         