
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Belatacept, a selective T-cell (lymphocyte) costimulation blocker, binds to CD80 and CD86 on antigen-presenting cells thereby blocking CD28 mediated costimulation of T lymphocytes. In vitro, belatacept inhibits T lymphocyte proliferation and the production of the cytokines interleukin-2, interferon-γ, interleukin-4, and TNF-α. Activated T lymphocytes are the predominant mediators of immunologic rejection.
                        In non-human primate models of renal transplantation, belatacept monotherapy prolonged graft survival and decreased the production of anti-donor antibodies, compared to vehicle.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        Belatacept-mediated costimulation blockade results in the inhibition of cytokine production by T cells required for antigen-specific antibody production by B cells. In clinical trials, greater reductions in mean immunoglobulin (IgG, IgM, and IgA) concentrations were observed from baseline to Month 6 and Month 12 post-transplant in belatacept-treated patients compared to cyclosporine-treated patients. In an exploratory subset analysis, a trend of decreasing IgG concentrations with increasing belatacept trough concentrations was observed at Month 6. Also in this exploratory subset analysis, belatacept-treated patients with CNS PTLD, CNS infections including PML, other serious infections, and malignancies were observed to have a higher incidence of IgG concentrations below the lower limit of the normal range (<694 mg/dL) at Month 6 than those patients who did not experience these adverse events. This observation was more pronounced with the higher than recommended dose of belatacept. A similar trend was also observed for cyclosporine-treated patients with serious infections and malignancies.
                        However, it is unclear whether any causal relationship between an IgG concentration below the lower level of normal and these adverse events exists, as the analysis may have been confounded by other factors (e.g., age greater than 60 years, receipt of an extended criteria donor kidney, exposure to lymphocyte depleting agents) which were also associated with IgG below the lower level of normal at Month 6 in these trials.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        Table 5 summarizes the pharmacokinetic parameters of belatacept in healthy adult subjects after a single 10 mg per kg intravenous infusion; and in kidney transplant patients after the 10 mg per kg intravenous infusion at Week 12, and after 5 mg per kg intravenous infusion every 4 weeks at Month 12 post-transplant or later.
                        


                        


In healthy subjects, the pharmacokinetics of belatacept was linear and the exposure to belatacept increased proportionally after a single intravenous infusion dose of 1 to 20 mg per kg. The pharmacokinetics of belatacept in de novo kidney transplant patients and healthy subjects are comparable. Following the recommended regimen, the mean belatacept serum concentration reached steady-state by Week 8 in the initial phase following transplantation and by Month 6 during the maintenance phase. Following once monthly intravenous infusion of 10 mg per kg and 5 mg per kg, there was about 20% and 10% systemic accumulation of belatacept in kidney transplant patients, respectively.
                        Based on population pharmacokinetic analysis of 924 kidney transplant patients up to 1 year post-transplant, the pharmacokinetics of belatacept were similar at different time periods post-transplant. In clinical trials, trough concentrations of belatacept were consistently maintained from Month 6 up to 3 years post-transplant. Population pharmacokinetic analyses in kidney transplant patients revealed that there was a trend toward higher clearance of belatacept with increasing body weight. Age, gender, race, renal function (measured by calculated glomerular filtration rate [GFR]), hepatic function (measured by albumin), diabetes, and concomitant dialysis did not affect the clearance of belatacept.
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Drug Interactions
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Mycophenolate Mofetil
                                 
                                    In a pharmacokinetic substudy of Studies 1 and 2, the plasma concentrations of MPA were measured in 41 patients who received fixed MMF doses of 500 to 1500 mg twice daily with either 5 mg per kg of NULOJIX or cyclosporine. The mean dose-normalized MPA Cmax and AUC0-12 were approximately 20% and 40% higher, respectively, with NULOJIX coadministration than with cyclosporine coadministration [see 
                                          Drug Interactions (7.1)
                                       ].
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Cytochrome P450 Substrates
                                 
                                    The potential of NULOJIX to alter the systemic concentrations of drugs that are CYP450 substrates was investigated in healthy subjects following administration of a cocktail of probe drugs given concomitantly with, and at 3 days and at 7 days following a single intravenous 10 mg per kg dose of NULOJIX. NULOJIX did not alter the pharmacokinetics of drugs that are substrates of CYP1A2 (caffeine), CYP2C9 (losartan), CYP2D6 (dextromethorphan), CYP3A (midazolam), and CYP2C19 (omeprazole) [see 
                                          Drug Interactions (7.2)
                                       ].
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         