
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              •Coadministration with strong CYP3A4/5 inhibitors (e.g., ketoconazole) significantly increases saxagliptin concentrations. Limit KOMBIGLYZE XR dose to 2.5 mg/1000 mg once daily. (2.2, 7.1)
                           
                           
                              •Cationic drugs eliminated by renal tubular secretion may reduce metformin elimination: use with caution. (5.10, 7.2)
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 Strong Inhibitors of CYP3A4/5 Enzymes
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Saxagliptin
                              
                              Ketoconazole significantly increased saxagliptin exposure. Similar significant increases in plasma concentrations of saxagliptin are anticipated with other strong CYP3A4/5 inhibitors (e.g., atazanavir, clarithromycin, indinavir, itraconazole, nefazodone, nelfinavir, ritonavir, saquinavir, and telithromycin). The dose of saxagliptin should be limited to 2.5 mg when coadministered with a strong CYP3A4/5 inhibitor. [See 
                                    Dosage and Administration (2.2)
                                  and 
                                    Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)
                                 .]
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 Cationic Drugs
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Metformin hydrochloride
                              
                              Cationic drugs (e.g., amiloride, digoxin, morphine, procainamide, quinidine, quinine, ranitidine, triamterene, trimethoprim, or vancomycin) that are eliminated by renal tubular secretion theoretically have the potential for interaction with metformin by competing for common renal tubular transport systems. Such interaction between metformin and oral cimetidine has been observed in healthy volunteers. Although such interactions remain theoretical (except for cimetidine), careful patient monitoring and dose adjustment of KOMBIGLYZE XR and/or the interfering drug is recommended in patients who are taking cationic medications that are excreted via the proximal renal tubular secretory system.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3 Use with Other Drugs
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Metformin hydrochloride
                              
                              Some medications can predispose to hyperglycemia and may lead to loss of glycemic control. These medications include the thiazides and other diuretics, corticosteroids, phenothiazines, thyroid products, estrogens, oral contraceptives, phenytoin, nicotinic acid, sympathomimetics, calcium channel blockers, and isoniazid. When such drugs are administered to a patient receiving KOMBIGLYZE XR, the patient should be closely observed for loss of glycemic control. When such drugs are withdrawn from a patient receiving KOMBIGLYZE XR, the patient should be observed closely for hypoglycemia.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         