
               
               
               
                  CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
                     Atenolol is a beta1-selective 
(cardioselective) beta-adrenergic receptor blocking agent without membrane 
stabilizing or intrinsic sympathomimetic (partial agonist) activities. This 
preferential effect is not absolute, however, and at higher doses, atenolol 
inhibits beta2-adrenoreceptors, chiefly located in the 
bronchial and vascular musculature
                  Pharmacokinetics and Metabolism
                     In man, absorption of an oral dose is rapid and consistent 
but incomplete. Approximately 50% of an oral dose is absorbed from the 
gastrointestinal tract, the remainder being excreted unchanged in the feces. 
Peak blood levels are reached between two (2) and four (4) hours after 
ingestion. Unlike propranolol or metoprolol, but like nadolol, atenolol 
undergoes little or no metabolism by the liver, and the absorbed portion is 
eliminated primarily by renal excretion. Over 85% of an intravenous dose is 
excreted in urine within 24 hours compared with approximately 50% for an oral 
dose. Atenolol also differs from propranolol in that only a small amount (6% to 
16%) is bound to proteins in the plasma. This kinetic profile results in 
relatively consistent plasma drug levels with about a fourfold interpatient 
variation.
                  The elimination half-life of oral atenolol is approximately 6 to 7 hours, and 
there is no alteration of the kinetic profile of the drug by chronic 
administration. Following intravenous administration, peak plasma levels are 
reached within 5 minutes. Declines from peak levels are rapid (5- to 10-fold) 
during the first 7 hours; thereafter, plasma levels decay with a half-life 
similar to that of orally administered drug. Following oral doses of 50 mg or 
100 mg, both beta-blocking and antihypertensive effects persist for at least 24 
hours. When renal function is impaired, elimination of atenolol is closely 
related to the glomerular filtration rate; significant accumulation occurs when 
the creatinine clearance falls below 35 mL/min/1.73 m2. 
(See 
                         DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION.)
                  
                  
                   trend that the elimination of renally 
excreted drugs is decreased with increasing age
               
               
            
         