
               
               
               
                  Clinical Pharmacology
               
               
                  Peritoneal dialysis is the process of filtering excess water and
							toxins from the bloodstream through a semi-permeable membrane. This
							process does not cure the disease, but prevents progression of symptoms.
							Dialysis for chronic kidney failure is essential to maintain life,
							unless the patient receives a kidney transplant. A peritoneal dialysis
							procedure utilizes the peritoneum (lining of the abdomen) as the
							semi-permeable membrane. The procedure is conducted by instilling
							peritoneal dialysis solution through a catheter in the abdomen into the
							peritoneal cavity. Since the peritoneum is heavily supplied with blood
							vessels, the contact of the solution with the peritoneum causes excess
							water and toxins in the bloodstream to be drawn across the membrane into
							the solution. This osmosis and diffusion occurs between the plasma of
							the patient and the peritoneal dialysis solution. After a period of time
							called "dwell time," the solution is then drained from the patient.
                  This solution does not contain potassium. In situations in which
							there is a normal serum potassium level or hypokalemia, the addition of
							potassium chloride (up to a concentration of 4 mEq/L) may be indicated
							to prevent severe hypokalemia. Addition of
								potassium chloride should be made after careful evaluation of serum
								and total body potassium and only under the direction of a
								physician.
                  
                  Clinical studies have demonstrated that the use of low magnesium
							solutions resulted in significant increases in serum CO2 and
							decreases in serum magnesium levels. The decrease in magnesium levels
							did not cause clinically significant hypomagnesemia.
               
               
            
         