
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        PERIKABIVEN® is used as a supplement or as the sole source of nutrition in patients, providing macronutrients (amino acids, dextrose and lipids) and micronutrients (electrolytes) parenterally.  
                        The amino acids provide the structural units that make up proteins and are used to synthesize proteins and other biomolecules or are oxidized to urea and carbon dioxide as a source of energy. 
                        The administered dextrose is oxidized to carbon dioxide and water, yielding energy.
                        Intravenously administered lipids provide a biologically utilizable source of calories and essential fatty acids.  Fatty acids serve as an important substrate for energy production.   The most common mechanism of action for energy derived from fatty acid metabolism is beta- oxidation.  Fatty acids are important for membrane structure and function, precursors for bioactive molecules (such as prostaglandins), and as regulators of gene expression.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        The infused lipid particles provided by PERIKABIVEN® are expected to be cleared from the blood stream in a manner thought to be comparable to the clearing of chylomicrons.  In healthy volunteers, the maximum clearance rate of the triglycerides after fasting overnight has been found to be 3.8 ± 1.5 g/kg per 24 hours.  Both elimination and oxidation rates are dependent on the patient’s clinical condition; elimination is faster and utilization is increased in postoperative patients, in sepsis, burns and trauma, while patients with renal impairment may show lower utilization of exogenous lipid emulsions. Due to differences in elimination, patients with these conditions should be closely monitored during PERIKABIVEN® administration 
                              [see Warnings and Precautions (5.3, 5.11)]
                           .         
                        The disposition of infused amino acids, dextrose and electrolytes are essentially the same as those supplied by ordinary food.  
                        A clinical study in healthy volunteers employing high intravenous doses (80 mmol) of either sodium glycerophosphate used in PERIKABIVEN® or reference, inorganic sodium phosphate demonstrated that both compounds resulted in comparable serum inorganic phosphate concentrations after a single intravenous dose.  Changes from baseline in the serum levels of sodium, potassium, and total calcium were comparable across the two phosphate sources in this study.  
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         