
               
               
               DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
                  
                  
                  
                  This section describes clinically relevant drug interactions with VIREAD. Drug interactions trials are described elsewhere in the labeling [See Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)]. 
                  
                  
 

                  
                  Coadministration of VIREAD and didanosine should be undertaken with caution and patients receiving this combination should be monitored closely for didanosine-associated adverse reactions. Didanosine should be discontinued in patients who develop didanosine-associated adverse reactions.
                  When administered with VIREAD, Cmax and AUC of didanosine increased significantly [See Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)]. The mechanism of this interaction is unknown. Higher didanosine concentrations could potentiate didanosine-associated adverse reactions, including pancreatitis and neuropathy. Suppression of CD4+ cell counts has been observed in patients receiving VIREAD with didanosine 400 mg daily. 
                  In patients weighing greater than 60 kg, the didanosine dose should be reduced to 250 mg when it is coadministered with VIREAD. Data are not available to recommend a dose adjustment of didanosine for adult or pediatric patients weighing less than 60 kg. When coadministered, VIREAD and didanosine EC may be taken under fasted conditions or with a light meal (less than 400 kcal, 20% fat).
                  
 

                  
                  Atazanavir has been shown to increase tenofovir concentrations [See Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)]. The mechanism of this interaction is unknown. Patients receiving atazanavir and VIREAD should be monitored for VIREAD-associated adverse reactions. VIREAD should be discontinued in patients who develop VIREAD-associated adverse reactions.
                  VIREAD decreases the AUC and Cmin of atazanavir [See Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)]. When coadministered with VIREAD, it is recommended that atazanavir 300 mg is given with ritonavir 100 mg. Atazanavir without ritonavir should not be coadministered with VIREAD.
                  
 

                  
                  Lopinavir/ritonavir has been shown to increase tenofovir concentrations [See Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)]. The mechanism of this interaction is unknown. Patients receiving lopinavir/ritonavir and VIREAD should be monitored for VIREAD-associated adverse reactions. VIREAD should be discontinued in patients who develop VIREAD-associated adverse reactions.
                  
 

                  
                  Since tenofovir is primarily eliminated by the kidneys [See Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)], coadministration of VIREAD with drugs that reduce renal function or compete for active tubular secretion may increase serum concentrations of tenofovir and/or increase the concentrations of other renally eliminated drugs. Some examples include, but are not limited to cidofovir, acyclovir, valacyclovir, ganciclovir, and valganciclovir. Drugs that decrease renal function may also increase serum concentrations of tenofovir.
                  In the treatment of chronic hepatitis B, VIREAD should not be administered in combination with HEPSERA (adefovir dipivoxil).
                  
 

                  
 

                  
 

               
               
            
         