
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Ciclopirox is a hydroxypyridone antifungal agent although the relevance of this property for the indication of seborrheic dermatitis is not known. Ciclopirox acts by chelation of polyvalent cations (Fe3+ or Al3+), resulting in the inhibition of the metal-dependent enzymes that are responsible for the degradation of peroxides within the fungal cell.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        The pharmacodynamics of Ciclopirox Shampoo, 1% are unknown.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        In a study in patients with seborrheic dermatitis of the scalp, application of 5 mL ciclopirox shampoo 1% twice weekly for 4 weeks, with an exposure time of 3 minutes per application, resulted in detectable serum concentrations of ciclopirox in 6 out of 18 patients. The serum concentrations measured throughout the dosing interval on Days 1 and 29 ranged from 10.3 ng/mL to 13.2 ng/mL.  Total urinary excretion of ciclopirox was less than 0.5% of the administered dose.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.4 Microbiology
                     
                        Ciclopirox is fungicidal in vitro against Malassezia
                            furfur (Pityrosporum
                           spp.), P. 
                           ovale, and P. 
                           orbiculare.
                        The clinical significance of antifungal activity in the treatment of seborrheic dermatitis is not known.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         