
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  
                  Following oral administration of a single 500 mg dose (two 250 mg tablets) to 36 fasted healthy male volunteers, the mean (SD) pharmacokinetic parameters were AUC0-72 = 4.3 (1.2) mcg•h/mL; Cmax = 0.5 (0.2) mcg/mL; Tmax = 2.2 (0.9) hours.
                  With a regimen of 500 mg (two 250 mg capsules
                        1
                     ) on day 1, followed by 250 mg daily (one 250 mg capsule) on days 2 through 5, the pharmacokinetic parameters of azithromycin in plasma in healthy young adults (18 to 40 years of age) are portrayed in the chart below. Cmin and Cmax remained essentially unchanged from day 2 through day 5 of therapy.
                  


                  


In a two-way crossover study, 12 adult healthy volunteers (6 males, 6 females) received 1,500 mg of azithromycin administered in single daily doses over either 5 days (two 250 mg tablets on day 1, followed by one 250 mg tablet on days 2 to 5) or 3 days (500 mg per day for days 1 to 3). Due to limited serum samples on day 2 (3-day regimen) and days 2 to 4 (5-day regimen), the serum concentration-time profile of each subject was fit to a 3-compartment model and the AUC0-∞ for the fitted concentration profile was comparable between the 5-day and 3-day regimens.
                  


                  



                     Total AUC for the entire 3-day and 5-day regimens
                  
                  Median azithromycin exposure (AUC0-288) in mononuclear (MN) and polymorphonuclear (PMN) leukocytes following either the 5-day or 3-day regimen was more than a 1000-fold and 800-fold greater than in serum, respectively. Administration of the same total dose with either the 5-day or 3-day regimen may be expected to provide comparable concentrations of azithromycin within MN and PMN leukocytes.
                  Two azithromycin 250 mg tablets are bioequivalent to a single 500 mg tablet.
                  
                     Azithromycin 250 mg tablets are bioequivalent to 250 mg capsules in the fasted state. Azithromycin 250 mg capsules are no longer commercially available.
                  
                  
 

                  
                  The absolute bioavailability of azithromycin 250 mg capsules is 38%.
                  In a two-way crossover study in which 12 healthy subjects received a single 500 mg dose of azithromycin (two 250 mg tablets) with or without a high fat meal, food was shown to increase Cmax by 23% but had no effect on AUC.
                  When azithromycin suspension was administered with food to 28 adult healthy male subjects, Cmax increased by 56% and AUC was unchanged.
                  The AUC of azithromycin was unaffected by co-administration of an antacid containing aluminum and magnesium hydroxide with azithromycin capsules; however, the Cmax was reduced by 24%. Administration of cimetidine (800 mg) two hours prior to azithromycin had no effect on azithromycin absorption.
                  
 

                  
                  The serum protein binding of azithromycin is variable in the concentration range approximating human exposure, decreasing from 51% at 0.02 mcg /mL to 7% at 2 mcg /mL.
                  Following oral administration, azithromycin is widely distributed throughout the body with an apparent steady-state volume of distribution of 31.1 L/kg. Greater azithromycin concentrations in tissues than in plasma or serum were observed. High tissue concentrations should not be interpreted to be quantitatively related to clinical efficacy. The antimicrobial activity of azithromycin is pH related and appears to be reduced with decreasing pH. However, the extensive distribution of drug to tissues may be relevant to clinical activity.
                  Selected tissue (or fluid) concentration and tissue (or fluid) to plasma/serum concentration ratios are shown in the following table:
                  


                  



                     Azithromycin tissue concentrations were originally determined using 250 mg capsules.
                  
                  
                     Sample was obtained 2 to 4 hours after the first dose.
                  
                  
                     Sample was obtained 10 to 12 hours after the first dose.
                  
                  
                     Dosing regimen of two doses of 250 mg each, separated by 12 hours.
                  
                  
                     Sample was obtained 19 hours after a single 500 mg dose.
                  
                  The extensive tissue distribution was confirmed by examination of additional tissues and fluids (bone, ejaculum, prostate, ovary, uterus, salpinx, stomach, liver, and gallbladder). As there are no data from adequate and well-controlled studies of azithromycin treatment of infections in these additional body sites, the clinical importance of these tissue concentration data is unknown.
                  Following a regimen of 500 mg on the first day and 250 mg daily for 4 days, only very low concentrations were noted in cerebrospinal fluid (less than 0.01 mcg/mL) in the presence of non-inflamed meninges.
                  
 

                  
                  
                     In vitro and in vivo studies to assess the metabolism of azithromycin have not been performed.
                  
 

                  
                  Plasma concentrations of azithromycin following single 500 mg oral and i.v. doses declined in a polyphasic pattern with a mean apparent plasma clearance of 630 mL/min and terminal elimination half-life of 68 hours. The prolonged terminal half-life is thought to be due to extensive uptake and subsequent release of drug from tissues.
                  Biliary excretion of azithromycin, predominantly as unchanged drug, is a major route of elimination. Over the course of a week, approximately 6% of the administered dose appears as unchanged drug in urine. 
                  
 

                  
                  Azithromycin pharmacokinetics were investigated in 42 adults (21 to 85 years of age) with varying degrees of renal impairment. Following the oral administration of a single 1,000 mg dose of azithromycin, mean Cmax and AUC0-120 increased by 5.1% and 4.2%, respectively in subjects with mild to moderate renal impairment (GFR 10 to 80 mL/min) compared to subjects with normal renal function (GFR >80 mL/min). The mean Cmax and AUC0-120 increased 61% and 35%, respectively in subjects with severe renal impairment (GFR <10 mL/min) compared to subjects with normal renal function (GFR >80 mL/min). (See 
                        DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION
                     ).
                  
 

                  
                  The pharmacokinetics of azithromycin in subjects with hepatic impairment have not been established.
                  
 

                  
                  There are no significant differences in the disposition of azithromycin between male and female subjects. No dosage adjustment is recommended based on gender.
                  
 

                  
                  When studied in healthy elderly subjects aged 65 to 85 years, the pharmacokinetic parameters of azithromycin in elderly men were similar to those in young adults; however, in elderly women, although higher peak concentrations (increased by 30 to 50%) were observed, no significant accumulation occurred.
                  
 

                  
                  In two clinical studies, azithromycin for oral suspension was dosed at 10 mg/kg on day 1, followed by 5 mg/kg on days 2 through 5 to two groups of pediatric patients (aged 1 to 5 years and 5 to 15 years, respectively). The mean pharmacokinetic parameters on day 5 were Cmax=0.216 mcg/mL, Tmax=1.9 hours, and AUC0-24=1.822 mcg•hr/mL for the 1- to 5-year-old group and were Cmax=0.383 mcg/mL, Tmax=2.4 hours, and AUC0-24=3.109 mcg•hr/mL for the 5- to 15-year-old group.
                  Two clinical studies were conducted in 68 pediatric patients aged 3 to 16 years to determine the pharmacokinetics and safety of azithromycin for oral suspension. Azithromycin was administered following a low-fat breakfast.
                  The first study consisted of 35 pediatric patients treated with 20 mg/kg/day (maximum daily dose 500 mg) for 3 days of whom 34 patients were evaluated for pharmacokinetics.
                  In the second study, 33 pediatric patients received doses of 12 mg/kg/day (maximum daily dose 500 mg) for 5 days of whom 31 patients were evaluated for pharmacokinetics.
                  In both studies, azithromycin concentrations were determined over a 24 hour period following the last daily dose. Patients weighing above 25.0 kg in the 3-day study or 41.7 kg in the 5-day study received the maximum adult daily dose of 500 mg. Eleven patients (weighing 25.0 kg or less) in the first study and 17 patients (weighing 41.7 kg or less) in the second study received a total dose of 60 mg/kg. The following table shows pharmacokinetic data in the subset of pediatric patients who received a total dose of 60 mg/kg.
                  


                  


The similarity of the overall exposure (AUC0-∞) between the 3-day and 5-day regimens in pediatric patients is unknown.
                  Single dose pharmacokinetics in pediatric patients given doses of 30 mg/kg have not been studied. (See 
                        DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION
                     .)
                  
 

                  
                  Drug interaction studies were performed with azithromycin and other drugs likely to be co-administered. The effects of coadministration of azithromycin on the pharmacokinetics of other drugs are shown in Table 1 and the effect of other drugs on the pharmacokinetics of azithromycin are shown in Table 2.
                  Co-administration of azithromycin at therapeutic doses had a modest effect on the pharmacokinetics of the drugs listed in Table 1. No dosage adjustment of drugs listed in Table 1 is recommended when co-administered with azithromycin.
                  Co-administration of azithromycin with efavirenz or fluconazole had a modest effect on the pharmacokinetics of azithromycin. Nelfinavir significantly increased the Cmax and AUC of azithromycin. No dosage adjustment of azithromycin is recommended when administered with drugs listed in Table 2. (See 
                        PRECAUTIONS: Drug Interactions
                     ).
                  


                  



                     -90% Confidence interval not reported
                  
                  


                  



                     -90% Confidence interval not reported
                  
                  
 

                  
                  QTc interval prolongation was studied in a randomized, placebo-controlled parallel trial in 116 healthy subjects who received either chloroquine (1000 mg) alone or in combination with azithromycin (500 mg, 1000 mg, and 1500 mg once daily). Co-administration of azithromycin increased the QTc interval in a dose- and concentration-dependent manner. In  comparison to chloroquine alone, the maximum mean (95% upper confidence bound) increases in QTcF were 5 (10) ms, 7 (12) ms and 9 (14) ms with the co-administration of 500 mg, 1000 mg and 1500 mg azithromycin, respectively.
                  
 

                  
                  Azithromycin binds to the 23S rRNA of the bacterial 50S ribosomal subunit. It blocks protein synthesis by inhibiting the transpeptidation/translocation step of protein synthesis and by inhibiting the assembly of the 50S ribosomal subunit.
                  Azithromycin concentrates in phagocytes and fibroblasts as demonstrated by in vitro incubation techniques. The ratio of intracellular to extracellular concentration was >30 after one hour incubation. In vivo studies suggest that concentration in phagocytes may contribute to drug distribution to inflamed tissues.
                  
 

                  
                  The most frequently encountered mechanism of resistance to azithromycin is modification of the 23S rRNA at positions corresponding to A2058 and A2059 in the Escherichia coli numbering system. In addition to cross resistance with other macrolides (erythromycin and clarithromycin), ribosomal modification may determine resistance to other antibiotic classes (lincosamides and streptogramins B) that bind to overlapping ribosomal sites. Azithromycin has been shown to be active against most isolates of the following bacteria, both in vitro and in clinical infections (see 
                        INDICATIONS AND USAGE
                     ).
                  
 

                  
                  
                     Staphylococcus 
                     aureus
                  
                  
                     Streptococcus 
                     agalactiae
                  
                  
                     Streptococcus 
                     pneumoniae
                  
                  
                     Streptococcus 
                     pyogenes
                  
                  
 

                  
                  
                     Haemophilus
                     ducreyi
                  
                  
                     Haemophilus
                     influenzae
                  
                  
                     Moraxella 
                     catarrhalis
                  
                  
                     Neisseria 
                     gonorrhoeae
                  
                  
 

                  
                  
                     Chlamydophila
                     pneumoniae
                  
                  
                     Chlamydia trachomatis
                  
                  
                     Mycoplasma 
                     pneumoniae
                  
                  The following in vitro data are available, 
                        but their clinical significance is unknown.
                  
                  At least 90% of the following bacteria exhibit an in vitro minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) less than or equal to the azithromycin susceptible breakpoint of ≤4mcg/mL. However, safety and effectiveness of azithromycin in treating clinical infections due to these bacteria have not been established in adequate and well-controlled trials.
                  
 

                  
                  Beta-hemolytic streptococci (Groups C, F, G)
                  Viridans group streptococci
                  
 

                  
                  
                     Bordetella
                      pertussis
                  
                  
 

                  
                  
                     Peptostreptococcus species
                  
                     Prevotella
                     bivia
                  
                  
 

                  
                  
                     Ureaplasma
                     urealyticum
                  
                  
                     Legionella 
                     pneumophila
                  
                  
 

                  
                  When available, the results of in vitro susceptibility test results for antimicrobial drugs used in resident hospitals should be provided to the physician as periodic reports which describe the susceptibility profile of nosocomial and community-acquired pathogens. These reports may differ from susceptibility data obtained from outpatient use, but could aid the physician in selecting the most effective antimicrobial.
                  
 

                  
                  Quantitative methods are used to determine antimicrobial minimum inhibitory concentrations (MICs). These MICs provide estimates of the susceptibility of bacteria to antimicrobial compounds. The MICs should be determined using a standardized procedure. Standardized procedures are based on a dilution method1
                     ,2 (broth or agar) or equivalent with standardized inoculum concentration and standardized concentration of azithromycin powder. The MIC values should be interpreted according to criteria provided in Table 3.
                  
 

                  
                  Quantitative methods that require measurement of zone diameters also provide reproducible estimates of the susceptibility of bacteria to antimicrobial compounds. One such standardized procedure2
                     ,3 requires the use of standardized inoculum concentration. This procedure uses paper disks impregnated with 15 mcg azithromycin to test the susceptibility of bacteria to azithromycin. The disk diffusion interpretive criteria are provided in Table 3.
                  


                  



                     Insufficient information is available to determine Intermediate or Resistant interpretive criteria The ability to correlate MIC values and plasma drug levels is difficult as azithromycin concentrates in macrophages and tissues (see 
                  
                  A report of “susceptible” indicates that the pathogen is likely to be inhibited if the antimicrobial compound reaches the concentrations usually achievable. A report of “intermediate” indicates that the result should be considered equivocal, and, if the microorganism is not fully susceptible to alternative, clinically feasible drugs, the test should be repeated. This category implies possible clinical applicability in body sites where the drug is physiologically concentrated or in situations where high dosage of drug can be used. This category also provides a buffer zone which prevents small uncontrolled technical factors from causing major discrepancies in interpretation. A report of “resistant” indicates that the pathogen is not likely to be inhibited if the antimicrobial compound reaches the concentrations usually achievable; other therapy should be selected.
                  
 

                  
                  Standardized susceptibility test procedures require the use of laboratory controls to monitor and ensure the accuracy and precision of supplies and reagents used in the assay, and the techniques of the individual performing the test. Standard azithromycin powder should provide the following range of MIC values noted in Table 4. For the diffusion technique using the azithromycin 15 mcg disk, the criteria in Table 4 should be achieved.
                  


                  



                     ATCC = American Type Culture Collection
                  
                  
 

               
               
            
         