
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  In a study of five healthy adults administered a single 500 mg dose of nafcillin by intravenous injection over seven minutes, the mean plasma concentration of the drug was approximately 30 mcg/mL at 5 minutes after injection.  The mean area under the plasma concentration-versus-time curve (AUC) for nafcillin in this study was 18.06 mcg
                        •
                     h/mL.  The serum half-life of nafcillin administered by the intravenous route ranged from 33 to 61 minutes as measured in three separate studies.
                  In contrast to the other penicillinase-resistant penicillins, only about 30% of nafcillin is excreted as unchanged drug in the urine of normal volunteers, and most within the first six hours.  Nafcillin is primarily eliminated by nonrenal routes, namely hepatic inactivation and excretion in the bile.
                  Nafcillin binds to serum proteins, mainly albumin.  The degree of protein binding reported for nafcillin is 89.9 ± 1.5%.  Reported values vary with the method of study and the investigator.
                  The concurrent administration of probenecid with nafcillin increases and prolongs plasma concentrations of nafcillin.  Probenecid significantly reduces the total body clearance of nafcillin with renal clearance being decreased to a greater extent than nonrenal clearance.
                  The penicillinase-resistant penicillins are widely distributed in various body fluids, including bile, pleural, amniotic and synovial fluids.  With normal doses insignificant concentrations are found in the aqueous humor of the eye.  High nafcillin CSF levels have been obtained in the presence of inflamed meninges.
                  Renal failure does not appreciably affect the serum half-life of nafcillin; therefore, no modification of the usual nafcillin dosage is necessary in renal failure with or without hemodialysis.  Hemodialysis does not accelerate the rate of clearance of nafcillin from the blood.
                  A study which assessed the effects of cirrhosis and extrahepatic biliary obstruction in man demonstrated that the plasma clearance of nafcillin was significantly decreased in patients with hepatic dysfunction.  In these patients with cirrhosis and extrahepatic obstruction, nafcillin excretion in the urine was significantly increased from about 30 to 50% of the administered dose, suggesting that renal disease superimposed on hepatic disease could further decrease nafcillin clearance.
               
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Microbiology
                     
                        Penicillinase-resistant penicillins exert a bactericidal action against penicillin-susceptible microorganisms during the state of active multiplication.  All penicillins inhibit the biosynthesis of the bacterial cell wall.
                        The drugs in this class are highly resistant to inactivation by staphylococcal penicillinase and are active against penicillinase producing strains of 
                              Staphylococcus 
                           
                           
                              aureus
                           .  The penicillinase-resistant penicillins are active 
                              in vitro
                            against a variety of other bacteria.
                        
                           
                              Susceptibility Tests
                           
                        
                        
                           
                              Diffusion Techniques
                           :  Quantitative methods that require measurement of zone diameters provide reproducible estimates of the susceptibility of bacteria to antimicrobial compounds.  One such standardized procedure1 that has been recommended for use with disks to test the susceptibility of microorganisms to nafcillin uses the 1-mcg nafcillin disk. Interpretation involves correlation of the diameter obtained in the disk test with the MIC for nafcillin.  Reports from the laboratory providing results of the standard single-disk susceptibility test with a 1-mcg nafcillin disk should be interpreted according to the following criteria:
                        


                        


A report of “Susceptible” indicates that the pathogen is likely to be inhibited by usually achievable concentrations of the antimicrobial compound in blood.  A report of “Intermediate” indicates that the result should be considered equivocal, and, if the microorganism is not fully susceptible to alternative, clinically feasible drugs, the test should be repeated.  This category implies possible clinical applicability in body sites where the drug is physiologically concentrated or in situations where high dosage of drug can be used.  This category also provides a buffer zone that prevents small uncontrolled technical factors from causing major discrepancies in interpretation.  A report of “Resistant” indicates that usually achievable concentrations of the antimicrobial compound in the blood are unlikely to be inhibitory and that other therapy should be selected.
                        Measurement of MIC or MBC and achieved antimicrobial compound concentrations may be appropriate to guide therapy in some infections (see
                               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY 
                           section for further information on drug concentrations achieved in infected body sites and other pharmacokinetic properties of this antimicrobial drug product).
                        Standardized susceptibility test procedures require the use of laboratory control microorganisms.  The 1 mcg nafcillin disk should provide the following zone diameters in these laboratory test quality control strains:
                        


                        



                           
                              Dilution Techniques
                           :  Quantitative methods that are used to determine minimum inhibitory concentrations provide reproducible estimates of the susceptibility of bacteria to antimicrobial compounds.  One such standardized procedure uses a standardized dilution method2 (broth, agar, or microdilution) or equivalent with nafcillin powder.  The MIC values obtained should be interpreted according to the following criteria:
                        

                        


                        


Interpretation should be as stated above for results using diffusion techniques.  As with standard diffusion techniques, dilution methods require the use of laboratory control microorganisms.  Standard nafcillin powder should provide the following MIC values:
                        


