
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Nplate increases platelet production through binding and activation of the TPO receptor, a mechanism analogous to endogenous TPO.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        In clinical studies, treatment with Nplate resulted in dose-dependent increases in platelet counts.  After a single subcutaneous dose of 1 to 10 mcg/kg Nplate in patients with chronic ITP, the peak platelet count was 1.3 to 14.9 times greater than the baseline platelet count over a 2- to 3-week period. The platelet counts were above 50 x 109/L for seven out of eight patients with chronic ITP who received six weekly doses of Nplate at 1 mcg/kg.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        In the long-term extension study in patients with ITP receiving weekly treatment of Nplate subcutaneously, the pharmacokinetics of romiplostim over the dose range of 3 to 15 mcg/kg indicated that peak serum concentrations of romiplostim were observed about 7 to 50 hours post dose (median: 14 hours) with half-life values ranging from 1 to 34 days (median: 3.5 days). The serum concentrations varied among patients and did not correlate with the dose administered. The elimination of serum romiplostim is in part dependent on the TPO receptor on platelets. As a result, for a given dose, patients with high platelet counts are associated with low serum concentrations and vice versa. In another ITP clinical study, no accumulation in serum concentrations was observed (n = 4) after six weekly doses of Nplate (3 mcg/kg). The accumulation at higher doses of romiplostim is unknown.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         