
                     
                     
                     Drug Interactions
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              — Felodipine is metabolized by CYP3A4. Co-administration of CYP3A4 inhibitors (e.g., ketoconazole, itraconazole, erythromycin, grapefruit juice, cimetidine) with felodipine may lead to several-fold increases in the plasma levels of felodipine, either due to an increase in bioavailability or due to a decrease in metabolism. These increases in concentration may lead to increased effects, (lower blood pressure and increased heart rate). These effects have been observed with co-administration of itraconazole (a potent CYP3A4 inhibitor). Caution should be used when CYP3A4 inhibitors are co-administered with felodipine. A conservative approach to dosing felodipine should be taken. The following specific interactions have been reported:
                                            CYP3A4 Inhibitors
                              
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              — Co-administration of another extended release formulation of felodipine with itraconazole resulted in approximately 8-fold increase in the AUC, more than 6-fold increase in the C , and 2-fold prolongation in the half-life of felodipine.
                                            Itraconazole
                                 max
                              
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              — Co-administration of felodipine extended-release tablets with erythromycin resulted in approximately 2.5-fold increase in the AUC and C , and about 2-fold prolongation in the half-life of felodipine.
                                            Erythromycin
                                 max
                              
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              — Co-administration of felodipine with grapefruit juice resulted in more than 2-fold increase in the AUC and C , but no prolongation in the half-life of felodipine.
                                            Grapefruit Juice
                                 max
                              
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              — Co-administration of felodipine with cimetidine (a non-specific CYP-450 inhibitor) resulted in an increase of approximately 50% in the AUC and the C , of felodipine.
                                            Cimetidine
                                 max
                              
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              — A pharmacokinetic study of felodipine in conjunction with metoprolol demonstrated no significant effects on the pharmacokinetics of felodipine. The AUC and C of metoprolol, however, were increased approximately 31 and 38%, respectively. In controlled clinical trials, however, beta blockers including metoprolol were concurrently administered with felodipine and were well tolerated.
                                            Beta-Blocking Agents
                                 max
                              
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              — When given concomitantly with felodipine extended-release tablets the pharmacokinetics of digoxin in patients with heart failure were not significantly altered.
                                            Digoxin
                              
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              — In a pharmacokinetic study, maximum plasma concentrations of felodipine were considerably lower in epileptic patients on long-term anticonvulsant therapy (eg, phenytoin, carbamazepine, or phenobarbital) than in healthy volunteers. In such patients, the mean area under the felodipine plasma concentration-time curve was also reduced to approximately 6% of that observed in healthy volunteers. Since a clinically significant interaction may be anticipated, alternative antihypertensive therapy should be considered in these patients.
                                            Anticonvulsants
                              
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              — Felodipine may increase the blood concentration of tacrolimus. When given concomitantly with felodipine, the tacrolimus blood concentration should be followed and the tacrolimus dose may need to be adjusted.
                                            Tacrolimus
                              
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              — In healthy subjects there were no clinically significant interactions when felodipine was given concomitantly with indomethacin or spironolactone.
                                            Other Concomitant Therapy
                              
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              — See
                                            Interaction with Food
                                 .
                                                CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY, Pharmacokinetics and Metabolism
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               