
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Codeine Phosphate
                     
                        Codeine is a narcotic analgesic and antitussive whose effects are due to central action. It is well absorbed via oral administration. Following absorption, codeine is metabolized primarily by enzymes in the liver into morphine and other metabolites. These are excreted primarily in the urine with negligible amounts in the feces.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Phenylephrine Hydrochloride
                     
                        Phenylephrine is an alpha-adrenergic receptor agonist, and acts predominantly by a direct action on alpha (α) adrenergic receptors. It causes Constriction of blood vessels in the nasal mucosa, which may relieve nasal congestion, after oral ingestion. In therapeutic doses the drug causes little, if any, central nervous system stimulation, and has no significant stimulant effect on the beta (β) adrenergic receptors of the heart.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Diphenhydramine hydrochloride
                     
                        is an ethanolamine antihistamine with anticholinergic (drying), anti-inflammatory and sedative effects. It does not prevent the release of histamine, but competitively antagonizes histamine at H1, histamine receptors and thus blocks it in the central nervous system and in the periphery. Its antihistaminic effects thus relieve and block such allergic reactions as increased capillary permeability and dilation, edema formation, "flare" and "itch" response, vasoconstriction and vasodilatation, and gastrointestinal and smooth-muscle constriction.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         