
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Methylnaltrexone is a selective antagonist of opioid binding at the mu-opioid receptor. As a quaternary amine, the ability of methylnaltrexone to cross the blood-brain barrier is restricted. This allows methylnaltrexone to function as a peripherally-acting mu‑opioid receptor antagonist in tissues such as the gastrointestinal tract, thereby decreasing the constipating effects of opioids without impacting opioid-mediated analgesic effects on the central nervous system. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        
                           Cardiac Electrophysiology
                        
                        In a randomized, double-blind placebo- and (open-label) moxifloxacin-controlled 4‑period crossover study, 56 healthy subjects were administered methylnaltrexone bromide 0.3 mg/kg and methylnaltrexone bromide 0.64 mg/kg by intravenous infusion over 20 minutes, placebo, and a single oral dose of moxifloxacin. At a dose approximately 4.3 times the maximum recommended dose (7.5 times the mean peak plasma concentration), methylnaltrexone does not prolong the QTc interval to any clinically relevant extent.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        
                           Absorption
                        
                        Following subcutaneous administration, methylnaltrexone achieved peak concentrations (Cmax) at approximately 0.5 hours. Across the range of doses from 0.15 mg/kg to 0.50 mg/kg, mean Cmax and area under the plasma concentration-time curve (AUC) increased in a dose-proportional manner. There was no accumulation of methylnaltrexone following once-daily subcutaneous dosing of methylnaltrexone bromide 12 mg for seven consecutive days in healthy subjects.
                        


                        



                           i) Expressed as mean (SD).
                        
                           ii) Expressed as median (range).
                        
                           Distribution
                        
                        The steady-state volume of distribution (Vss) of methylnaltrexone is approximately 1.1 L/kg. The fraction of methylnaltrexone bound to human plasma proteins is 11.0% to 15.3%, as determined by equilibrium dialysis. 
                        
                           Elimination
                        
                        Following intravenous administration of 0.3 mg/kg, the total clearance of methylnaltrexone is approximately 10.5 ± 1.5 mL/min/kg, with renal clearance of 6.37 ± 3.0 mL/min/kg. The terminal half-life (t1/2) is approximately 8 hours.  
                        
                           Metabolism
                        
                        In a mass balance study, approximately 44% of the administered radioactivity was recovered in the urine over 24 hours with 5 distinct metabolites and none of the detected metabolites was in amounts over 6% of administered radioactivity. Conversion to methyl-6-naltrexol isomers (5% of total) and methylnaltrexone sulfate (1.3% of total) appear to be the primary pathways of metabolism. N‑demethylation of methylnaltrexone to produce naltrexone is not significant.
                        After 12 mg once daily dosing the mean AUC0-24 ratio of metabolites to methylnaltrexone at steady-state was 30%, 19%, and 9% for methylnaltrexone sulfate, methyl-6a-naltrexol, and methyl-6b-naltrexol, respectively.  Methyl-6a-naltrexol, and methyl-6b-naltrexol are active mu-opioid receptor antagonists and methylnaltrexone sulfate is a weak mu-opioid receptor antagonist.
                        Methylnaltrexone is conjugated by sulfotransferase SULT1E1 and SULT2A1 isoforms to methylnaltrexone sulfate.  Conversion to methyl-6-naltrexol isomers is mediated by aldo-keto reductase 1C enzymes.
                        
                           Excretion
                        
                        After intravenous administration, approximately half of the dose was excreted in the urine (53.6%) and 17.3% of administered dose was excreted in the feces up to 168 hours postdose.  Methylnaltrexone is excreted primarily as the unchanged drug in the urine and feces.  Active renal secretion of methylnaltrexone is suggested by renal clearance of methylnaltrexone that is approximately 4-5 fold higher than creatinine clearance. 
                        
                            
                        
                        
                           Specific Populations
                        
                        
                           Age:  Geriatric Population
                        
                        A study was conducted to characterize the pharmacokinetics of methylnaltrexone after a single dose of 24 mg methylnaltrexone via intravenous infusion over 20 min in healthy adults between 18 and 45 years of age and in healthy adults aged 65 years and older.  In elderly subjects (mean age 72 years old), mean clearance was about 20% lower (56 L/h versus 70 L/h) and AUC∞ was 26% higher than in subjects between 18 and 45 years of age (mean age 30 years old).
                        
                           Renal impairment
                        
                        In a study of volunteers with varying degrees of renal impairment receiving a single dose of 0.30 mg/kg methylnaltrexone bromide, renal impairment had a marked effect on the renal excretion of methylnaltrexone. Severe renal impairment decreased the renal clearance of methylnaltrexone by 8- to 9-fold and resulted in a 2-fold increase in total methylnaltrexone exposure (AUC). Mean Cmax was not significantly changed. No studies were performed in patients with end-stage renal impairment requiring dialysis.
                        
                           Hepatic impairment
                        
                        The effect of mild and moderate hepatic impairment on the systemic exposure to methylnaltrexone has been studied in patients with Child-Pugh Class A  (n=8) and B (n=8), compared to healthy subjects. Results showed no meaningful effect of hepatic impairment on the AUC or Cmax of methylnaltrexone.  The effect of severe hepatic impairment on the pharmacokinetics of methylnaltrexone has not been studied.
                        
                           Drug Interactions
                        
                        
                           In vitro, methylnaltrexone did not significantly inhibit or induce the activity of cytochrome P450 (CYP) isozymes CYP1A2, CYP2A6, CYP2B6, CYP2C9, CYP2C19, or CYP3A4.  
                        
                           In vitro, methylnaltrexone did not induce the enzymatic activity of CYP2E1.
                        
                           In
                           vitro studies suggested that methylnaltrexone was a substrate of Organic Cation Transporter 1 but not a substrate of Organic Anion Transporter 1 or  P-glycoprotein.
                        
                           Cimetidine
                        
                        A clinical drug interaction study in healthy adult subjects evaluated the effects of cimetidine, a drug that inhibits the active renal secretion of organic cations, on the pharmacokinetics of methylnaltrexone (24 mg administered as an IV infusion over 20 minutes).  A single dose of methylnaltrexone was administered before cimetidine dosing and with the last dose of cimetidine (400 mg every 8 hours for 6 days).  Mean Cmax and AUC of methylnaltrexone increased by 10% with concomitant cimetidine administration.  The renal clearance of methylnaltrexone decreased about 40%.  
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         