
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           Strong cytochrome P450 3A4 inhibitors (e.g., ritonavir): Use not recommended. May increase risk of cardiovascular effects. (7.1)
                           Monoamine oxidase inhibitors and tricyclic antidepressants: Use with extreme caution. May potentiate effect of salmeterol on vascular system. (7.2)
                           Beta-blockers: Use with caution. May block bronchodilatory effects of beta-agonists and produce severe bronchospasm. (7.3)
                           Diuretics: Use with caution. Electrocardiographic changes and/or hypokalemia associated with nonpotassium-sparing diuretics may worsen with concomitant beta-agonists. (7.4)
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 Inhibitors of Cytochrome P450 3A4
                     
                        In a drug interaction study in 20 healthy subjects, coadministration of salmeterol (50 mcg twice daily) and ketoconazole (400 mg once daily) for 7 days resulted in greater systemic exposure to salmeterol (AUC increased 16-fold and Cmax increased 1.4-fold). Three (3) subjects were withdrawn due to beta2-agonist side effects (2 with prolonged QTc and 1 with palpitations and sinus tachycardia). Although there was no statistical effect on the mean QTc, coadministration of salmeterol and ketoconazole was associated with more frequent increases in QTc duration compared with salmeterol and placebo administration. Due to the potential increased risk of cardiovascular adverse events, the concomitant use of salmeterol with strong CYP3A4 inhibitors (e.g., ketoconazole, ritonavir, atazanavir, clarithromycin, indinavir, itraconazole, nefazodone, nelfinavir, saquinavir, telithromycin) is not recommended.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 Monoamine Oxidase Inhibitors and Tricyclic Antidepressants
                     
                        SEREVENT DISKUS should be administered with extreme caution to patients being treated with monoamine oxidase inhibitors or tricyclic antidepressants, or within 2 weeks of discontinuation of such agents, because the action of salmeterol on the vascular system may be potentiated by these agents.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3 Beta-Adrenergic Receptor Blocking Agents
                     
                        Beta-blockers not only block the pulmonary effect of beta-agonists, such as SEREVENT DISKUS, but may also produce severe bronchospasm in patients with asthma or COPD. Therefore, patients with asthma or COPD should not normally be treated with beta-blockers. However, under certain circumstances, there may be no acceptable alternatives to the use of beta-adrenergic blocking agents for these patients; cardioselective beta-blockers could be considered, although they should be administered with caution.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4 Diuretics
                     
                        The ECG changes and/or hypokalemia that may result from the administration of nonpotassium-sparing diuretics (such as loop or thiazide diuretics) can be acutely worsened by beta-agonists, especially when the recommended dose of the beta-agonist is exceeded. Although the clinical relevance of these effects is not known, caution is advised in the coadministration of SEREVENT DISKUS with nonpotassium-sparing diuretics.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         