
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
					
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
							
                     
                        The precise mechanism of the analgesic and antipyretic properties of acetaminophen is not established but is thought to primarily involve central actions.
								
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics
							
                     
                        Acetaminophen has been shown to have analgesic and antipyretic activities in animal and human studies.
								
                        Single doses of OFIRMEV up to 3000 mg and repeated doses of 1000 mg every 6 hours for 48 hours have not been shown to cause a significant effect on platelet aggregation.  Acetaminophen does not have any immediate or delayed effects on small-vessel hemostasis.  Clinical studies of both healthy subjects and patients with hemophilia showed no significant changes in bleeding time after receiving multiple doses of oral acetaminophen.
								
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
							
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Distribution
                              
                              The pharmacokinetics of OFIRMEV have been studied in patients and healthy subjects from premature neonates up to adults 60 years old.  The pharmacokinetic profile of OFIRMEV has been demonstrated to be dose proportional in adults following administration of single doses of 500, 650, and 1000 mg.
										
                              The maximum concentration (Cmax) occurs at the end of the 15 minute intravenous infusion of OFIRMEV.  Compared to the same dose of oral acetaminophen, the Cmax following administration of OFIRMEV is up to 70% higher, while overall exposure (area under the concentration time curve [AUC]) is very similar.
										
                              Pharmacokinetic parameters of OFIRMEV (AUC, Cmax, terminal elimination half-life [T½], systemic clearance [CL], and volume of distribution at steady state [Vss]) following administration of a single intravenous dose of 15 mg/kg for the pediatric population and 1000 mg in adults are summarized in Table 4.
                              


                              


The pharmacokinetic exposure of OFIRMEV observed in children and adolescents is similar to adults, but higher in neonates and infants.  Dosing simulations from pharmacokinetic data in infants and neonates suggest that dose reductions of 33% in infants 1 month to < 2 years of age, and 50% in neonates up to 28 days, with a minimum dosing interval of 6 hours, will produce a pharmacokinetic exposure similar to that observed in children age 2 years and older.
										
                              At therapeutic levels, binding of acetaminophen to plasma proteins is low (ranging from 10% to 25%).  Acetaminophen appears to be widely distributed throughout most body tissues except fat.
										
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Metabolism and Excretion
                              
                              Acetaminophen is primarily metabolized in the liver by first-order kinetics and involves three principal separate pathways:  Conjugation with glucuronide, conjugation with sulfate, and oxidation via the cytochrome P450 enzyme pathway, primarily CYP2E1, to form a reactive intermediate metabolite (N-acetyl-p-benzoquinone imine or NAPQI).  With therapeutic doses, NAPQI undergoes rapid conjugation with glutathione and is then further metabolized to form cysteine and mercapturic acid conjugates.
										
                              Acetaminophen metabolites are mainly excreted in the urine.  Less than 5% is excreted in the urine as unconjugated (free) acetaminophen and more than 90% of the administered dose is excreted within 24 hours.
										
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         