
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
                  See also Clinical Pharmacology (12.3). 
               
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              •Concomitant use of meloxicam and warfarin may result in increased risk of bleeding complications (7.7) 
                           
                              •Concomitant use of meloxicam and aspirin is not generally recommended because of the potential of increased adverse effect including increased GI bleeding (7.2) 
                           
                              •Concomitant use with meloxicam increases lithium plasma levels (7.4) 
                           
                              •Concomitant use with NSAIDs may reduce the antihypertensive effect of ACE inhibitors (7.1)
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 ACE-inhibitors 
                     
                        NSAIDs may diminish the antihypertensive effect of ACE-inhibitors. This interaction should be given consideration in patients taking meloxicam concomitantly with ACE-inhibitors. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 Aspirin 
                     
                        When meloxicam is administered with aspirin (1000 mg three times daily) to healthy volunteers, an increase in the AUC (10%) and Cmax (24%) of meloxicam was noted. The clinical significance of this interaction is not known; however, as with other NSAIDs concomitant administration of meloxicam and aspirin is not generally recommended because of the potential for increased adverse effects. 
                        Concomitant administration of low-dose aspirin with meloxicam may result in an increased rate of GI ulceration or other complications, compared to use of meloxicam alone. Meloxicam is not a substitute for aspirin for cardiovascular prophylaxis. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3 Diuretics 
                     
                        Clinical studies, as well as post marketing observations, have shown that NSAIDs can reduce the natriuretic effect of furosemide and thiazides in some patients. This response has been attributed to inhibition of renal prostaglandin synthesis. However, studies with furosemide agents and meloxicam have not demonstrated a reduction in natriuretic effect. Furosemide single and multiple dose pharmacodynamics and pharmacokinetics are not affected by multiple doses of meloxicam. Nevertheless, during concomitant therapy with meloxicam, patients should be observed closely for signs of renal failure [see Warnings and Precautions (5.6)], as well as to ensure diuretic efficacy. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4 Lithium 
                     
                        In a study conducted in healthy subjects, mean pre-dose lithium concentration and AUC were increased by 21% in subjects receiving lithium doses ranging from 804 to 1072 mg twice daily with meloxicam 15 mg every day as compared to subjects receiving lithium alone. These effects have been attributed to inhibition of renal prostaglandin synthesis by meloxicam. Closely monitor patients on lithium treatment for signs of lithium toxicity when meloxicam is introduced, adjusted, or withdrawn. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.5 Methotrexate 
                     
                        NSAIDs have been reported to competitively inhibit methotrexate accumulation in rabbit kidney slices. Therefore, NSAIDs may reduce the elimination of methotrexate, thereby enhancing the toxicity of methotrexate. Use caution when meloxicam is administered concomitantly with methotrexate [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)]. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.6 Cyclosporine 
                     
                        Meloxicam, like other NSAIDs, may affect renal prostaglandins, thereby altering the renal toxicity of certain drugs. Therefore, concomitant therapy with meloxicam may increase cyclosporine’s nephrotoxicity. Use caution when meloxicam is administered concomitantly with cyclosporine. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.7 Warfarin 
                     
                        The effects of warfarin and NSAIDs on GI bleeding are synergistic, such that users of both drugs together have a risk of serious GI bleeding higher than users of either drug alone. 
                        Monitor anticoagulant activity, particularly in the first few days after initiating or changing meloxicam therapy in patients receiving warfarin or similar agents, since these patients are at an increased risk of bleeding than with the use of either drug alone. Use caution when administering meloxicam with warfarin since patients on warfarin may experience changes in INR and an increased risk of bleeding complications when a new medication is introduced [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         