
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              •CYP3A4 Inducers: Increased risk of more rapid metabolism and decreased effects of methadone. (7.1)
                           
                              •CYP3A4 Inhibitors: Increased risk of reduced metabolism and methadone toxicity. (7.1)
                           
                              •Anti-retroviral Agents: May result in increased clearance and decreased plasma levels of methadone or in certain cases, increased plasma levels and risk of toxicity. (7.1)
                           
                              •Potentially Arrhythmogenic Agents: Extreme caution is necessary when any drug known to have the potential to prolong the QT interval is prescribed in conjunction with methadone. (7.3)
                           
                              •Opioid antagonists, partial agonists, mixed agonists/antagonist opioid analgesics: Avoid concomitant use with methadone hydrochloride tablets for oral suspension because it may precipitate withdrawal symptoms. (5.12, 7.4)
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 Cytochrome P-450 Interactions 
                     
                        
                           Methadone undergoes hepatic N-
                           demethylation
                            by cytochrome P450 (CYP) isoforms, principally CYP3A4, CYP2B6, CYP2C19, and to a lesser extent by CYP2C9 and CYP2D6 [see CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY (12.3)]. 
                        
                        
                           
                              Cytochrome P450 Inducers
                           
                        
                        Concurrent use of methadone and drugs that induce cytochrome P450 enzymes(such as rifampicin, phenytoin, phenobarbital, carbamazepine, and St. John’s Wort) may result in reduced efficacy of methadone and could precipitate a withdrawal syndrome.  Closely monitor patients receiving methadone hydrochloride tablets for oral suspension and an enzyme inducer closely for signs of withdrawal and adjust the methadone dose accordingly.  
                        
                           
                              Cytochrome P450 Inhibitors
                           
                        
                        Coadministration of drugs that inhibit CYP3A4 (such as ketoconazole, itraconazole, voriconazole, clarithromycin, erythromycin, telithromycin) and/or drugs that inhibit CYP2C9 (such as sertraline and fluvoxamine) may cause decreased clearance of methadone, which could increase or prolong adverse drug effects and may cause fatal respiratory depression[see CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY (12.3)].
                           Monitor patients closely for signs of respiratory or central nervous system depression when methadone hydrochloride tablets for oral suspension are prescribed with a CYP3A4 inhibitor and reduce the dosage if necessary.
                        
                           
                              Paradoxical Effects of Antiretroviral Agents on Methadone
                           
                        
                        Concurrent use of certain protease inhibitors with CYP3A4 inhibitory activity, alone and in combination, such as abacavir, amprenavir, darunavir+ritonavir, efavirenz, nelfinavir, nevirapine, ritonavir, telaprevir, lopinavir+ritonavir, saquinavir+ritonavir, and tipranvir+ritonavir, has resulted in increased clearance or decreased plasma levels of methadone.  This may result in reduced efficacy of methadone hydrochloride tablets for oral suspension and could precipitate a withdrawal syndrome. Monitor patients receiving methadone hydrochloride tablets for oral suspension and any of these anti-retroviral therapies closely for evidence of withdrawal effects and adjust the methadone hydrochloride tablets for oral suspension dose accordingly.
                        
                           
                              Effects of Methadone on Antiretroviral Agents
                           
                        
                        
                           
                              Didanosine
                           
                           
                               and 
                           
                           
                              Stavudine
                           
                           
                              :
                           Experimental evidence demonstrated that methadone decreased the area under the concentration-time curve (AUC) and peak levels for didanosine and stavudine, with a more significant decrease for didanosine. Methadone disposition was not substantially altered.
                        
                           
                              Zidovudine
                           
                           
                              :
                           Experimental evidence demonstrated that methadone increased the AUC of zidovudine, which could result in toxic effects.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 CNS Depressants
                     
                        Concurrent use of methadone and other central nervous system (CNS) depressants (e.g. sedatives, hypnotics, general anesthetics, antiemetics, phenothiazines, other tranquilizers, alcohol and drugs of abuse) can increase the risk of respiratory depression, hypotension, and profound sedation or coma. Monitor patients receiving CNS depressants and methadone hydrochloride tablets for oral suspension for signs of respiratory depression and hypotension. When such combined therapy is contemplated, reduce the initial dose of one or both agents.  Deaths have been reported when methadone has been abused in conjunction with benzodiazepines.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3 Potentially Arrhythmogenic Agents
                     
                        Monitor patients closely for cardiac conduction changes when any drug known to have the potential to prolong the QT interval is prescribed in conjunction with methadone hydrochloride tablets for oral suspension. Pharmacodynamic interactions may occur with concomitant use of methadone hydrochloride tablets for oral suspension and potentially arrhythmogenic agents such as class I and III antiarrhythmics, some neuroleptics and tricyclic antidepressants, and calcium channel blockers.
                        Similarly, monitor patients closely when prescribing methadone hydrochloride tablets for oral suspension concomitantly with drugs capable of inducing electrolyte disturbances (hypomagnesemia, hypokalemia) that may prolong the QT interval, including diuretics, laxatives, and, in rare cases, mineralocorticoid hormones.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4 Opioid Antagonists, Mixed Agonists/Antagonists, and Partial Agonists
                     
                        As with other mu-agonists, patients maintained on methadone may experience withdrawal symptoms when given opioid antagonists, mixed agonist/antagonists, and partial agonists. Examples of such agents are naloxone, naltrexone, pentazocine, nalbuphine, butorphanol, and buprenorphine.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.5 Antidepressants
                     
                        
                           
                              Monoamine Oxidase (MAO) Inhibitors:
                           Therapeutic doses of meperidine have precipitated severe reactions in patients concurrently receiving monoamine oxidase inhibitors or those who have received such agents within 14 days. Similar reactions thus far have not been reported with methadone. However, if the use of methadone hydrochloride tablets for oral suspension is necessary in such patients, a sensitivity test should be performed in which repeated small, incremental doses of methadone hydrochloride tablets for oral suspension are administered over the course of several hours while the patient’s condition and vital signs are carefully observed.
                        
                           
                              Desipramine
                           
                           
                              :
                           Blood levels of desipramine have increased with concurrent methadone administration.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.6 Anticholinergics
                     
                        Anticholinergics or other drugs with anticholinergic activity when used concurrently with opioids may result in increased risk of urinary retention and/or severe constipation, which may lead to paralytic ileus.  Monitor patients for signs of urinary retention or reduced gastric motility when methadone hydrochloride tablets for oral suspension are used concurrently with anticholinergic drugs.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.7 Laboratory Test Interactions
                     
                        False positive urine drug screens for methadone have been reported for several drugs including diphenhydramine, doxylamine, clomipramaine, chlorpromazine, thioridazine, quetiapine, and verapamil.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         