
               
               
               7  DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           Aspirin: Concomitant administration with other NSAIDs, including aspirin, is not recommended because of an increased risk of adverse reactions, including GI bleeding (7.1)
                           Anticoagulants: Concomitant use of diclofenac and anticoagulants (e.g., warfarin) increases the risk of serious GI bleeding (7.2)
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 Aspirin 
                     
                              When administered with aspirin, diclofenac potassium’s protein binding is reduced. The clinical significance of this interaction is not known; however, as with other NSAIDs, concomitant administration of CAMBIA and aspirin is not generally recommended because of the potential of increased adverse effects.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 Anticoagulants 
                     
                              The effects of anticoagulants such as warfarin and NSAIDs on GI bleeding are synergistic, such that users of both drugs together have a risk of serious GI bleeding higher than that with use of either drug alone.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3 ACE Inhibitors  
                     
                              NSAIDs may diminish the antihypertensive effect of ACE inhibitors. This interaction should be given consideration in patients taking CAMBIA concomitantly with ACE inhibitors.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4 Diuretics 
                     
                              Clinical studies, as well as post-marketing observations, have shown that diclofenac potassium can reduce the natriuretic effect of furosemide and thiazides in some patients. This response has been attributed to inhibition of renal prostaglandin synthesis. During concomitant therapy with NSAIDs, observe patients closely for signs of renal failure as well as to assure diuretic efficacy [see Warnings and Precautions (5.6)].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.5 Lithium
                     
                              NSAIDs have produced elevations of plasma lithium levels and a reduction in renal lithium clearance. The mean minimum lithium concentration increased 15% and the renal clearance was decreased by approximately 20%. These effects have been attributed to inhibition of renal prostaglandin synthesis by the NSAID. When CAMBIA and lithium are administered concurrently, observe patients carefully for signs of lithium toxicity.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.6 Methotrexate
                     
                              NSAIDs have been reported to competitively inhibit methotrexate accumulation in rabbit kidney slices. This indicates that NSAIDs may enhance the toxicity of methotrexate. Use caution when NSAIDs are administered concomitantly with methotrexate.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.7 Cyclosporine
                     
                              CAMBIA, like other NSAIDs, may affect renal prostaglandins and increase the toxicity of certain drugs. Therefore, concomitant therapy with CAMBIA may increase cyclosporine’s nephrotoxicity. Use caution when CAMBIA is administered concomitantly with cyclosporine.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.8 Inhibitors of Cytochrome P450 2C9
                     
                              Diclofenac is metabolized predominantly by Cytochrome P-450 CYP2C9. Co-administration of medications that inhibit CYP2C9 may affect the pharmacokinetics of diclofenac [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         