
               
               
               
                  CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY

               
               
                  The development and enlargement of the prostate gland is dependent on the potent androgen, 5α-dihydrotestosterone (DHT). Type II 5α-reductase metabolizes testosterone to DHT in the prostate gland, liver and skin. DHT induces androgenic effects by binding to androgen receptors in the cell nuclei of these organs.
                  Finasteride is a competitive and specific inhibitor of Type II 5α-reductase with which it slowly forms a stable enzyme complex. Turnover from this complex is extremely slow (t½ ~ 30 days). This has been demonstrated both in vivo and in vitro. Finasteride has no affinity for the androgen receptor. In man, the 5α-reduced steroid metabolites in blood and urine are decreased after administration of finasteride.
                  In man, a single 5 mg oral dose of finasteride tablets USP produces a rapid reduction in serum DHT concentration, with the maximum effect observed 8 hours after the first dose. The suppression of DHT is maintained throughout the 24-hour dosing interval and with continued treatment. Daily dosing of finasteride tablets USP at 5 mg/day for up to 4 years has been shown to reduce the serum DHT concentration by approximately 70%. The median circulating level of testosterone increased by approximately 10 to 20% but remained within the physiologic range.
                  Adult males with genetically inherited Type II 5α-reductase deficiency also have decreased levels of DHT. Except for the associated urogenital defects present at birth, no other clinical abnormalities related to Type II 5α-reductase deficiency have been observed in these individuals. These individuals have a small prostate gland throughout life and do not develop BPH.
                  In patients with BPH treated with finasteride (1 to 100 mg/day) for 7 to 10 days prior to prostatectomy, an approximate 80% lower DHT content was measured in prostatic tissue removed at surgery, compared to placebo; testosterone tissue concentration was increased up to 10 times over pretreatment levels, relative to placebo. Intraprostatic content of prostate-specific antigen (PSA) was also decreased.
                  In healthy male volunteers treated with finasteride tablets USP for 14 days, discontinuation of therapy resulted in a return of DHT levels to pretreatment levels in approximately 2 weeks. In patients treated for three months, prostate volume, which declined by approximately 20%, returned to close to baseline value after approximately three months of discontinuation of therapy.
               
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        Pharmacokinetics

                     
                     
                        
                           Absorption
                        
                        In a study of 15 healthy young subjects, the mean bioavailability of finasteride 5 mg tablets was 63% (range 34 to 108 %), based on the ratio of area under the curve (AUC) relative to an intravenous (IV) reference dose. Maximum finasteride plasma concentration averaged 37 ng/mL (range, 27 to 49 ng/mL) and was reached 1 to 2 hours postdose. Bioavailability of finasteride was not affected by food.
                        
                           Distribution
                        
                        Mean steady-state volume of distribution was 76 liters (range, 44 to 96 liters). Approximately 90% of circulating finasteride is bound to plasma proteins. There is a slow accumulation phase for finasteride after multiple dosing. After dosing with 5 mg/day of finasteride for 17 days, plasma concentrations of finasteride were 47 and 54% higher than after the first dose in men  45 to 60 years old (n=12) and ≥70 years old (n=12), respectively. Mean trough concentrations after 17 days of dosing were 6.2 ng/mL (range, 2.4 to 9.8 ng/mL) and  8.1 ng/mL (range, 1.8 to 19.7 ng/mL), respectively, in the two age groups. Although steady state was not reached in this study, mean trough plasma concentration in another study in patients with BPH (mean age, 65 years) receiving 5 mg/day was 9.4 ng/mL (range, 7.1 to 13.3 ng/mL; n=22) after over a year of dosing.
                        Finasteride has been shown to cross the blood brain barrier but does not appear to distribute preferentially to the CSF.
                        In 2 studies of healthy subjects (n=69) receiving finasteride tablets USP, 5 mg/day for 6 to 24 weeks, finasteride concentrations in semen ranged from undetectable (<0.1 ng/mL) to 10.54 ng/mL. In an earlier study using a less sensitive assay, finasteride concentrations in the semen of 16 subjects receiving finasteride tablets USP, 5 mg/day ranged from undetectable (<1.0 ng/mL) to 21 ng/mL. Thus, based on a 5-mL ejaculate volume, the amount of finasteride in semen was estimated to be 50- to 100-fold less than the dose of finasteride (5 mcg) that had no effect on circulating DHT levels in men (see also PRECAUTIONS, 
                              Pregnancy
                           ).
                        
                           Metabolism
                        
                        Finasteride is extensively metabolized in the liver, primarily via the cytochrome P450 3A4 enzyme subfamily. Two metabolites, the t-butyl side chain monohydroxylated and monocarboxylic acid metabolites, have been identified that possess no more than 20% of the 5α-reductase inhibitory activity of finasteride.
                        
                           Excretion
                        
                        In healthy young subjects (n=15), mean plasma clearance of finasteride was 165 mL/min (range, 70 to 279 mL/min) and mean elimination half-life in plasma was 6 hours (range, 3 to 16 hours). Following an oral dose of 14C-finasteride in man (n=6), a mean of 39% (range, 32 to 46 %) of the dose was excreted in the urine in the form of metabolites; 57% (range, 51 to 64 %) was excreted in the feces.
                        The mean terminal half-life of finasteride in subjects ≥70 years of age was approximately 8 hours (range, 6 to 15 hours; n=12), compared with 6 hours (range, 4 to 12 hours; n=12) in subjects 45 to 60 years of age. As a result, mean AUC(0 to 24 hr) after 17 days of dosing was 15% higher in subjects ≥70 years of age than in subjects 45 to 60 years of age (p=0.02).
                        
                           Special Populations
                        
                        
                           Pediatric: Finasteride pharmacokinetics have not been investigated in patients <18 years of age.
                        
                           Gender: Finasteride pharmacokinetics in women are not available.
                        
                           Geriatric: No dosage adjustment is necessary in the elderly. Although the elimination rate of finasteride is decreased in the elderly, these findings are of no clinical significance. See also Pharmacokinetics, Excretion, PRECAUTIONS, Geriatric Use and DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION.
                        
                           Race: The effect of race on finasteride pharmacokinetics has not been studied.
                        
                           Renal Insufficiency: No dosage adjustment is necessary in patients with renal insufficiency. In patients with chronic renal impairment, with creatinine clearances ranging from 9.0 to 55 mL/min, AUC, maximum plasma concentration, half-life, and protein binding after a single dose of 14C-finasteride were similar to values obtained in healthy volunteers. Urinary excretion of metabolites was decreased in patients with renal impairment. This decrease was associated with an increase in fecal excretion of metabolites. Plasma concentrations of metabolites were significantly higher in patients with renal impairment (based on a 60% increase in total radioactivity AUC). However, finasteride has been well tolerated in BPH patients with normal renal function receiving up to 80 mg/day for 12 weeks, where exposure of these patients to metabolites would presumably be much greater.
                        
                           Hepatic Insufficiency: The effect of hepatic insufficiency on finasteride pharmacokinetics has not been studied. Caution should be used in the administration of  finasteride tablets USP  in those patients with liver function abnormalities, as finasteride is metabolized extensively in the liver.
                        
                           Drug Interactions (also see PRECAUTIONS, 
                              Drug Interactions
                           )
                        No drug interactions of clinical importance have been identified. Finasteride does not appear to affect the cytochrome P450-linked drug metabolism enzyme system. Compounds that have been tested in man have included antipyrine, digoxin, propranolol, theophylline, and warfarin, and no clinically meaningful interactions were found.
                        



                        



                           Clinical Studies
                        
                        Finasteride tablets USP, 5 mg/day was initially evaluated in patients with symptoms of BPH and enlarged prostates by digital rectal examination in two 1-year, placebo-controlled, randomized, double-blind studies and their 5-year open extensions.
                        Finasteride tablets USP was further evaluated in a long-term efficacy and safety study, a double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled, 4-year, multicenter study. 3040 patients between the ages of 45 and 78, with moderate to severe symptoms of BPH and an enlarged prostate upon digital rectal examination, were randomized into the study (1524 to finasteride, 1516 to placebo) and 3016 patients were evaluable for efficacy. 1883 patients completed the 4-year study (1000 in the finasteride group, 883 in the placebo group).
                        
                           Effect on Symptom Score
                        
                        Symptoms were quantified using a score similar to the American Urological Association Symptom Score, which evaluated both obstructive symptoms (impairment of size and force of stream, sensation of incomplete bladder emptying, delayed or interrupted urination) and irritative symptoms (nocturia, daytime frequency, need to strain or push the flow of urine) by rating on a 0 to 5 scale for six symptoms and a 0 to 4 scale for one symptom, for a total possible score of 34.
                        Patients in a long-term efficacy and safety study had moderate to severe symptoms at baseline (mean of approximately 15 points on a 0 to 34 point scale). Patients randomized to finasteride tablets USP who remained on therapy for 4 years had a mean (±1 SD) decrease in symptom score of 3.3 (± 5.8) points compared with 1.3 (± 5.6) points in the placebo group. (See Figure 1.) A statistically significant improvement in symptom score was evident at 1 year in patients treated with finasteride tablets USP vs. placebo (–2.3 vs –1.6), and this improvement continued through Year 4.
                        
                        Results seen in earlier studies were comparable to those seen in a long-term efficacy and safety study. Although an early improvement in urinary symptoms was seen in some patients, a therapeutic trial of at least 6 months was generally necessary to assess whether a beneficial response in symptom relief had been achieved. The improvement in BPH symptoms was seen during the first year and maintained throughout an additional 5 years of open extension studies.
                        
                           Effect on the Need for Surgery
                        
                        In a long-term efficacy and safety study, efficacy was also assessed by evaluating treatment failures. Treatment failure was prospectively defined as BPH-related urological events or clinical deterioration, lack of improvement and/or the need for alternative therapy. BPH-related urological events were defined as urological surgical intervention. Complete event information was available for 92% of the patients. The following table summarizes the results.
                        


                        


Compared with placebo, finasteride tablets USP was associated with a significantly lower need for BPH-related surgery. Compared with placebo, finasteride tablets USP was associated with a significantly lower risk for surgery [10.1% for placebo vs 4.6% for finasteride tablets USP; 55% reduction in risk, 95% CI: (37 to 68%)]; see Figure 2.
                        
                        
                           Effect on Maximum Urinary Flow Rate
                        
                        In the patients in a long-term efficacy and safety study who remained on therapy for the duration of the study and had evaluable urinary flow data, finasteride tablets USP increased maximum urinary flow rate by 1.9 mL/sec compared with 0.2 mL/sec in the placebo group.
                        There was a clear difference between treatment groups in maximum urinary flow rate in favor of finasteride tablets USP by month 4 (1.0 vs 0.3 mL/sec) which was maintained throughout the study. In the earlier 1-year studies, increase in maximum urinary flow rate was comparable to a long-term efficacy and safety study and was maintained through the first year and throughout an additional 5 years of open extension studies.
                        
                           Effect on Prostate Volume
                        
                        In a long-term efficacy and safety study, prostate volume was assessed yearly by magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) in a subset of patients. In patients treated with finasteride tablets USP who remained on therapy, prostate volume was reduced compared with both baseline and placebo throughout the 4-year study.  Finasteride tablets USP decreased prostate volume by 17.9% (from 55.9 mL at baseline to 45.8 mL at 4 years) compared with an increase of 14.1% (from 51.3 mL to 58.5 mL) in the placebo group (p<0.001). (See Figure 3.)
                        Results seen in earlier studies were comparable to those seen in a long-term efficacy and safety study. Mean prostate volume at baseline ranged between 40 to 50 mL. The reduction in prostate volume was seen during the first year and maintained throughout an additional five years of open extension studies.
                        
                        
                           Prostate Volume as a Predictor of Therapeutic Response
                        
                        A meta-analysis combining 1-year data from seven double-blind, placebo-controlled studies of similar design, including 4491 patients with symptomatic BPH, demonstrated that, in patients treated with finasteride tablets USP, the magnitude of symptom response and degree of improvement in maximum urinary flow rate were greater in patients with an enlarged prostate at baseline.
                        
                           Summary of Clinical Studies
                        
                        The data from these studies, showing improvement in BPH-related symptoms, reduction in treatment failure (BPH-related urological events), increased maximum urinary flow rates, and decreasing prostate volume, suggest that finasteride tablets USP arrests the disease process of BPH in men with an enlarged prostate.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         