
               
               
               
                  CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  Topical corticosteroids share anti-inflammatory, anti-pruritic and vasoconstrictive actions.
                  The mechanism of anti-inflammatory activity of topical corticosteroids is unclear. Various laboratory methods, including vasoconstrictor assays, are used to compare and predict potencies and/or clinical efficacies of topical corticosteroids. There is some evidence to suggest that a recognizable correlation exists between vasoconstrictor potency and therapeutic efficacy in man.
                  Pramoxine Hydrochloride is a topical anesthetic agent which provides temporary relief from itching and pain. It acts by stabilizing the neuronal membrane of the nerve endings with which it comes into contact.
               
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        Pharmacokinetics
                     
                     
                        The extent of percutaneous absorption of topical steroids is determined by many factors including the vehicle, the integrity of the epidermal barrier and the use of occlusive dressings.
                        Topical corticosteroids can be absorbed from normal intact skin. Inflammation and/or other disease processes in the skin increase percutaneous absorption of topical corticosteroids. Occlusive dressings substantially increase the percutaneous absorption of topical corticosteroids.  Thus, occlusive dressings may be a valuable therapeutic adjunct for treatment of resistant dermatoses. (See DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION.)
                        Once absorbed through the skin, topical corticosteroids are handled through pharmacokinetic pathways similar to systemically administered corticosteroids.
                        Corticosteroids are bound to plasma proteins in varying degrees. Corticosteroids are metabolized primarily in the liver and are then excreted by the kidneys. Some of the corticosteroids and their metabolites are also excreted into the bile.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         