
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Rifaximin is an antibacterial drug [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.4)].
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        
                           Absorption
                           
                        
                        In healthy subjects, the mean time to reach peak rifaximin plasma concentrations was about an hour and the mean Cmax ranged 2.4 to 4 ng/mL after a single dose and multiple doses of XIFAXAN 550 mg.
                        
                           Travelers’ Diarrhea
                        
                        Systemic absorption of XIFAXAN (200 mg three times daily) was evaluated in 13 subjects challenged with shigellosis on Days 1 and 3 of a three-day course of treatment.  Rifaximin plasma concentrations and exposures were low and variable. There was no evidence of accumulation of rifaximin following repeated administration for 3 days (9 doses).  Peak plasma rifaximin concentrations after 3 and 9 consecutive doses ranged from 0.81 to 3.4 ng/mL on Day 1 and 0.68 to 2.26 ng/mL on Day 3.  Similarly, AUC0-last estimates were 6.95 ± 5.15 ng•h/mL on Day 1 and 7.83 ± 4.94 ng•h/mL on Day 3.  XIFAXAN is not suitable for treating systemic bacterial infections because of limited systemic exposure after oral administration [see Warnings and Precautions (5.1)].
                        
                           Hepatic Encephalopathy
                        
                        Mean rifaximin exposure (AUCτ) in patients with a history of HE was approximately 12-fold higher than that observed in healthy subjects.  Among patients with a history of HE, the mean AUC in patients with Child-Pugh Class C hepatic impairment was 2-fold higher than in patients with Child-Pugh Class A hepatic impairment [see Warnings and Precautions (5.4) and Use in Specific Populations (8.7)].
                        
                        
                           Irritable Bowel Syndrome with Diarrhea 
                        
                        In patients with irritable bowel syndrome with diarrhea (IBS-D) treated with XIFAXAN 550 mg three times a day for 14 days, the median Tmax was 1 hour and mean Cmax and AUC were generally comparable with those in healthy subjects.  After multiple doses, AUCtau was 1.65-fold higher than that on Day 1 in IBS-D patients (Table 2). 
                        


                        



                           Food Effect in Healthy Subjects
                        
                        A high-fat meal consumed 30 minutes prior to XIFAXAN dosing in healthy subjects delayed the mean time to peak plasma concentration from 0.75 to 1.5 hours and increased the systemic exposure (AUC) of rifaximin by 2-fold but did not significantly affect Cmax.
                        
                           Distribution
                        
                        Rifaximin is moderately bound to human plasma proteins.  In vivo, the mean protein binding ratio was 67.5% in healthy subjects and 62% in patients with hepatic impairment when XIFAXAN was administered.
                        
                           Elimination
                        
                        The mean half-life of rifaximin in healthy subjects at steady-state was 5.6 hours and was 6 hours in IBS-D patients. 
                        
                           Metabolism: 
                        
                        In an in vitro study rifaximin was metabolized mainly by CYP3A4.  Rifaximin accounted for 18% of radioactivity in plasma suggesting that the absorbed rifaximin undergoes extensive metabolism.
                        
                           Excretion: 
                        
                        In a mass balance study, after administration of 400 mg 14C-rifaximin orally to healthy volunteers, of the 96.94% total recovery, 96.62% of the administered radioactivity was recovered in feces mostly as the unchanged drug and 0.32% was recovered in urine mostly as metabolites with 0.03% as the unchanged drug. 
                        Biliary excretion of rifaximin was suggested by a separate study in which rifaximin was detected in the bile after cholecystectomy in patients with intact gastrointestinal mucosa.
                        
                           Specific Populations
                        
                        
                           Hepatic Impairment 
                        
                        The systemic exposure of rifaximin was markedly elevated in patients with hepatic impairment compared to healthy subjects.  
                        The pharmacokinetics of rifaximin in patients with a history of HE was evaluated after administration of XIFAXAN 550 mg twice a day. The pharmacokinetic parameters were associated with a high variability and mean rifaximin exposure (AUCτ) in patients with a history of HE was higher compared to those in healthy subjects.  The mean AUCτ  in patients with hepatic impairment of Child-Pugh Class A, B, and C was 10-, 14-, and 21-fold higher, respectively, compared to that in healthy subjects (Table 3).
                        


                        



                           Renal Impairment
                        
                        The pharmacokinetics of rifaximin in patients with impaired renal function has not been studied.
                        
                           
                              Drug Interaction Studies
                           
                        
                        
                           Effect of other drugs on rifaximin
                        
                        An in vitro study suggests that rifaximin is a substrate of CYP3A4.  
                        
                           In vitro rifaximin is a substrate of P-glycoprotein, OATP1A2, OATP1B1, and OATP1B3.  Rifaximin is not a substrate of OATP2B1. 
                        
                           
                              Cyclosporine
                           
                        
                        
                           In vitro in the presence of P-glycoprotein inhibitor, verapamil, the efflux ratio of rifaximin was reduced greater than 50%.  In a clinical drug interaction study, mean Cmax for rifaximin was increased 83-fold, from 0.48 to 40.0 ng/mL; mean AUC∞ was increased 124-fold, from 2.54 to 314 ng●h/mL following co-administration of a single dose of XIFAXAN 550 mg with a single 600 mg dose of cyclosporine, an inhibitor of P-glycoprotein [see Drug Interactions (7.2)].  
                        Cyclosporine is also an inhibitor of OATP, breast cancer resistance protein (BCRP) and a weak inhibitor of CYP3A4.  The relative contribution of inhibition of each transporter by cyclosporine to the increase in rifaximin exposure is unknown.
                        
                           Effect of rifaximin on other drugs
                        
                        In in vitro drug interaction studies the IC50 values for rifaximin was >50 micromolar (~60 mcg) for CYP isoforms 1A2, 2A6, 2B6, 2C9, 2C19, 2D6, and 2E1.  In vitro IC50 value of rifaximin for CYP3A4 was 25 micromolar.  Based on in vitro studies, clinically significant drug interaction via inhibition of 1A2, 2A6, 2B6, 2C9, 2C19, 2D6, 2E1 and 3A4 by rifaximin is not expected. 
                        The inhibitory effect of rifaximin on P-glycoprotein transport was observed in an in vitro study.  The effect of rifaximin on P-gp transporter was not evaluated in vivo.
                        In in vitro studies, rifaximin at 3 micromolar inhibited the uptake of estradiol glucuronide via OATP1B1 by 64% and via OATP1B3 by 70% while the uptake of estrone sulfate via OATP1A2 was inhibited by 40%.  The inhibitory potential of rifaximin on these transporters at the clinically relevant concentrations is unknown.
                        
                           
                              Midazolam
                           
                        
                        In an in vitro study, rifaximin was shown to induce CYP3A4 at the concentration of 0.2 micromolar.  No significant induction of CYP3A4 enzyme using midazolam as a substrate was observed when rifaximin was administered three times a day for 7 days at 200 mg and 550 mg doses in two clinical drug interaction studies in healthy subjects.
                        The effect of XIFAXAN 200 mg administered orally every 8 hours for 3 days and for 7 days on the pharmacokinetics of a single dose of either 2 mg intravenous midazolam or 6 mg oral midazolam was evaluated in healthy subjects.  No significant difference was observed in the systemic exposure or elimination of intravenous or oral midazolam or its major metabolite, 1’-hydroxymidazolam, between midazolam alone or together with XIFAXAN.  Therefore, XIFAXAN was not shown to significantly affect intestinal or hepatic CYP3A4 activity for the 200 mg three times a day dosing regimen.
                        When single dose of 2 mg midazolam was orally administered after administration of XIFAXAN 550 mg three times a day for 7 days and 14 days to healthy subjects, the mean AUC of midazolam was 3.8% and 8.8% lower, respectively, than when midazolam was administered alone.  The mean Cmax of midazolam was lower by 4 to 5% when XIFAXAN was administered for 7-14 days prior to midazolam administration.  This degree of interaction is not considered clinically meaningful.
                        
                           
                              Oral Contraceptives Containing Ethinyl Estradiol and Norgestimate
                           
                        
                        The oral contraceptive study utilized an open-label, crossover design in 28 healthy female subjects to determine if XIFAXAN 200 mg orally administered three times a day for 3 days (the dosing regimen for travelers’ diarrhea) altered the pharmacokinetics of a single dose of an oral contraceptive containing 0.07 mg ethinyl estradiol and 0.5 mg norgestimate.  Results showed that the pharmacokinetics of single doses of ethinyl estradiol and norgestimate were not altered by XIFAXAN.
                        An open-label oral contraceptive study was conducted in 39 healthy female subjects to determine if XIFAXAN 550 mg orally administered three times a day for 7 days altered the pharmacokinetics of a single dose of an oral contraceptive containing 0.025 mg of ethinyl estradiol (EE) and 0.25 mg norgestimate (NGM).  Mean Cmax of EE and NGM was lower by 25% and 13%, after the 7-day XIFAXAN regimen than when the oral contraceptive was given alone. The mean AUC values of NGM active metabolites were lower by 7% to approximately 11%, while AUC of EE was not altered in presence of rifaximin.The clinical relevance of the Cmax and AUC reductions in the presence of rifaximin is not known.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.4 Microbiology
                     
                        
                           Mechanism of Action
                        
                        Rifaximin is a semi-synthetic derivative of rifampin and acts by binding to the beta-subunit of bacterial DNA-dependent RNA polymerase blocking one of the steps in transcription.  This results in inhibition of bacterial protein synthesis and consequently inhibits the growth of bacteria. 
                        
                           Drug Resistance and Cross-Resistance
                        
                        Resistance to rifaximin is caused primarily by mutations in the rpoB gene. This changes the binding site on DNA dependent RNA polymerase and decreases rifaximin binding affinity, thereby reducing efficacy. Cross-resistance between rifaximin and other classes of antimicrobials has not been observed.  
                        
                           Antibacterial Activity
                        
                        Rifaximin has been shown to be active against the following pathogens both in vitro and in clinical studies of infectious diarrhea as described in the Indications and Usage (1.1) section: 
                        
                           Escherichia coli (enterotoxigenic and enteroaggregative strains).
                        
                           Susceptibility Tests
                        
                        
                           In vitro susceptibility testing was performed according to the Clinical and Laboratory Standards Institute (CLSI).1,2,3 However, the correlation between susceptibility testing and clinical outcome has not been determined.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         