
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  Tobramycin inhalation solution is specifically formulated for administration by inhalation. When inhaled, tobramycin is concentrated in the airways.
               
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        Tobramycin inhalation solution contains tobramycin, a cationic polar molecule that does not readily cross epithelial membranes.(1) The bioavailability of tobramycin inhalation solution may vary because of individual differences in nebulizer performance and airway pathology.(2) Following administration of tobramycin inhalation solution, tobramycin remains concentrated primarily in the airways.
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Sputum Concentrations
                           
                              Ten minutes after inhalation of the first 300 mg dose of tobramycin inhalation solution, the average concentration of tobramycin was 1237 mcg/g (ranging from 35 to 7417 mcg/g) in sputum. Tobramycin does not accumulate in sputum; after 20 weeks of therapy with the tobramycin inhalation solution regimen, the average concentration of tobramycin at ten minutes after inhalation was 1154 mcg/g (ranging from 39 to 8085 mcg/g) in sputum. High variability of tobramycin concentration in sputum was observed. Two hours after inhalation, sputum concentrations declined to approximately 14% of tobramycin levels at ten minutes after inhalation.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Serum Concentrations
                           
                              The average serum concentration of tobramycin one hour after inhalation of a single 300 mg dose of tobramycin inhalation solution by cystic fibrosis patients was 0.95 mcg/mL. After 20 weeks of therapy on the tobramycin inhalation solution regimen, the average serum tobramycin concentration one hour after dosing was 1.05 mcg/mL.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Elimination
                           
                              The elimination half-life of tobramycin from serum is approximately 2 hours after intravenous (IV) administration. Assuming tobramycin absorbed following inhalation behaves similarly to tobramycin following IV administration, systemically absorbed tobramycin is eliminated principally by glomerular filtration. Unabsorbed tobramycin, following tobramycin inhalation solution administration, is probably eliminated primarily in expectorated sputum.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Microbiology
                     
                        Tobramycin is an aminoglycoside antibiotic produced by Streptomyces tenebrarius.(1) It acts primarily by disrupting protein synthesis, leading to altered cell membrane permeability, progressive disruption of the cell envelope, and eventual cell death.(3)
                        
                        Tobramycin has in-vitro activity against a wide range of gram-negative organisms including Pseudomonas aeruginosa. It is bactericidal at concentrations equal to or slightly greater than inhibitory concentrations.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Susceptibility Testing
                     
                        A single sputum sample from a cystic fibrosis patient may contain multiple morphotypes of Pseudomonas aeruginosa and each morphotype may have a different level of in-vitro susceptibility to tobramycin. Treatment for 6 months with tobramycin inhalation solution in two clinical studies did not affect the susceptibility of the majority of P. aeruginosa isolates tested; however, increased minimum inhibitory concentrations (MICs) were noted in some patients. The clinical significance of this information has not been clearly established in the treatment of P. aeruginosa in cystic fibrosis patients. For additional information regarding the effects of tobramycin inhalation solution on P. aeruginosa MIC values and bacterial sputum density, please refer to the CLINICAL STUDIES section.
                        The in-vitro antimicrobial susceptibility test methods used for parenteral tobramycin therapy can be used to monitor the susceptibility of P. aeruginosa isolated from cystic fibrosis patients. If decreased susceptibility is noted, the results should be reported to the clinician.
                        Susceptibility breakpoints established for parenteral administration of tobramycin do not apply to aerosolized administration of tobramycin inhalation solution. The relationship between in-vitro susceptibility test results and clinical outcome with tobramycin inhalation solution therapy is not clear.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         