
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           Hepatic enzyme-inducing drugs (e.g., phenytoin, carbamazepine, primidone, phenobarbital, rifampin) can increase valproate clearance, while enzyme inhibitors (e.g., felbamate) can decrease valproate clearance. Therefore increased monitoring of valproate and concomitant drug concentrations and dose adjustment is indicated whenever enzymeinducing or inhibiting drugs are introduced or withdrawn (7.1)
                           Aspirin, carbapenem antibiotics: Monitoring of valproate concentrations are recommended (7.1)
                           Co-administration of valproate can affect the pharmacokinetics of other drugs (e.g. diazepam, ethosuximide, lamotrigine, phenytoin) by inhibiting their metabolism or protein binding displacement (7.2)
                           Dosage adjustment of amitryptyline/nortryptyline, warfarin, and zidovudine may be necessary if used concomitantly with divalproex sodium extended-release tablets (7.2)
                           Topiramate: Hyperammonemia and encephalopathy (5.8, 7.3)
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 Effects of Co-Administered Drugs on Valproate Clearance
                     
                        Drugs that affect the level of expression of hepatic enzymes, particularly those that elevate levels of glucuronosyltransferases, may increase the clearance of valproate. For example, phenytoin, carbamazepine, and phenobarbital (or primidone) can double the clearance of valproate. Thus, patients on monotherapy will generally have longer half-lives and higher concentrations than patients receiving polytherapy with antiepilepsy drugs.
                        In contrast, drugs that are inhibitors of cytochrome P450 isozymes, e.g., antidepressants, may be expected to have little effect on valproate clearance because cytochrome P450 microsomal mediated oxidation is a relatively minor secondary metabolic pathway compared to glucuronidation and beta-oxidation.
                        Because of these changes in valproate clearance, monitoring of valproate and concomitant drug concentrations should be increased whenever enzyme inducing drugs are introduced or withdrawn.
                        The following list provides information about the potential for an influence of several commonly prescribed medications on valproate pharmacokinetics. The list is not exhaustive nor could it be, since new interactions are continuously being reported.
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Drugs for which a potentially important interaction has been observed
                              
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Aspirin
                                    
                                    A study involving the co-administration of aspirin at antipyretic doses (11 to 16 mg/kg) with valproate to pediatric patients (n=6) revealed a decrease in protein binding and an inhibition of metabolism of valproate. Valproate free fraction was increased 4-fold in the presence of aspirin compared to valproate alone. The β-oxidation pathway consisting of 2-E-valproic acid, 3-OH-valproic acid, and 3- keto valproic acid was decreased from 25% of total metabolites excreted on valproate alone to 8.3% in the presence of aspirin. Whether or not the interaction observed in this study applies to adults is unknown, but caution should be observed if valproate and aspirin are to be co-administered.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Carbapenem antibiotics
                                    
                                    A clinically significant reduction in serum valproic acid concentration has been reported in patients receiving carbapenem antibiotics (ertapenem, imipenem, meropenem) and may result in loss of seizure control. The mechanism of this interaction in not well understood. Serum valproic acid concentrations should be monitored frequently after initiating carbapenem therapy. Alternative antibacterial or anticonvulsant therapy should be considered if serum valproic acid concentrations drop significantly or seizure control deteriorates [see Warnings and Precautions (5.11)].
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Felbamate
                                    
                                    A study involving the co-administration of 1200 mg/day of felbamate with valproate to patients with epilepsy (n=10) revealed an increase in mean valproate peak concentration by 35% (from 86 to 115 mcg/mL) compared to valproate alone. Increasing the felbamate dose to 2400 mg/day increased the mean valproate peak concentration to 133 mcg/mL (another 16% increase). A decrease in valproate dosage may be necessary when felbamate therapy is initiated.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Rifampin
                                    
                                    A study involving the administration of a single dose of valproate (7 mg/kg) 36 hours after 5 nights of daily dosing with rifampin (600 mg) revealed a 40% increase in the oral clearance of valproate. Valproate dosage adjustment may be necessary when it is coadministered with rifampin.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           Drugs for which either no interaction or a likely clinically unimportant interaction has been observed
                        
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Antacids
                              
                              A study involving the co-administration of valproate 500 mg with commonly administered antacids (Maalox, Trisogel, and Titralac - 160 mEq doses) did not reveal any effect on the extent of absorption of valproate.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Chlorpromazine
                              
                              A study involving the administration of 100 to 300 mg/day of chlorpromazine to schizophrenic patients already receiving valproate (200 mg BID) revealed a 15% increase in trough plasma levels of valproate.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Haloperidol
                              
                              A study involving the administration of 6 to 10 mg/day of haloperidol to schizophrenic patients already receiving valproate (200 mg BID) revealed no significant changes in valproate trough plasma levels.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Cimetidine and Ranitidine
                              
                              Cimetidine and ranitidine do not affect the clearance of valproate.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         