
                     
                     
                     Drug Interactions:
                     
                        When given concurrently the following drugs may interact with thiazide diuretics.
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Alcohol, Barbiturates, or Narcotics
                           
                           
                              Potentiation of orthostatic hypotension may occur.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Antidiabetic Drugs - (Oral Agents And Insulin)
                           
                           
                              Dosage adjustment of the antidiabetic drug may be required.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Other Antihypertensive Drugs
                           
                           
                              Additive effect or potentiation.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Cholestyramine And Colestipol Resins
                           
                           
                              Absorption of hydrochlorothiazide is impaired in the presence of anionic exchange resins. Single doses of either cholestyramine or colestipol resins bind the hydrochlorothiazide and reduce its absorption from the gastrointestinal tract by up to 85 and 43 percent, respectively.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Corticosteroids, ACTH
                           
                           
                              Intensified electrolyte depletion, particularly hypokalemia.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Pressor Amines (e.g., Norepinephrine)
                           
                           
                              Possible decreased response to pressor amines but not sufficient to preclude their use.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Skeletal Muscle Relaxants, Nondepolarizing (e.g., Tubocurarine)
                           
                           
                              Possible increased responsiveness to the muscle relaxant.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Lithium
                           
                           
                              Generally should not be given with diuretics. Diuretic agents reduce the renal clearance of lithium and add a high risk of lithium toxicity. Refer to the package insert for lithium preparations before use of such preparations with hydrochlorothiazide.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Non-Steroidal Anti-Inflammatory Drugs
                           
                           
                              In some patients, the administration of a non-steroidal anti-inflammatory agent can reduce the diuretic, natriuretic, and antihypertensive effects of loop, potassium-sparing and thiazide diuretics. Therefore, when hydrochlorothiazide and non-steroidal anti-inflammatory agents are used concomitantly, the patient should be observed closely to determine if the desired effect of the diuretic is obtained.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               