
               
               
               
                  12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
               
                  
                     Figure 1: Mean (including SD) plasma oxybutynin concentrations versus time after application of GELNIQUE 3% to the abdomen (Site A), thigh (Site B), and upper arm/shoulder (Site C) (N = 25).
                     
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                     
                        Oxybutynin is a racemic (50:50) mixture of R- and S- isomers. Antimuscarinic activity resides predominantly with the R-isomer. 
                        Oxybutynin acts as a competitive antagonist of acetylcholine at postganglionic muscarinic receptors, resulting in relaxation of bladder smooth muscle. The active metabolite, N-desethyloxybutynin, has pharmacological activity on the human detrusor muscle that is similar to that of oxybutynin in in vitro studies.  In patients with conditions characterized by involuntary detrusor contractions, cystometric studies have demonstrated that oxybutynin increases maximum urinary bladder capacity and increases the volume to first detrusor contraction.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                     
                        Oxybutynin is transported across intact skin and into the systemic circulation by passive diffusion across the stratum corneum. Steady-state concentrations are achieved within 3 days of continuous dosing. 
                        
                           Absorption
                        
                        Absorption of oxybutynin is similar when GELNIQUE 3% is applied to the abdomen, upper arm/shoulders or thighs. The pharmacokinetic parameters and mean plasma concentrations during a randomized, crossover study of the three recommended application sites in 25 healthy men and women are shown in Table 2 and Figure 1, respectively.
                        


                        



                           Figure 1: Mean (including SD) plasma oxybutynin concentrations versus time after application of GELNIQUE 3% to the abdomen (Site A), thigh (Site B), and upper arm/shoulder (Site C) (N = 25).
                        
                        
                           Distribution
                        
                        Oxybutynin is widely distributed in body tissues following systemic absorption. The volume of distribution was estimated to be 193 L after intravenous administration of 5 mg oxybutynin chloride.
                        
                           Metabolism
                        
                        Oxybutynin is metabolized primarily by the cytochrome P450 enzyme systems, particularly CYP3A4, found mostly in the liver and gut wall. Metabolites include N-desethyloxybutynin (DEO), which is pharmacologically active and phenylcyclohexylglycolic acid, which is pharmacologically inactive.
                        Transdermal administration of oxybutynin bypasses the first-pass gastrointestinal and hepatic metabolism, reducing the formation of the N-desethyloxybutynin metabolite. Only small amounts of CYP3A4 are found in skin, limiting pre-systemic metabolism during transdermal absorption. The AUC ratio of N-desethyloxybutynin metabolite to parent compound following multiple transdermal applications is approximately 1:1 for GELNIQUE 3%. The apparent half-life was approximately 30 hours.
                        
                           Excretion
                        
                        Oxybutynin undergoes extensive hepatic metabolism, with less than 0.1% of the administered dose excreted unchanged in the urine. Less than 0.1% of the administered dose is excreted as the metabolite N-desethyloxybutynin.
                        
                           Person-to-Person Transference
                        
                        The potential for dermal transfer of oxybutynin from a treated person to an untreated person was evaluated in a single-dose study where subjects dosed with GELNIQUE 3% engaged in vigorous contact with an untreated partner for 15 minutes, either with (N = 14 couples) or without (N = 14 couples) clothing covering the application area. The untreated partners not protected by clothing demonstrated low detectable plasma concentrations of oxybutynin (mean Cmax = 0.65 ng/mL). Only one of the 14 untreated subjects participating in the clothing-to-skin contact regimen had very low measurable oxybutynin plasma concentrations (Cmax = 0.06 ng/mL) during the 24 hours following contact with treated subjects; oxybutynin was not detectable with the remaining 13 untreated subjects. Regardless of the low exposure observed in this study, patients should avoid skin-to-skin contact with partners after applying the gel.
                        
                           Use of Sunscreen
                        
                        The effect of sunscreen on the absorption of oxybutynin when applied 30 minutes before or 30 minutes after GELNIQUE 3% application was evaluated in a single-dose randomized crossover study (N = 20). Concomitant application of sunscreen, either before or after GELNIQUE 3% application, had no effect on the systemic exposure of oxybutynin.
                        
                           Showering
                        
                        The effect of showering on the absorption of oxybutynin was evaluated in a randomized, steady-state crossover study under conditions of no shower, or showering 1, 2 or 6 hours after GELNIQUE 3% application (N = 22). The results of the study indicate that showering one hour after administration does not affect the overall systemic exposure to oxybutynin.
                        
                           Race
                        
                        The effect of race on the pharmacokinetics of GELNIQUE 3% has not been studied.
                        
                           Geriatric Patients
                        
                        Available data suggest that there are no significant differences in the pharmacokinetics of oxybutynin based on geriatric status in patients following administration of GELNIQUE 3% [see 
                           
                              Use in Specific Populations (8.5)
                           ].
                        
                           Pediatric Patients
                        
                        The pharmacokinetics of oxybutynin and N-desethyloxybutynin following application of GELNIQUE 3% has not been evaluated in individuals younger than 18 years of age [see 
                           
                              Use in Specific Populations (8.4)
                           ].
                        
                           Gender
                        
                        Available data suggest that there are no significant differences in the pharmacokinetics of oxybutynin based on gender in healthy volunteers following administration of GELNIQUE 3%.
                        
                           Renal Impairment
                        
                        There is limited experience with the use of GELNIQUE 3% in patients with renal insufficiency [see 
                           
                              Use in Specific Populations (8.6)
                           ].
                        
                           Hepatic Impairment
                        
                        There is limited experience with the use of GELNIQUE 3% in patients with hepatic insufficiency [see 
                           
                              Use in Specific Populations (8.7)
                           ].
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         