


CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY





Pharmacokinetics
When one gram dose of Metronidazole Cream, 1%, was applied in a single application to the face of 16 healthy volunteers, low concentrations of metronidazole were detected in the plasma of 7 of the volunteers. The mean ± SD Cmax of metronidazole was 27.6 ± 7.3 ng/mL, which is about 1% of the value reported for a single 250 mg oral dose of metronidazole. The time to maximum plasma concentration (Tmax) in the volunteers with detectable metronidazole was 8–12 hours after topical application.Metronidazole Cream, 1%, was applied in a single application to the face of 16 healthy volunteers, low concentrations of metronidazole were detected in the plasma of 7 of the volunteers. The mean ± SD C







Pharmacodynamics
The mechanisms by which metronidazole acts in reducing inflammatory lesions of rosacea are unknown.







Clinical Studies
Safety and efficacy of Metronidazole Cream, 1%, were evaluated in two randomized vehicle-controlled clinical studies for the treatment of rosacea, which excluded patients who had nodules, moderate or severe rhinophyma, dense telangiectases, plaque-like facial edema or ocular involvement and those who had a history of not responding to metronidazole therapy for rosacea. Of the patients included in the efficacy database (n=416), there were 142 men and 274 women. Endpoint efficacy data comparisons for patients treated with daily Metronidazole Cream, 1%, or vehicle applications are listed below.Metronidazole Cream, 1%, were evaluated in two randomized vehicle-controlled clinical studies for the treatment of rosacea, which excluded patients who had nodules, moderate or severe rhinophyma, dense telangiectases, plaque-like facial edema or ocular involvement and those who had a history of not responding to metronidazole therapy for rosacea. Of the patients included in the efficacy database (n=416), there were 142 men and 274 women. Endpoint efficacy data comparisons for patients treated with daily 










Safety Studies
Studies of contact sensitization (n=258), phototoxicity (n=21), and photocontact sensitization (n=29) of Metronidazole Cream, 1%, were conducted. No evidence of sensitization or phototoxicity was seen in these studies.Metronidazole Cream, 1%, were conducted. No evidence of sensitization or phototoxicity was seen in these studies.






