
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1	Mechanism of Action
                     
                        The mechanism(s) by which REBIF (interferon beta-1a) exerts its therapeutic effects in patients with multiple sclerosis is unknown.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        The relationships between serum interferon beta-1a levels and measurable pharmacodynamic activities to the mechanism(s) by which REBIF exerts its effects in multiple sclerosis are unknown. No gender-related effects on pharmacodynamic parameters have been observed.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        The pharmacokinetics of REBIF (interferon beta-1a) in people with multiple sclerosis have not been evaluated. In healthy subjects, a single subcutaneous (sc) injection of 60 mcg of REBIF (liquid formulation) resulted in a peak serum concentration (Cmax) of 5.1 ± 1.7 IU/mL (mean ± SD), with a median time of peak serum concentration (Tmax) of 16 hours. The serum elimination half-life (t1/2) was 69 ± 37 hours, and the area under the serum concentration versus time curve (AUC) from zero to 96 hours was 294 ± 81 IU h/mL. Following every other day sc injections in healthy subjects, an increase in AUC of approximately 240% was observed, suggesting that accumulation of interferon beta-1a occurs after repeat administration. Total clearance is approximately 33-55 L/hour. There have been no observed gender-related effects on pharmacokinetic parameters. Pharmacokinetics of REBIF in pediatric and geriatric patients or patients with renal or hepatic insufficiency have not been established.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         