
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  Studies have shown that following intravenous administration of Cefazolin for Injection to normal volunteers, mean serum concentrations peaked at approximately 185 mcg/mL and were approximately 4 mcg/mL at 8 hours for a 1-gram dose.
                  The serum half-life for Cefazolin for Injection is approximately 1.8 hours following I.V. administration.
                  In a study (using normal volunteers) of constant intravenous infusion with dosages of 3.5 mg/kg for one hour (approximately 250 mg) and 1.5 mg/kg the next 2 hours (approximately 100 mg), Cefazolin for Injection produced a steady serum level at the third hour of approximately 28 mcg/mL.
                  Studies in patients hospitalized with infections indicate that Cefazolin for Injection produces mean peak serum levels approximately equivalent to those seen in normal volunteers.
                  Bile levels in patients without obstructive biliary disease can reach or exceed serum levels by up to five times; however, in patients with obstructive biliary disease, bile levels of Cefazolin for Injection are considerably lower than serum levels (<1 mcg/mL).
                  In synovial fluid, the level of Cefazolin for Injection becomes comparable to that reached in serum at about 4 hours after drug administration.
                  Studies of cord blood show prompt transfer of Cefazolin for Injection across the placenta. Cefazolin for Injection is present in very low concentrations in the milk of nursing mothers.
                  Cefazolin for Injection is excreted unchanged in the urine. In the first 6 hours approximately 60% of the drug is excreted in the urine and this increases to 70% to 80% within 24 hours.
                  In patients undergoing peritoneal dialysis (2 L/hr.), Cefazolin for Injection produced mean serum levels of approximately 10 and 30 mcg/mL after 24 hours’ instillation of a dialyzing solution containing 50 mg/L and 150 mg/L, respectively. Mean peak levels were 29 mcg/mL (range 13 to 44 mcg/mL) with 50 mg/L (3 patients), and 72 mcg/mL (range 26 to 142 mcg/mL) with 150 mg/L (6 patients). Intraperitoneal administration of Cefazolin for Injection is usually well tolerated.
                  Controlled studies on adult normal volunteers, receiving 1 gram 4 times a day for 10 days, monitoring CBC, SGOT, SGPT, bilirubin, alkaline phosphatase, BUN, creatinine and urinalysis, indicated no clinically significant changes attributed to Cefazolin for Injection.
               
               
            
         