
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY

               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Antidiabetic Activity

                     
                        The primary activity of insulin, including Humalog Mix75/25, is the regulation of glucose metabolism. In addition, all insulins have several anabolic and anti-catabolic actions on many tissues in the body. In muscle and other tissues (except the brain), insulin causes rapid transport of glucose and amino acids intracellularly, promotes anabolism, and inhibits protein catabolism. In the liver, insulin promotes the uptake and storage of glucose in the form of glycogen, inhibits gluconeogenesis, and promotes the conversion of excess glucose into fat.

                        Insulin lispro, the rapid-acting component of Humalog Mix75/25, has been shown to be equipotent to Regular human insulin on a molar basis. One unit of Humalog® has the same glucose-lowering effect as one unit of Regular human insulin, but its effect is more rapid and of shorter duration. Humalog Mix75/25 has a similar glucose-lowering effect as compared with Humulin® 70/30 on a unit for unit basis.

                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Pharmacokinetics

                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Absorption — Studies in nondiabetic subjects and patients with type 1 (insulin-dependent) diabetes demonstrated that Humalog, the rapid-acting component of Humalog Mix75/25, is absorbed faster than Regular human insulin (U-100). In nondiabetic subjects given subcutaneous doses of Humalog ranging from 0.1 to 0.4 U/kg, peak serum concentrations were observed 30 to 90 minutes after dosing. When nondiabetic subjects received equivalent doses of Regular human insulin, peak insulin concentrations occurred between 50 to 120 minutes after dosing. Similar results were seen in patients with type 1 diabetes.

                              
                                 Figure 1: Serum Immunoreactive Insulin (IRI) Concentrations, After Subcutaneous Injection of Humalog Mix75/25 or Humulin 70/30 in Healthy Nondiabetic Subjects.

                              
                              Humalog Mix75/25 has two phases of absorption. The early phase represents insulin lispro and its distinct characteristics of rapid onset. The late phase represents the prolonged action of insulin lispro protamine suspension. In 30 healthy nondiabetic subjects given subcutaneous doses (0.3 U/kg) of Humalog Mix75/25, peak serum concentrations were observed 30 to 240 minutes (median, 60 minutes) after dosing (see
                                  Figure 1). Identical results were found in patients with type 1 diabetes. The rapid absorption characteristics of Humalog are maintained with Humalog Mix75/25 (see
                                  Figure 1).

                              
                                 Figure 1 represents serum insulin concentration versus time curves of Humalog Mix75/25 and Humulin 70/30. Humalog Mix75/25 has a more rapid absorption than Humulin 70/30, which has been confirmed in patients with type 1 diabetes.

                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           Figure 1

                           
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Distribution — Radiolabeled distribution studies of Humalog Mix75/25 have not been conducted. However, the volume of distribution following injection of Humalog is identical to that of Regular human insulin, with a range of 0.26 to 0.36 L/kg.

                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Metabolism — Human metabolism studies of Humalog Mix75/25 have not been conducted. Studies in animals indicate that the metabolism of Humalog, the rapid-acting component of Humalog Mix75/25, is identical to that of Regular human insulin.

                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Elimination — Humalog Mix75/25 has two absorption phases, a rapid and a prolonged phase, representative of the insulin lispro and insulin lispro protamine suspension components of the mixture. As with other intermediate-acting insulins, a meaningful terminal phase half-life cannot be calculated after administration of Humalog Mix75/25 because of the prolonged insulin lispro protamine suspension absorption.

                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Pharmacodynamics

                     
                        Studies in nondiabetic subjects and patients with diabetes demonstrated that Humalog has a more rapid onset of glucose-lowering activity, an earlier peak for glucose-lowering, and a shorter duration of glucose-lowering activity than Regular human insulin. The early onset of activity of Humalog Mix75/25 is directly related to the rapid absorption of Humalog. The time course of action of insulin and insulin analogs, such as Humalog (and hence Humalog Mix75/25), may vary considerably in different individuals or within the same individual. The parameters of Humalog Mix75/25 activity (time of onset, peak time, and duration) as presented in Figures 2 and 3 should be considered only as general guidelines. The rate of insulin absorption and consequently the onset of activity is known to be affected by the site of injection, exercise, and other variables (see
                            General

                           under

                           PRECAUTIONS).

                        In a glucose clamp study performed in 30 nondiabetic subjects, the onset of action and glucose-lowering activity of Humalog, Humalog® Mix50/50™, Humalog Mix75/25, and insulin lispro protamine suspension (NPL component) were compared (see
                            Figure 2). Graphs of mean glucose infusion rate versus time showed a distinct insulin activity profile for each formulation. The rapid onset of glucose-lowering activity characteristic of Humalog was maintained in Humalog Mix75/25.

                        In separate glucose clamp studies performed in nondiabetic subjects, pharmacodynamics of Humalog Mix75/25 and Humulin 70/30 were assessed and are presented in Figure 3. Humalog Mix75/25 has a duration of activity similar to that of Humulin 70/30.

                        
                           Figure 2: Insulin Activity After Injection of Humalog, Humalog Mix50/50, Humalog Mix75/25, or Insulin Lispro Protamine Suspension (NPL Component) in 30 Nondiabetic Subjects.

                        
                        
                           Figure 3: Insulin Activity After Injection of Humalog Mix75/25 and Humulin 70/30 in Nondiabetic Subjects.

                        
                        
                           Figures 2 and 3 represent insulin activity profiles as measured by glucose clamp studies in healthy nondiabetic subjects.

                        
                           Figure 2 shows the time activity profiles of Humalog, Humalog Mix50/50, Humalog Mix75/25, and insulin lispro protamine suspension (NPL component).

                        
                           Figure 3 is a comparison of the time activity profiles of Humalog Mix75/25 (see
                            Figure 3a) and of Humulin 70/30 (see
                            Figure 3b) from two different studies.

                     
                     
                     
                        
                           Figure 2

                           
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           Figure 3

                           
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Special Populations

                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Age and Gender — Information on the effect of age on the pharmacokinetics of Humalog Mix75/25 is unavailable. Pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic comparisons between men and women administered Humalog Mix75/25 showed no gender differences. In large Humalog clinical trials, sub-group analysis based on age and gender demonstrated that differences between Humalog and Regular human insulin in postprandial glucose parameters are maintained across sub-groups.

                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Smoking — The effect of smoking on the pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of Humalog Mix75/25 has not been studied.

                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Pregnancy — The effect of pregnancy on the pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of Humalog Mix75/25 has not been studied.

                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Obesity — The effect of obesity and/or subcutaneous fat thickness on the pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of Humalog Mix75/25 has not been studied. In large clinical trials, which included patients with Body Mass Index up to and including 35 kg/m2, no consistent differences were observed between Humalog and Humulin® R with respect to postprandial glucose parameters.

                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Renal Impairment — The effect of renal impairment on the pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of Humalog Mix75/25 has not been studied. In a study of 25 patients with type 2 diabetes and a wide range of renal function, the pharmacokinetic differences between Humalog and Regular human insulin were generally maintained. However, the sensitivity of the patients to insulin did change, with an increased response to insulin as the renal function declined. Careful glucose monitoring and dose reductions of insulin, including Humalog Mix75/25, may be necessary in patients with renal dysfunction.

                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Hepatic Impairment — Some studies with human insulin have shown increased circulating levels of insulin in patients with hepatic failure. The effect of hepatic impairment on the pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of Humalog Mix75/25 has not been studied. However, in a study of 22 patients with type 2 diabetes, impaired hepatic function did not affect the subcutaneous absorption or general disposition of Humalog when compared with patients with no history of hepatic dysfunction. In that study, Humalog maintained its more rapid absorption and elimination when compared with Regular human insulin. Careful glucose monitoring and dose adjustments of insulin, including Humalog Mix75/25, may be necessary in patients with hepatic dysfunction.

                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         