
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  Like other topical corticosteroids CLOBEX® 
(clobetasol propionate) Spray, 0.05% has anti-inflammatory, antipruritic, and 
vasoconstrictive properties. The mechanism of the anti-inflammatory activity of 
the topical steroids in general is unclear. However, corticosteroids are thought 
to act by induction of phospholipase A2 inhibitory 
proteins, collectively called lipocortins. It is postulated that these proteins 
control the biosynthesis of potent mediators of inflammation such as 
prostaglandins and leukotrienes by inhibiting the release of their common 
precursor, arachidonic acid. Arachidonic acid is released from membrane 
phospholipids by phospholipase A2.
                  
                     Pharmacokinetics: The extent of percutaneous 
absorption of topical corticosteroids is determined by many factors, including 
the vehicle, the integrity of the epidermal barrier and occlusion. Topical 
corticosteroids can be absorbed from normal intact skin. Inflammation and other 
disease processes in the skin may increase percutaneous absorption.
                  There are no human data regarding the distribution of corticosteroids to body 
organs following topical application. Nevertheless, once absorbed through the 
skin, topical corticosteroids are handled through metabolic pathways similar to 
systemically administered corticosteroids. They are metabolized, primarily in 
the liver, and are then excreted by the kidneys. In addition, some 
corticosteroids and their metabolites are also excreted in the bile.
                  CLOBEX® (clobetasol propionate) Spray, 0.05% is in the 
super-high range of potency as compared with other topical corticosteroids in a 
vasoconstrictor study conducted in healthy subjects. However, similar blanching 
scores do not necessarily imply therapeutic equivalence.
                  The effect of CLOBEX® (clobetasol propionate) Spray, 
0.05% on hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis function was investigated in 
adults in two studies. In the first study, patients with plaque psoriasis 
covering at least 20% of their body applied CLOBEX® 
(clobetasol propionate) Spray, 0.05% twice daily for up to 4 weeks. Fifteen 
percent (2 out of 13) of patients displayed adrenal suppression after 4 weeks of 
use based on the Cosyntropin Stimulation Test. The laboratory suppression was 
transient; all subjects returned to normal after cessation of drug use. In the 
second study, patients with plaque psoriasis covering at least 20% of their body 
applied CLOBEX® (clobetasol propionate) Spray, 0.05% 
twice daily for either 2 or 4 weeks. Nineteen percent (4 out of 21) of patients 
treated for 2 weeks and 20% (3 out of 15) of patients treated for 4 weeks 
displayed adrenal suppression at the end of treatment based on the Cosyntropin 
Stimulation Test. The laboratory suppression was transient; all subjects 
returned to normal after cessation of drug use. In these studies, HPA axis 
suppression was defined as serum cortisol level ≤18 μg/dL 30-min post 
cosyntropin (ACTH1-24) stimulation (See 
                        PRECAUTIONS
                     ).
               
               
            
         