
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
                  Drug interaction studies have not been conducted with STELARA
                        ®
                     .
               
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           Live vaccines: Live vaccines should not be given with STELARA®. (7.1)
                           Concomitant therapy: In psoriasis studies, the safety of concomitant use of STELARA® with immunosuppressants or phototherapy has not been evaluated. (7.2)
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 Live Vaccines
                     
                        Live vaccines should not be given concurrently with STELARA®
                            [see Warnings and Precautions (5.7)].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 Concomitant Therapies 
                     
                        In psoriasis studies the safety of STELARA® in combination with immunosuppressive agents or phototherapy has not been evaluated.  In psoriatic arthritis studies, concomitant MTX use did not appear to influence the safety or efficacy of STELARA®
                            [see Warnings and Precautions (5.8)].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3 CYP450 Substrates
                     
                        The formation of CYP450 enzymes can be altered by increased levels of certain cytokines (e.g., IL-1, IL-6, IL-10, TNFα, IFN) during chronic inflammation. Thus, STELARA®, an antagonist of IL-12 and IL-23, could normalize the formation of CYP450 enzymes. Upon initiation of STELARA® in patients who are receiving concomitant CYP450 substrates, particularly those with a narrow therapeutic index, monitoring for therapeutic effect (e.g., for warfarin) or drug concentration (e.g., for cyclosporine) should be considered and the individual dose of the drug adjusted as needed [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4	Allergen Immunotherapy
                     
                        STELARA® has not been evaluated in patients who have undergone allergy immunotherapy. STELARA® may decrease the protective effect of allergen immunotherapy (decrease tolerance) which may increase the risk of an allergic reaction to a dose of allergen immunotherapy. Therefore, caution should be exercised in patients receiving or who have received allergen immunotherapy, particularly for anaphylaxis.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         