


CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
Local anesthetics block the generation and the conduction
of nerve impulses, presumably by increasing the threshold for electrical
excitation in the nerve, by slowing the propagation of the nerve impulse,
and by reducing the rate of rise of the action potential. In general,
the progression of anesthesia is related to the diameter, myelination,
and conduction velocity of affected nerve fibers. Clinically, the
order of loss of nerve function is as follows: pain, temperature,
touch, proprioception, and skeletal muscle tone. Procaine lacks topical
anesthetic activity.Systemic absorption of
local anesthetics produces effects on the cardiovascular and central
nervous systems. At blood concentrations achieved with normal therapeutic
doses, changes in cardiac conduction, excitability, refractoriness,
contractility, and peripheral vascular resistance are minimal. However,
toxic blood concentrations depress cardiac conduction and excitability,
which may lead to atrioventricular block and ultimately to cardiac
arrest. In addition, myocardial contractility is depressed and peripheral
vasodilation occurs, leading to decreased cardiac output and arterial
blood pressure.Following systemic absorption,
local anesthetics can produce central nervous system stimulation,
depression, or both. Apparent central stimulation is manifested as
restlessness, tremors and shivering, progressing to convulsions, followed
by depression, and coma progressing ultimately to respiratory arrest.
However, the local anesthetics have a primary depressant effect on
the medulla and on higher centers. The depressed stage may occur without
a prior excited stage.Pharmacokinetics:Pharmacokinetics:The rate of systemic
absorption of local anesthetics is dependent upon the total dose and
concentration of drug administered, the route of administration, the
vascularity of the administration site, and the presence or absence
of epinephrine in the anesthetic solution. A dilute concentration
of epinephrine (1:200,000 or 5 μg/mL) usually reduces the rate
of absorption and plasma concentration of NOVOCAIN. It also will promote
local hemostasis and increase the duration of anesthesia.Onset of anesthesia with NOVOCAIN is rapid, the time of
onset for sensory block ranging from about two to five minutes depending
upon such factors as the anesthetic technique, the type of block,
the concentration of the solution, and the individual patient. The
degree of motor blockade produced is dependent on the concentration
of the solution.The duration of anesthesia
also varies depending upon the technique and type of block, the concentration,
and the individual. NOVOCAIN will normally provide anesthesia which
is adequate for one hour.Local anesthetics
are bound to plasma proteins in varying degrees. Generally, the lower
the plasma concentration of drug, the higher the percentage of drug
bound to plasma.Local anesthetics appear to
cross the placenta by passive diffusion. The rate and degree of diffusion
is governed by the degree of plasma protein binding, the degree of
ionization, and the degree at lipid solubility. Fetal/maternal ratios
of local anesthetics appear to be inversely related to the degree
of plasma protein binding, because only the free, unbound drug is
available for placental transfer. The extent of placental transfer
is also determined by the degree of ionization and lipid solubility
of the drug. Lipid, soluble nonionized drugs readily enter the fetalblood from the maternal circulation.Depending
upon the route of administration, local anesthetics are distributed
to some extent to all body tissues, with high concentrations found
in highly perfused organs such as the liver, lungs, heart, and brain.Various pharmacokinetic parameters of the local anesthetics
can be significantly altered by the presence of hepatic or renal disease,
addition of epinephrine, factors affecting urinary pH, renal blood
flow, the route of drug administration, and the age of the patient.
The in vitro plasma half-life
of NOVOCAIN in adults is 40 ± 9 seconds and in neonates 84 ±
30 seconds.in vitro plasma half-life
of NOVOCAIN in adults is 40 ± 9 seconds and in neonates 84 ±
30 seconds.NOVOCAIN is readily absorbed following
parenteral administration and is rapidly hydrolyzed by plasma cholinesterase
to para-aminobenzoic acid and diethylaminoethanol.The para-aminobenzoic acid metabolite inhibits the action of the
sulfonamides. (See PRECAUTIONS.)For NOVOCAIN,
approximately 90% of the para-aminobenzoic acid metabolite and its
conjugates and 33% of the diethylaminoethanol metabolite are recovered
in the urine, while less than 2% of the administered dose is recovered
unchanged in the urine.


