
               
               
               
                  12     CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1     Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Calcitonin salmon is a calcitonin receptor agonist. Calcitonin salmon acts primarily on bone, but direct renal effects and actions on the gastrointestinal tract are also recognized. Calcitonin salmon appears to have actions essentially identical to calcitonins of mammalian origin, but its potency per mg is greater and it has a longer duration of action.
                        The actions of calcitonin on bone and its role in normal human bone physiology are still not completely elucidated, although calcitonin receptors have been discovered in osteoclasts and osteoblasts.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2     Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        The information below, describing the clinical pharmacology of calcitonin, has been derived from studies with injectable calcitonin salmon. The mean bioavailability of calcitonin salmon nasal spray is approximately 3% of the injectable calcitonin salmon in healthy subjects and, therefore, the conclusions concerning the clinical pharmacology of this preparation may be different.
                        
                           Bone 
                        
                        Single injections of calcitonin salmon caused a marked transient inhibition of the ongoing bone resorptive process. With prolonged use, there is a persistent, smaller decrease in the rate of bone resorption. Histologically, this is associated with a decreased number of osteoclasts and an apparent decrease in their resorptive activity.
                        In healthy adults, who have a relatively low rate of bone resorption, the administration of exogenous calcitonin salmon results in decreases in serum calcium within the limits of the normal range. In healthy children and in patients whose bone resorption is more rapid, decreases in serum calcium are more pronounced in response to calcitonin salmon.
                        
                           Kidney 
                        
                        Studies with injectable calcitonin salmon show increases in the excretion of filtered phosphate, calcium, and sodium by decreasing their tubular reabsorption. Comparable studies have not been conducted with calcitonin salmon nasal spray.
                        
                           Gastrointestinal Tract
                        
                        Some evidence from studies with injectable preparations suggests that calcitonin salmon may have effects on the gastrointestinal tract. Short-term administration of injectable calcitonin salmon results in marked transient decreases in the volume and acidity of gastric juice and in the volume and the trypsin and amylase content of pancreatic juice. Whether these effects continue to be elicited after each injection of calcitonin salmon during chronic therapy has not been investigated. These studies have not been conducted with calcitonin salmon nasal spray.
                        
                           Calcium Homeostasis
                        
                        In two clinical studies designed to evaluate the pharmacodynamic response to calcitonin salmon nasal spray, administration of calcitonin salmon 100–1600 International Units to healthy volunteers resulted in rapid and sustained decreases within the normal range for both total serum calcium and serum ionized calcium. Single doses of calcitonin salmon greater than 400 International Units did not produce any further biological response to the drug.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3     Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        The bioavailability of calcitonin salmon nasal spray relative to intramuscular administration in healthy volunteers is between 3 and 5%. Calcitonin salmon nasal spray is absorbed rapidly by the nasal mucosa with a mean Tmax of about 13 minutes. The terminal half-life of calcitonin salmon has been calculated to be around 18 minutes and no evidence of accumulation was observed with multiple dosing. 
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         