
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  Mechanism of ActionAmlodipine is a dihydropyridine calcium antagonist (calcium ion 
antagonist or slow-channel blocker) that inhibits the transmembrane influx of 
calcium ions into vascular smooth muscle and cardiac muscle. Experimental data 
suggest that amlodipine binds to both dihydropyridine and nondihydropyridine 
binding sites. The contractile processes of cardiac muscle and vascular smooth 
muscle are dependent upon the movement of extracellular calcium ions into these 
cells through specific ion channels. Amlodipine inhibits calcium ion influx 
across cell membranes selectively, with a greater effect on vascular smooth 
muscle cells than on cardiac muscle cells. Negative inotropic effects can be 
detected in vitro but such effects have not been seen 
in intact animals at therapeutic doses. Serum calcium concentration is not 
affected by amlodipine. Within the physiologic pH range, amlodipine is an 
ionized compound (pKa=8.6), and its kinetic interaction 
with the calcium channel receptor is characterized by a gradual rate of 
association and dissociation with the receptor binding site, resulting in a 
gradual onset of effect. 
                  Amlodipine is a peripheral arterial vasodilator that acts directly on 
vascular smooth muscle to cause a reduction in peripheral vascular resistance 
and reduction in blood pressure.
                  The precise mechanisms by which amlodipine relieves angina have not been 
fully delineated, but are thought to include the following:
                  Exertional Angina: In patients with exertional angina, amlodipine reduces the 
total peripheral resistance (afterload) against which the heart works and 
reduces the rate pressure product, and thus myocardial oxygen demand, at any 
given level of exercise. 
                  Vasospastic Angina: Amlodipine has been demonstrated to block constriction 
and restore blood flow in coronary arteries and arterioles in response to 
calcium, potassium epinephrine, serotonin, and thromboxane A2 analog in experimental animal models and in human coronary 
vessels in vitro. This inhibition of coronary spasm 
is responsible for the effectiveness of amlodipine in vasospastic (Prinzmetal’s 
or variant) angina. 
                  
                  
                  Pharmacokinetics and Metabolism:After oral administration of therapeutic doses of amlodipine , 
absorption produces peak plasma concentrations between 6 and 12 hours. Absolute 
bioavailability has been estimated to be between 64 and 90%. The bioavailability 
of amlodipine is not altered by the presence of food. 
                  Amlodipine is extensively (about 90%) converted to inactive metabolites via 
hepatic metabolism with 10% of the parent compound and 60% of the metabolites 
excreted in the urine. Ex vivo studies have shown 
that approximately 93% of the circulating drug is bound to plasma proteins in 
hypertensive patients. Elimination from the plasma is biphasic with a terminal 
elimination half-life of about 30-50 hours. Steady-state plasma levels of 
amlodipine are reached after 7 to 8 days of consecutive daily dosing.
                  The pharmacokinetics of amlodipine are not significantly influenced by renal 
impairment. Patients with renal failure may therefore receive the usual initial 
dose.
                  Elderly patients and patients with hepatic insufficiency have decreased 
clearance of amlodipine with a resulting increase in AUC of approximately 
40-60%, and a lower initial dose may be required. A similar increase in AUC was 
observed in patients with moderate to severe heart failure. 
                  
                  
                  Pediatric PatientsSixty-two hypertensive patients aged 6 to 17 years received doses 
of amlodipine between 1.25 mg and 20 mg. Weight-adjusted clearance and volume of 
distribution were similar to values in adults. 
                  
                  
                  Pharmacodynamics
                  
                  Hemodynamics:Following administration of therapeutic doses to patients with 
hypertension, amlodipine produces vasodilation resulting in a reduction of 
supine and standing blood pressures. These decreases in blood pressure are not 
accompanied by a significant change in heart rate or plasma catecholamine levels 
with chronic dosing. Although the acute intravenous administration of amlodipine 
decreases arterial blood pressure and increases heart rate in hemodynamic 
studies of patients with chronic stable angina, chronic oral administration of 
amlodipine in clinical trials did not lead to clinically significant changes in 
heart rate or blood pressures in normotensive patients with angina. 
                  With chronic once daily oral administration, antihypertensive effectiveness 
is maintained for at least 24 hours. Plasma concentrations correlate with effect 
in both young and elderly patients. The magnitude of reduction in blood pressure 
with amlodipine is also correlated with the height of pretreatment elevation; 
thus, individuals with moderate hypertension (diastolic pressure 105-114 mmHg) 
had about a 50% greater response than patients with mild hypertension (diastolic 
pressure 90-104 mmHg). Normotensive subjects experienced no clinically 
significant change in blood pressures (+1/-2 mmHg). 
                  In hypertensive patients with normal renal function, therapeutic doses of 
amlodipine resulted in a decrease in renal vascular resistance and an increase 
in glomerular filtration rate and effective renal plasma flow without change in 
filtration fraction or proteinuria. 
                  As with other calcium channel blockers, hemodynamic measurements of cardiac 
function at rest and during exercise (or pacing) in patients with normal 
ventricular function treated with amlodipine have generally demonstrated a small 
increase in cardiac index without significant influence on dP/dt or on left 
ventricular end diastolic pressure or volume. In hemodynamic studies, amlodipine 
has not been associated with a negative inotropic effect when administered in 
the therapeutic dose range to intact animals and man, even when coadministered 
with beta-blockers to man. Similar findings, however, have been observed in 
normals or well-compensated patients with heart failure with agents possessing 
significant negative inotropic effects. 
                  
                  
                  Electrophysiologic Effects:Amlodipine does not change sinoatrial nodal function or 
atrioventricular conduction in intact animals or man. In patients with chronic 
stable angina, intravenous administration of 10 mg did not significantly alter 
A-H and H-V conduction and sinus node recovery time after pacing. Similar 
results were obtained in patients receiving amlodipine and concomitant 
beta-blockers. In clinical studies in which amlodipine was administered in 
combination with beta-blockers to patients with either hypertension or angina, 
no adverse effects on electrocardiographic parameters were observed. In clinical 
trials with angina patients alone, amlodipine therapy did not alter 
electrocardiographic intervals or produce higher degrees of AV blocks.
                  Clinical Studies
                  
                  Effects in Hypertension
                  
                  Adult Patients:The antihypertensive efficacy of amlodipine has been demonstrated 
in a total of 15 double-blind, placebo-controlled, randomized studies involving 
800 patients on amlodipine and 538 on placebo. Once daily administration 
produced statistically significant placebo-corrected reductions in supine and 
standing blood pressures at 24 hours postdose, averaging about 12/6 mmHg in the 
standing position and 13/7 mmHg in the supine position in patients with mild to 
moderate hypertension. Maintenance of the blood pressure effect over the 24-hour 
dosing interval was observed, with little difference in peak and trough effect. 
Tolerance was not demonstrated in patients studied for up to 1 year. The 3 
parallel, fixed dose, dose response studies showed that the reduction in supine 
and standing blood pressures was dose-related within the recommended dosing 
range. Effects on diastolic pressure were similar in young and older patients. 
The effect on systolic pressure was greater in older patients, perhaps because 
of greater baseline systolic pressure. Effects were similar in black patients 
and in white patients. 
                  
                  
                  Pediatric Patients:Two-hundred sixty-eight hypertensive patients aged 6 to 17 years 
were randomized first to amlodipine 2.5 or 5 mg once daily for 4 weeks and then 
randomized again to the same dose or to placebo for another 4 weeks. Patients 
receiving 5 mg at the end of 8 weeks had lower blood pressure than those 
secondarily randomized to placebo. The magnitude of the treatment effect is 
difficult to interpret, but it is probably less than 5 mmHg systolic on the 5 mg 
dose. Adverse events were similar to those seen in adults. 
                  
                  
                  Effects in Chronic Stable Angina:The effectiveness of 5 to 10 mg/day of amlodipine in 
exercise-induced angina has been evaluated in 8 placebo-controlled, double-blind 
clinical trials of up to 6 weeks duration involving 1038 patients (684 
amlodipine , 354 placebo) with chronic stable angina. In 5 of the 8 studies 
significant increases in exercise time (bicycle or treadmill) were seen with the 
10 mg dose. Increases in symptom-limited exercise time averaged 12.8% (63 sec) 
for amlodipine 10 mg, and averaged 7.9% (38 sec) for amlodipine 5 mg. Amlodipine 
10 mg also increased time to 1 mm ST segment deviation in several studies and 
decreased angina attack rate. The sustained efficacy of amlodipine in angina 
patients has been demonstrated over long-term dosing. In patients with angina 
there were no clinically significant reductions in blood pressures (4/1 mmHg) or 
changes in heart rate (+0.3 bpm). 
                  
                  
                  Effects in Vasospastic Angina:In a double-blind, placebo-controlled clinical trial of 4 weeks 
duration in 50 patients, amlodipine therapy decreased attacks by approximately 
4/week compared with a placebo decrease of approximately 1/week (p less than 0.01). Two 
of 23 amlodipine and 7 of 27 placebo patients discontinued from the study due to 
lack of clinical improvement. 
                  
                  
                  Effects in Documented Coronary Artery Disease:In PREVENT, 825 patients with angiographically documented 
coronary artery disease were randomized to amlodipine (5 to 10 mg once daily) or 
placebo and followed for 3 years. Although the study did not show significance 
on the primary objective of change in coronary luminal diameter as assessed by 
quantitative coronary angiography, the data suggested a favorable outcome with 
respect to fewer hospitalizations for angina and revascularization procedures in 
patients with CAD. 
                  CAMELOT enrolled 1318 patients with CAD recently documented by angiography, 
without left main coronary disease and without heart failure or an ejection 
fraction less than 40%. Patients (76% males, 89% Caucasian, 93% enrolled at US sites, 
89% with a history of angina, 52% without PCI, 4% with PCI and no stent, and 44% 
with a stent) were randomized to double-blind treatment with either amlodipine 
(5 to 10 mg once daily) or placebo in addition to standard care that included 
aspirin (89%), statins (83%), beta-blockers (74%), nitroglycerin (50%), 
anti-coagulants (40%), and diuretics (32%), but excluded other calcium channel 
blockers. The mean duration of follow-up was 19 months. The primary endpoint was 
the time to first occurrence of one of the following events: hospitalization for 
angina pectoris, coronary revascularization, myocardial infarction, 
cardiovascular death, resuscitated cardiac arrest, hospitalization for heart 
failure, stroke/TIA, or peripheral vascular disease. A total of 110 (16.6%) and 
151 (23.1%) first events occurred in the amlodipine and placebo groups 
respectively for a hazard ratio of 0.691 (95% CI: 0.540-0.884, p= 0.003). The 
primary endpoint is summarized in Figure 1 below. The outcome of this study was 
largely derived from the prevention of hospitalizations for angina and the 
prevention of revascularization procedures (see 
                        Table 1
                     ). Effects in 
various subgroups are shown in Figure 2. 
                  In an angiographic substudy (n=274) conducted within CAMELOT, there was no 
significant difference between amlodipine and placebo on the change of atheroma 
volume in the coronary artery as assessed by intravascular ultrasound. 

                  
                  

Table 1 below summarizes the significant clinical outcomes from the composites 
of the primary endpoint. The other components of the primary endpoint including 
cardiovascular death, resuscitated cardiac arrest, myocardial infarction, 
hospitalization for heart failure, stroke/TIA, or peripheral vascular disease 
did not demonstrate a significant difference between amlodipine and placebo.




*   Total patients with these events




                  

                  

                  Studies in Patients with Congestive Heart 
Failure:Amlodipinehas been compared to placebo in four 8-12 week studies 
of patients with NYHA class II/III heart failure, involving a total of 697 
patients. In these studies, there was no evidence of worsened heart failure 
based on measures of exercise tolerance, NYHA classification, symptoms, or left 
ventricular ejection fraction. In a long-term (follow-up at least 6 months, mean 
13.8 months) placebo-controlled mortality/morbidity study of amlodipine 5 to10 
mg in 1153 patients with NYHA classes III (n=931) or IV (n=222) heart failure on 
stable doses of diuretics, digoxin, and ACE inhibitors, amlodipine had no effect 
on the primary endpoint of the study which was the combined endpoint of 
all-cause mortality and cardiac morbidity (as defined by life-threatening 
arrhythmia, acute myocardial infarction, or hospitalization for worsened heart 
failure), or on NYHA classification, or symptoms of heart failure. Total 
combined all-cause mortality and cardiac morbidity events were 222/571 (39%) for 
patients on amlodipine and 246/583 (42%) for patients on placebo; the cardiac 
morbid events represented about 25% of the endpoints in the study. 
                  Another study (PRAISE-2) randomized patients with NYHA class III (80%) or IV 
(20%) heart failure without clinical symptoms or objective evidence of 
underlying ischemic disease, on stable doses of ACE inhibitor (99%), digitalis 
(99%) and diuretics (99%), to placebo (n=827) or amlodipine (n=827) and followed 
them for a mean of 33 months. There was no statistically significant difference 
between amlodipine and placebo in the primary endpoint of all cause mortality 
(95% confidence limits from 8% reduction to 29% increase on amlodipine ). With 
amlodipine there were more reports of pulmonary edema. 
                  

                  
                     

                  
                  
                     

                  
                  
               
               
               
                  
                     image of figure 1
                     
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     image of figure 2
                     
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         