
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Pramipexole is a nonergot dopamine agonist with high relative in vitro specificity and full intrinsic activity at the D2 subfamily of dopamine receptors, binding with higher affinity to D3 than to D2 or D4 receptor subtypes.  
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     Parkinson’s Disease
                     
                        The precise mechanism of action of pramipexole as a treatment for Parkinson’s disease is unknown, although it is believed to be related to its ability to stimulate dopamine receptors in the striatum. This conclusion is supported by electrophysiologic studies in animals that have demonstrated that pramipexole influences striatal neuronal firing rates via activation of dopamine receptors in the striatum and the substantia nigra, the site of neurons that send projections to the striatum. The relevance of D3 receptor binding in Parkinson’s disease is unknown. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        Pramipexole displays linear pharmacokinetics over the clinical dosage range.  Its terminal half-life is about 8 hours in young healthy volunteers and about 12 hours in elderly volunteers (see 
CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY, Pharmacokinetics in Special Populations).  Steady-state concentrations are achieved within 2 days of dosing. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     Absorption
                     
                        Pramipexole is rapidly absorbed, reaching peak concentrations in approximately 2 hours. The absolute bioavailability of pramipexole is greater than 90%, indicating that it is well absorbed and undergoes little presystemic metabolism. Food does not affect the extent of pramipexole absorption, although the time of maximum plasma concentration (Tmax) is increased by about 1 hour when the drug is taken with a meal. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     Distribution
                     
                        Pramipexole is extensively distributed, having a volume of distribution of about 500 L (coefficient of variation [CV]=20%). It is about 15% bound to plasma proteins. Pramipexole distributes into red blood cells as indicated by an erythrocyte-to-plasma ratio of approximately 2. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     Metabolism and Elimination
                     
                        The terminal half-life of pramipexole is about 8 hours in healthy volunteers and 12 hours in elderly volunteers. 
                        Urinary excretion is the major route of pramipexole elimination, with 90% of a pramipexole dose recovered in urine, almost all as unchanged drug. Nonrenal routes may contribute to a small extent to pramipexole elimination, although no metabolites have been identified in plasma or urine. The renal clearance of pramipexole is approximately 400 mL/min (CV=25%), approximately three times higher than the glomerular filtration rate. Thus, pramipexole is secreted by the renal tubules, probably by the organic cation transport system. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     Pharmacokinetics in Special Populations
                     
                        Because therapy with pramipexole dihydrochloride tablets is initiated at a low dose and gradually titrated upward according to clinical tolerability to obtain the optimum therapeutic effect, adjustment of the initial dose based on gender, weight, or age is not necessary. However, renal insufficiency, which can cause a large decrease in the ability to eliminate pramipexole, may necessitate dosage adjustment (see 
CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY, Renal Insufficiency).
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     Gender
                     
                        Pramipexole clearance is about 30% lower in women than in men, but most of this difference can be accounted for by differences in body weight. There is no difference in half-life between males and females. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     Age
                     
                        Pramipexole clearance decreases with age as the half-life and clearance are about 40% longer and 30% lower, respectively, in elderly (aged 65 years or older) compared with young healthy volunteers (aged less than 40 years). This difference is most likely due to the well-known reduction in renal function with age, since pramipexole clearance is correlated with renal function, as measured by creatinine clearance (see 
CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY, Renal Insufficiency).
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     Parkinson’s Disease Patients
                     
                        A cross-study comparison of data suggests that the clearance of pramipexole may be reduced by about 30% in Parkinson’s disease patients compared with healthy elderly volunteers. The reason for this difference appears to be reduced renal function in Parkinson’s disease patients, which may be related to their poorer general health. The pharmacokinetics of pramipexole were comparable between early and advanced Parkinson’s disease patients. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     Pediatric
                     
                        The pharmacokinetics of pramipexole in the pediatric population have not been evaluated. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     Hepatic Insufficiency
                     
                        The influence of hepatic insufficiency on pramipexole pharmacokinetics has not been evaluated. Because approximately 90% of the recovered dose is excreted in the urine as unchanged drug, hepatic impairment would not be expected to have a significant effect on pramipexole elimination. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     Renal Insufficiency
                     
                        The clearance of pramipexole was about 75% lower in patients with severe renal impairment (creatinine clearance approximately 20 mL/min) and about 60% lower in patients with moderate impairment (creatinine clearance approximately 40 mL/min) compared with healthy volunteers.  Also, it took longer to achieve steady state.  A lower starting and/or maintenance dose may be appropriate in these patients (see 
PRECAUTIONSand DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION). In patients with varying degrees of renal impairment, pramipexole clearance correlates well with creatinine clearance.  Therefore, creatinine clearance can be used as a predictor of the extent of decrease in pramipexole clearance. Pramipexole clearance is extremely low in dialysis patients, as a negligible amount of pramipexole is removed by dialysis.  Caution should be exercised when administering pramipexole to patients with renal disease. 
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         