
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
                  Risedronate is not metabolized and does not induce or inhibit hepatic microsomal drug-metabolizing enzymes (for example, Cytochrome P450).
               
               
               
                  
                     
                        Calcium supplements, antacids, proton pump inhibitors (PPIs), H2 blockers, magnesium-based supplements or laxatives, and iron preparations interfere with the absorption of Atelvia (7.1, 7.2)
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 Calcium Supplements/Antacids
                     
                        When Atelvia was administered following breakfast, the co-administration of a tablet containing 600 mg of elemental calcium and 400 international units vitamin D reduced risedronate bioavailability by approximately 38% [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)
                           ]. Calcium supplements, antacids, magnesium-based supplements or laxatives, and iron preparations interfere with the absorption of Atelvia and should not be taken together.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 Histamine 2 (H2) Blockers and Proton Pump Inhibitors (PPIs)
                     
                        Drugs that raise stomach pH (for example, PPIs or H2 blockers) may cause faster drug release from enteric coated (delayed-release) drug products such as Atelvia. Co-administration of Atelvia with the PPI, esomeprazole, increased risedronate bioavailability. The maximum plasma concentration (Cmax) and the area under the plasma concentration (AUC) were increased by 60 percent and 22 percent, respectively.
                        Concomitant administration of Atelvia and H2 blockers or PPIs is not recommended.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3 Hormone Therapy
                     
                        Concomitant use of Atelvia with estrogens and estrogen agonist/antagonists has not been studied.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4 Aspirin/Nonsteroidal Anti-Inflammatory Drugs
                     
                        In the Phase 3 study comparing Atelvia 35 mg once-a-week immediately following breakfast and risedronate sodium 5 mg daily, 18% of NSAID users (any use) in both groups developed upper gastrointestinal adverse reactions. Among non-users, 13% of patients taking Atelvia 35 mg once-a-week immediately following breakfast developed upper gastrointestinal adverse reactions, compared to 12% taking risedronate sodium 5 mg daily.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         