
                     
                     
                     Drug Interactions
                     
                        Potassium-depleting are a major contributing factor to digitalis toxicity. particularly if administered rapidly by the intravenous route, may produce serious arrhythmias in digitalized patients. and raise the serum digoxin concentration due to a reduction in clearance and/or in volume of distribution of the drug, with the implication that digitalis intoxication may result. and (and possibly other ) and may increase digoxin absorption in patients who inactivate digoxin by bacterial metabolism in the lower intestine, so that digitalis intoxication may result (see ). and by decreasing gut motility, may increase digoxin absorption. certain and may interfere with intestinal digoxin absorption, resulting in unexpectedly low serum concentrations. may decrease serum digoxin concentration, especially in patients with renal dysfunction, by increasing the non-renal clearance of digoxin. There have been inconsistent reports regarding the effects of other drugs [e.g., ] on serum digoxin concentration. administration to a digitalized, hypothyroid patient may increase the dose requirement of digoxin. Concomitant use of digoxin and increases the risk of cardiac arrhythmias. may cause a sudden extrusion of potassium from muscle cells, and may thereby cause arrhythmias in digitalized patients. Although beta-adrenergic blockers or calcium channel blockers and digoxin may be useful in combination to control atrial fibrillation, their additive effects on AV node conduction can result in advanced or complete heart block.
                                    diuretics
                           Calcium,
                           Quinidine, verapamil, amiodarone, propafenone, indomethacin, itraconazole, alprazolam,
                           spironolactone
                           Erythromycin
                           clarithromycin
                           macrolide antibiotics
                           tetracycline
                           CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY: Absorption
                           Propantheline
                           diphenoxylate,
                           Antacids, kaolin-pectin, sulfasalazine, neomycin, cholestyramine,
                           anticancer drugs,
                           metoclopramide
                           Rifampin
                           quinine, penicillamine
                           Thyroid
                           sympathomimetics
                           Succinylcholine
                        
                        Due to the considerable variability of these interactions, the dosage of digoxin should be individualized when patients receive these medications concurrently. Furthermore, caution should be exercised when combining digoxin with any drug that may cause a significant deterioration in renal function, since a decline in glomerular filtration or tubular secretion may impair the excretion of digoxin.
                     
                     
                  
               