
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS

               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              Drugs that Affect Glucose Metabolism: Adjustment of insulin dosage may be needed. (7.1, 7.2, 7.3)

                           
                              Anti-Adrenergic Drugs (e.g., beta-blockers, clonidine, guanethidine, and reserpine): Signs and symptoms of hypoglycemia may be reduced or absent. (5.3, 7.4)

                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 Drugs That May Increase the Risk of Hypoglycemia

                     
                        The risk of hypoglycemia associated with HUMALOG use may be increased when co-administered with antidiabetic agents, salicylates, sulfonamide antibiotics, monoamine oxidase inhibitors, fluoxetine, pramlintide, disopyramide, fibrates, propoxyphene, pentoxifylline, ACE inhibitors, angiotensin II receptor blocking agents, and somatostatin analogs (e.g., octreotide). Dose adjustment and increased frequency of glucose monitoring may be required when HUMALOG is co-administered with these drugs.

                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 Drugs That May Decrease the Blood Glucose Lowering Effect of HUMALOG

                     
                        The glucose lowering effect of HUMALOG may be decreased when co-administered with corticosteroids, isoniazid, niacin, estrogens, oral contraceptives, phenothiazines, danazol, diuretics, sympathomimetic agents (e.g., epinephrine, albuterol, terbutaline), somatropin, atypical antipsychotics, glucagon, protease inhibitors, and thyroid hormones. Dose adjustment and increased frequency of glucose monitoring may be required when HUMALOG is co-administered with these drugs.

                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3 Drugs That May Increase or Decrease the Blood Glucose Lowering Effect of HUMALOG

                     
                        The glucose lowering effect of HUMALOG may be increased or decreased with co-administered with beta-blockers, clonidine, lithium salts, and alcohol. Pentamidine may cause hypoglycemia, which may sometimes be followed by hyperglycemia. Dose adjustment and increased frequency of glucose monitoring may be required when HUMALOG is co-administered with these drugs.

                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4 Drugs That May Blunt Signs and Symptoms of Hypoglycemia

                     
                        The signs and symptoms of hypoglycemia [see Warnings and Precautions (5.3)] may be blunted when beta-blockers, clonidine, guanethidine, and reserpine are co-administered with HUMALOG.

                     
                     
                  
               
            
         