
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY

               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action

                     
                        Regulation of glucose metabolism is the primary activity of insulins and insulin analogs, including insulin lispro. Insulins lower blood glucose by stimulating peripheral glucose uptake by skeletal muscle and fat, and by inhibiting hepatic glucose production. Insulins inhibit lipolysis and proteolysis, and enhance protein synthesis.

                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics

                     
                        HUMALOG has been shown to be equipotent to human insulin on a molar basis. One unit of HUMALOG has the same glucose-lowering effect as one unit of regular human insulin. Studies in normal volunteers and patients with diabetes demonstrated that HUMALOG has a more rapid onset of action and a shorter duration of activity than regular human insulin when given subcutaneously.

                        The time course of action of insulin and insulin analogs, such as HUMALOG, may vary considerably in different individuals or within the same individual. The parameters of HUMALOG activity (time of onset, peak time, and duration) as designated in Figure 1 should be considered only as general guidelines. The rate of insulin absorption, and consequently the onset of activity are known to be affected by the site of injection, exercise, and other variables [see Warnings and Precautions (5.2)].

                        
                           Figure 1: Blood Glucose Levels After Subcutaneous Injection of Regular Human Insulin or HUMALOG (0.2 unit/kg) Immediately Before a High Carbohydrate Meal in 10 Patients with Type 1 Diabetesa.

                        
                        
                           a Baseline insulin concentration was maintained by infusion of 0.2 mU/min/kg human insulin.

                     
                     
                     
                        
                           Figure 1

                           
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Intravenous Administration of HUMALOG U-100 — The glucose lowering effect of intravenously administered HUMALOG was tested in 21 patients with type 1 diabetes. For the study, the patients' usual doses of insulin were held and blood glucose concentrations were allowed to reach a stable range of 200 to 260 mg/dL during a one to three hours run-in phase. The run-in phase was followed by a 6-hour assessment phase. During the assessment phase, patients received intravenous HUMALOG at an initial infusion rate of 0.5 units/hour. The infusion rate of HUMALOG could be adjusted at regular timed intervals to achieve and maintain blood glucose concentrations between 100 to 160 mg/dL.

                              The mean blood glucose levels during the assessment phase for patients on HUMALOG therapy are summarized below in Table 4. All patients achieved the targeted glucose range at some point during the 6-hour assessment phase. At the endpoint, blood glucose was within the target range (100 to 160 mg/dL) for 17 of 20 patients treated with HUMALOG. The average time (±SE) required to attain near normoglycemia was 129 ± 14 minutes for HUMALOG.

                              


                              


The pharmacodynamics of a single 20 unit dose of HUMALOG U-200 administered subcutaneously were compared to the pharmacodynamics of a single 20 unit dose of HUMALOG U-100 administered subcutaneously in a euglycemic clamp study enrolling healthy subjects. In this study, the overall, maximum, and time to maximum glucose lowering effect were similar between HUMALOG U-200 and HUMALOG U-100. The mean area under the glucose infusion rate curves (measure of overall pharmacodynamic effect) were 125 g and 126 g for HUMALOG U-200 and HUMALOG U-100, respectively. The maximum glucose infusion rate was 534 mg/min and 559 mg/min and the corresponding median time (min, max) to maximum effect were 2.8 h (0.5 h – 6.3 h) and 2.4 h (0.5 h – 4.7 h) for HUMALOG U-200 and HUMALOG U-100, respectively.

                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics

                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Absorption and Bioavailability — Studies in healthy volunteers and patients with diabetes demonstrated that HUMALOG is absorbed more quickly than regular human insulin. In healthy volunteers given subcutaneous doses of HUMALOG ranging from 0.1 to 0.4 unit/kg, peak serum levels were seen 30 to 90 minutes after dosing. When healthy volunteers received equivalent doses of regular human insulin, peak insulin levels occurred between 50 to 120 minutes after dosing. Similar results were seen in patients with type 1 diabetes (see

                                 Figure 3).

                              
                                 Figure 3: Serum HUMALOG and Insulin Levels After Subcutaneous Injection of Regular Human Insulin or HUMALOG (0.2 unit/kg) Immediately Before a High Carbohydrate Meal in 10 Patients with Type 1 Diabetesa.

                              
                              
                                 a Baseline insulin concentration was maintained by infusion of 0.2 mU/min/kg human insulin.

                              HUMALOG U-100 was absorbed at a consistently faster rate than regular human insulin in healthy male volunteers given 0.2 unit/kg at abdominal, deltoid, or femoral subcutaneous sites. After HUMALOG was administered in the abdomen, serum drug levels were higher and the duration of action was slightly shorter than after deltoid or thigh administration. Bioavailability of HUMALOG is similar to that of regular human insulin. The absolute bioavailability after subcutaneous injection ranges from 55% to 77% with doses between 0.1 to 0.2 unit/kg, inclusive.

                              The results of a study in healthy subjects demonstrated that HUMALOG U-200 is bioequivalent to HUMALOG U-100 following administration of a single 20 unit dose.

                              The mean observed area under the serum insulin concentration-time curve from time zero to infinity was 2360 pmol hr/L and 2390 pmol hr/L for HUMALOG U-200 and HUMALOG U-100, respectively. The corresponding mean peak serum insulin concentration was 795 pmol/L and 909 pmol/L for HUMALOG U-200 and HUMALOG U-100, respectively. The median time to maximum concentration was 1.0 hour for both formulations.

                              
                                 Distribution — When administered intravenously as bolus injections of 0.1 and 0.2 U/kg dose in two separate groups of healthy subjects, the mean volume of distribution of HUMALOG appeared to decrease with increase in dose (1.55 and 0.72 L/kg, respectively) in contrast to that of regular human insulin for which, the volume of distribution was comparable across the two dose groups (1.37 and 1.12 L/kg for 0.1 and 0.2 U/kg dose, respectively).

                              
                                 Metabolism — Human metabolism studies have not been conducted. However, animal studies indicate that the metabolism of HUMALOG is identical to that of regular human insulin.

                              
                                 Elimination — After subcutaneous administration of HUMALOG, the t1/2 is shorter than that of regular human insulin (1 versus 1.5 hours, respectively). When administered intravenously, HUMALOG and regular human insulin demonstrated similar dose-dependent clearance, with a mean clearance of 21.0 mL/min/kg and 21.4 mL/min/kg, respectively (0.1 unit/kg dose), and 9.6 mL/min/kg and 9.4 mL/min/kg, respectively (0.2 unit/kg dose). Accordingly, HUMALOG demonstrated a mean t1/2 of 0.85 hours (51 minutes) and 0.92 hours (55 minutes), respectively for 0.1 unit/kg and 0.2 unit/kg doses, and regular human insulin mean t1/2 was 0.79 hours (47 minutes) and 1.28 hours (77 minutes), respectively for 0.1 unit/kg and 0.2 unit/kg doses.

                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           Figure 3

                           
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Specific Populations
                              
                              The effects of age, gender, race, obesity, pregnancy, or smoking on the pharmacokinetics of HUMALOG have not been studied.

                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Renal Impairment — Type 2 diabetic patients with varying degree of renal impairment showed no difference in pharmacokinetics of regular insulin and HUMALOG. However, the sensitivity of the patients to insulin did change, with an increased response to insulin as the renal function declined. Some studies with human insulin have shown increased circulating levels of insulin in patients with renal impairment. Careful glucose monitoring and dose adjustments of insulin, including HUMALOG, may be necessary in patients with renal dysfunction.

                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Hepatic Impairment — Type 2 diabetic patients with impaired hepatic function showed no effect on the pharmacokinetics of HUMALOG as compared to patients with no hepatic dysfunction. However, some studies with human insulin have shown increased circulating levels of insulin in patients with liver failure. Careful glucose monitoring and dose adjustments of insulin, including HUMALOG, may be necessary in patients with hepatic dysfunction.

                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         