
               
               
               7. DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              Drugs that affect glucose metabolism: Adjustment of insulin dosage may be needed; closely monitor blood glucose. (7.1, 7.2, 7.3)
                           
                              Anti-Adrenergic Drugs (e.g., beta-blockers, clonidine, guanethidine, and reserpine): Signs and symptoms of hypoglycemia may be reduced or absent (7.3, 7.4)
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 Drugs That May Increase the Risk of Hypoglycemia
                     
                        The risk of hypoglycemia associated with TOUJEO use may be increased with antidiabetic agents, (ACE) inhibitors, angiotensin II receptor blocking agents, disopyramide, fibrates, fluoxetine, monoamine oxidase inhibitors, pentoxifylline, pramlintide, propoxyphene,  salicylates, somatostatin analogs (e.g., octreotide), and sulfonamide antibiotics. Dose adjustment and increased frequency of glucose monitoring may be required when TOUJEO is co-administered with these drugs.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 Drugs That May Decrease the Blood Glucose Lowering Effect of TOUJEO
                     
                        The glucose lowering effect of TOUJEO may be decreased when co-administered with atypical antipsychotics (e.g., olanzapine and clozapine), corticosteroids, danazol, diuretics, estrogens, glucagon, isonazid, niacin, oral contraceptives, phenothiazines, progestogens (e.g., in oral contraceptives), protease inhibitors, somatropin, sympathomimetic agents (e.g., albuterol, epinephrine, terbutaline) and thyroid hormones. Dose adjustment and increased frequency of glucose monitoring may be required when TOUJEO is co-administered with these drugs.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3 Drugs That May Increase or Decrease the Blood Glucose Lowering Effect of TOUJEO
                     
                        The glucose lowering effect of TOUJEO may be increased or decreased when co-administered with alcohol, beta-blockers, clonidine, and lithium salts. Pentamidine may cause hypoglycemia, which may sometimes be followed by hyperglycemia. Dose adjustment and increased frequency of glucose monitoring may be required when TOUJEO is co-administered with these drugs.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4 Drugs That May Affect Signs and Symptoms of Hypoglycemia
                     
                        The signs and symptoms of hypoglycemia [see Warnings and Precautions (5.3)] may be blunted when beta-blockers, clonidine, guanethidine, and reserpine are co-administered with TOUJEO.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         