
                     
                     
                     Drug Interactions
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Enalapril Maleate
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Hypotension – Patients on Diuretic Therapy
                                 
                                    Patients on diuretics and especially those in whom diuretic therapy was recently instituted, may occasionally experience an excessive reduction of blood pressure after initiation of therapy with enalapril. The possibility of hypotensive effects with enalapril can be minimized by either discontinuing the diuretic or increasing the salt intake prior to initiation of treatment with enalapril. If it is necessary to continue the diuretic, provide medical supervision for at least two hours and until blood pressure has stabilized for at least an additional hour (see 
                                          WARNINGS
                                        and 
                                          DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION).
                                    
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Agents Causing Renin Release
                                 
                                    The antihypertensive effect of enalapril is augmented by antihypertensive agents that cause renin release (e.g., diuretics).
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                       
                                       Non-steroidal Anti-inflammatory Agents including Selective Cyclooxygenase – 2 Inhibitors
(COX-2 Inhibitors)
                                       
                                          In patients who are elderly, volume-depleted (including those on diuretic therapy), or
with compromised renal function, co-administration of NSAIDs, including selective COX-2
inhibitors, with ACE inhibitors, including enalapril, may result in deterioration of renal
function, including possible acute renal failure. These effects are usually reversible. Monitor
renal function periodically in patients receiving enalapril and NSAID therapy.
                                          In a clinical pharmacology study, indomethacin or sulindac was administered to hypertensive
patients receiving enalapril maleate. In this study there was no evidence of a blunting of
the antihypertensive action of enalapril maleate. However, reports suggest that NSAIDs
may diminish the antihypertensive effect of ACE inhibitors.
                                       
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Other Cardiovascular Agents
                                 
                                    Enalapril has been used concomitantly with beta adrenergicblocking
agents, methyldopa, nitrates, calcium-blocking agents, hydralazine and prazosin
without evidence of clinically significant adverse interactions.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Agents Increasing Serum Potassium
                                 
                                    Enalapril attenuates diuretic-induced potassium loss.
Potassium-sparing diuretics (e.g., spironolactone, triamterene, or amiloride), potassium
supplements, or potassium-containing salt substitutes may lead to significant increases in
serum potassium. Therefore, if concomitant use of these agents is indicated because of
demonstrated hypokalemia they should be used with caution and with frequent monitoring
of serum potassium.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Lithium
                                 
                                    Lithium toxicity has been reported in patients receiving lithium concomitantly
with drugs which cause elimination of sodium, including ACE inhibitors. A few cases of
lithium toxicity have been reported in patients receiving concomitant enalapril and lithium
and were reversible upon discontinuation of both drugs. It is recommended that serum
lithium levels be monitored frequently if enalapril is administered concomitantly with
lithium.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Gold
                                 
                                    Nitritoid reactions (symptoms include facial flushing, nausea, vomiting and
hypotension) have been reported rarely in patients on therapy with injectable gold (sodium
aurothiomalate) and concomitant ACE inhibitor therapy including enalapril maleate and
hydrochlorothiazide tablets.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Hydrochlorothiazide
                           
                              When administered concurrently the following drugs may interact with thiazide diuretics:
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Alcohol, barbiturates, or narcotics
                                 
                                    potentiation of orthostatic hypotension may occur.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Antidiabetic drugs (oral agents and insulin)
                                 
                                    dosage adjustment of the antidiabetic drug may be required.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Other antihypertensive drugs
                                 
                                    additive effect or potentiation.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Cholestyramine and colestipol resins
                                 
                                    Absorption of hydrochlorothiazide is impaired in
the presence of anionic exchange resins. Single doses of either cholestyramine or colestipol
resins bind the hydrochlorothiazide and reduce its absorption from the gastrointestinal
tract by up to 85 and 43 percent, respectively.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Corticosteroids, ACTH
                                 
                                    intensified electrolyte depletion, particularly hypokalemia.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Pressor amines (e.g., norepinephrine)
                                 
                                    possible decreased response to pressor amines but not sufficient to preclude their use.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Skeletal muscle relaxants, nondepolarizing (e.g., tubocurarine)
                                 
                                    possible increased responsiveness to the muscle relaxant.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Lithium
                                 
                                    should not generally be given with diuretics. Diuretic agents reduce the
renal clearance of lithium and add a high risk of lithium toxicity. Refer to the package
insert for lithium preparations before use of such preparations with enalapril maleate and
hydrochlorothiazide.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Non-steroidal Anti-inflammatory Drugs
                                 
                                    In some patients, the administration
of a non-steroidal anti-inflammatory agent can reduce the diuretic, natriuretic, and
antihypertensive effects of loop, potassium-sparing and thiazide diuretics. Therefore, when
enalapril maleate and hydrochlorothiazide and non-steroidal anti-inflammatory agents are
used concomitantly, the patient should be observed closely to determine if the desired
effect of the diuretic is obtained.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               