
               
               
               
                  7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              CNS depressants: Increased risk of respiratory depression, hypotension, profound sedation, coma or death. When combined therapy with CNS depressant is contemplated, the dose of one or both agents should be reduced. (7.2)
                           
                           
                              Mixed agonist/antagonist opioids (i.e., pentazocine, nalbuphine, and butorphanol): May reduce analgesic effect and/or precipitate withdrawal symptoms. (7.3)
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        7.1   Alcohol
                     
                     
                        Concomitant use of alcohol with OPANA ER can result in an increase of oxymorphone plasma levels and potentially fatal overdose of oxymorphone. Instruct patients not to consume alcoholic beverages or use prescription or non-prescription products containing alcohol while on OPANA ER therapy [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        7.2   CNS Depressants
                     
                     
                        Concurrent use of OPANA ER and other CNS depressants including sedatives, hypnotics, tranquilizers, general anesthetics, phenothiazines, other opioids, and alcohol can increase the risk of respiratory depression, hypotension, profound sedation, or coma. Monitor patients receiving CNS depressants and OPANA ER for signs of respiratory depression and hypotension. When such combined therapy is contemplated, reduce the initial dose of one or both agents.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        7.3   Mixed Agonist/Antagonist Opioid Analgesics
                     
                     
                        Mixed agonist/antagonist analgesics (i.e., pentazocine, nalbuphine, butorphanol, or buprenorphine) may reduce the analgesic effect of OPANA ER or may precipitate withdrawal symptoms in these patients. Avoid the use of mixed agonist/antagonist analgesics in patients receiving OPANA ER.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        7.4  Cimetidine
                     
                     
                        Cimetidine can potentiate opioid-induced respiratory depression.  Monitor patients for respiratory depression when OPANA ER and cimetidine are used concurrently.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        7.5   Anticholinergics
                     
                     
                        Anticholinergics or other medications with anticholinergic activity when used concurrently with opioid analgesics may result in increased risk of urinary retention and/or severe constipation, which may lead to paralytic ileus. Monitor patients for signs of respiratory and central nervous system depression when OPANA ER is used concurrently with anticholinergic drugs.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         