
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  Desmopressin acetate contains as active substance 1-(3-mercaptopropionic acid)-8-D-arginine vasopressin, which is a synthetic analogue of the natural hormone arginine vasopressin. One mL (0.1 mg) of intranasal desmopressin acetate has an antidiuretic activity of about 400 International Units (IU); 10 mcg of desmopressin acetate is equivalent to 40 IU. The change in structure of arginine vasopressin to desmopressin acetate has resulted in a decreased vasopressor action and decreased actions on visceral smooth muscle relative to the enhanced antiduretic activity, so that clinically effective antiduretic doses are usually below threshold levels for effects on vascular or visceral smooth muscle. 
                  Desmopressin acetate administered intranasally has an antiduretic effect about one-tenth that of an equivalent dose administered by injection.
               
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        Intranasal Desmopressin Acetate is absorbed from the nasal mucosa. Desmopressin Acetate exhibits a biphasic elimination profile, with half-lives of 7.8 and 75.5 minutes for the initial and terminal phases, respectively, in contrast to lysine vasopressin, which has initial and terminal phase half-lives of 2.5 and 14.5 minutes, respectively. Desmopressin Acetate is mainly excreted in the urine. A pharmacokinetic study conducted in healthy volunteers and patients with mild, moderate, and severe renal impairment (n=24, 6 subjects each group) receiving single dose Desmopressin Acetate (2 mcg) injection demonstrated a difference in Desmopressin Acetate half-life. Terminal half-life significantly increased from 3 hours in normal healthy patients to 9 hours in patients with severe renal impairment. [See
                               CONTRAINDICATIONS.]
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         