
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Gaucher disease is an autosomal recessive disorder caused by mutations in the GBA gene, which results in a deficiency of the lysosomal enzyme beta-glucocerebrosidase. Glucocerebrosidase catalyzes the conversion of the sphingolipid glucocerebroside into glucose and ceramide. The enzymatic deficiency causes an accumulation of glucocerebroside primarily in the lysosomal compartment of macrophages, giving rise to foam cells or "Gaucher cells". Velaglucerase alfa catalyzes the hydrolysis of glucocerebroside, reducing the amount of accumulated glucocerebroside. In clinical trials VPRIV reduced spleen and liver size, and improved anemia and thrombocytopenia.
                        In this lysosomal storage disorder (LSD), clinical features are reflective of the accumulation of Gaucher cells in the liver, spleen, bone marrow, and other organs. The accumulation of Gaucher cells in the liver and spleen leads to organomegaly. Presence of Gaucher cells in the bone marrow and spleen lead to clinically significant anemia and thrombocytopenia.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        In a multicenter study conducted in pediatric (N=7, 4 to 17 years old) and adult (N=15, 19 to 62 years old) patients with type 1 Gaucher disease, pharmacokinetic evaluations were performed at Weeks 1 and 37 following 60-minute intravenous infusions of VPRIV 60 Units/kg every other week. Serum velaglucerase alfa concentrations declined rapidly with a mean half life of 11 to 12 minutes. The mean velaglucerase alfa clearance ranged from 6.72 to 7.56 mL/min/kg. The mean volume of distribution at steady state ranged from 82 to 108 mL/kg (8.2% to 10.8% of body weight).
                        No accumulation or change in velaglucerase alfa pharmacokinetics over time from Weeks 1 to 37 was observed upon multiple-dosing 60 Units/kg every other week.
                        Based on the limited data, there were no notable pharmacokinetic differences between male and female patients in this study. The effect of age on pharmacokinetics of velaglucerase alfa was inconclusive.
                        The effect of anti-drug antibody formation on the pharmacokinetic parameters of velaglucerase alfa is unknown.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         