
               
               
               DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
                  Caution must be exercised in the administration of Sodium Chloride Injection, USP, to patients receiving corticosteroids or corticotropin.
                  
                     Carcinogenesis, Mutagenesis, Impairment of Fertility 
                  Studies have not been performed with Sodium Chloride Injection, USP to evaluate the potential for carcinogenesis, mutagenesis or impairment of fertility.
                  
                     Pregnancy: 
                  
                     Teratogenic Effects
                  
                  
                     Pregnancy Category C 
                  Animal reproduction studies have not been conducted with sodium chloride. It is also not known whether sodium chloride can cause fetal harm when administered to a pregnant woman or can affect reproduction capacity. Sodium chloride should be given to a pregnant woman only if clearly needed.
                  
                     Nursing Mothers 
                  It is not known whether this drug is excreted in human milk. Because many drugs are excreted in human milk, caution should be exercised when Sodium Chloride Injection, USP is administered to a nursing mother.
                  
                     Pediatric Use 
                  The use of Sodium Chloride Injection, USP in pediatric patients is based on clinical practice. 
                  Plasma electrolyte concentrations should be closely monitored in the pediatric population as this population may have impaired ability to regulate fluids and electrolytes.
                  The infusion of hypotonic fluids (0.45% Sodium Chloride Injection, USP) together with the non‑osmotic secretion of ADH may result in hyponatremia in patients with acute volume depletion. Hyponatremia can lead to headache, nausea, seizures, lethargy, coma, cerebral edema and death, therefore acute symptomatic hyponatremic encephalopathy is considered a medical emergency.
                  
                     Geriatric Use
                  
                  Clinical studies of Sodium Chloride Injection, USP did not include sufficient numbers of subjects aged 65 and over to determine whether they respond differently from younger subjects. Other reported clinical experience has not identified differences in responses between elderly and younger patients. In general, dose selection for an elderly patient should be cautious, usually starting at the low end of the dosing range, reflecting the greater frequency of decreased hepatic, renal, or cardiac function, and of concomitant disease or drug therapy.
                  This drug is known to be substantially excreted by the kidney, and the risk of toxic reactions to this drug may be greater in patients with impaired renal function. Because elderly patients are more likely to have decreased renal function, care should be taken in dose selection, and it may be useful to monitor renal function.
                  Do not administer unless solution is clear and container is undamaged. Discard unused portion.
               
               
            
         