
               
               
               
                  CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY

                  Mechanism of Action:The precise mechanisms by which topiramate exerts its 
anticonvulsant effects are unknown; however, preclinical studies have revealed 
four properties that may contribute to topiramate's efficacy for epilepsy. 
Electrophysiological and biochemical evidence suggests that topiramate, at 
pharmacologically relevant concentrations, blocks voltage-dependent sodium 
channels, augments the activity of the neurotransmitter gamma-aminobutyrate at 
some subtypes of the GABA-A receptor, antagonizes the AMPA/kainate subtype of 
the glutamate receptor, and inhibits the carbonic anhydrase enzyme, particularly 
isozymes II and IV.
                  Pharmacodynamics:Topiramate has anticonvulsant activity in rat and mouse maximal 
electroshock seizure (MES) tests. Topiramate is only weakly effective in 
blocking clonic seizures induced by the GABAA receptor antagonist, 
pentylenetetrazole. Topiramate is also effective in rodent models of epilepsy, 
which include tonic and absence-like seizures in the spontaneous epileptic rat 
(SER) and tonic and clonic seizures induced in rats by kindling of the amygdala 
or by global ischemia.
                  

                  Pharmacokinetics:The sprinkle formulation is bioequivalent to the immediate 
release tablet formulation and, therefore, may be substituted as a therapeutic 
equivalent.

                  
                  Absorption of topiramate is rapid, with peak plasma concentrations occurring 
at approximately 2 hours following a 400 mg oral dose. The relative 
bioavailability of topiramate from the tablet formulation is about 80% compared 
to a solution. The bioavailability of topiramate is not affected by 
food.

                  
                  The pharmacokinetics of topiramate are linear with dose proportional 
increases in plasma concentration over the dose range studied (200 to 800 
mg/day). The mean plasma elimination half-life is 21 hours after single or 
multiple doses. Steady state is thus reached in about 4 days in patients with 
normal renal function. Topiramate is 15 to 41% bound to human plasma proteins 
over the blood concentration range of 0.5 to 250 mcg/mL. The fraction bound 
decreased as blood concentration increased. 

                  
                  Carbamazepine and phenytoin do not alter the binding of topiramate. Sodium 
valproate, at 500 mcg/mL (a concentration 5 to 10 times higher than considered 
therapeutic for valproate) decreased the protein binding of topiramate from 23% 
to 13%. Topiramate does not influence the binding of sodium valproate.
                  Metabolism and Excretion:Topiramate is not extensively metabolized and is primarily 
eliminated unchanged in the urine (approximately 70% of an administered dose). 
Six metabolites have been identified in humans, none of which constitutes more 
than 5% of an administered dose. The metabolites are formed via hydroxylation, 
hydrolysis, and glucuronidation. There is evidence of renal tubular reabsorption 
of topiramate. In rats, given probenecid to inhibit tubular reabsorption, along 
with topiramate, a significant increase in renal clearance of topiramate was 
observed. This interaction has not been evaluated in humans. Overall, oral 
plasma clearance (CL/F) is approximately 20 to 30 mL/min in humans following 
oral administration.
                  Pharmacokinetic Interactions
                     (see also Drug Interactions):
                  
                  Antiepileptic Drugs
                  Potential interactions between topiramate and standard AEDs were assessed in 
controlled clinical pharmacokinetic studies in patients with epilepsy. The 
effect of these interactions on mean plasma AUCs are summarized under 
                        PRECAUTIONS (Table 4)
                     . 

                  
                  
                     

                  
               
               
            
         