


 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
  Morphine produces a wide spectrum of pharmacologic effects including  analgesia, dysphoria, euphoria, somnolence, respiratory depression,  diminished gastrointestinal motility and physical dependence. Opiate  analgesia involves at least three anatomical areas of the central  nervous system: the periaqueductal-periventricular gray matter, the  ventromedial medulla and the spinal cord. A systemically administered  opiate may produce analgesia by acting at any, all or some combination  of these distinct regions. Morphine interacts predominantly with the  µ-receptor. The µ-binding sites of opioids are very  discretely distributed in the human brain, with high densities of sites  found in the posterior amygdala, hypothalamus, thalamus, nucleus  caudatus, putamen and certain cortical areas. They are also found on  the terminal axons of primary afferents within laminae I and II  (substantia gelatinosa) of the spinal cord and in the spinal nucleus of  the trigeminal nerve.   Morphine has an apparent volume of distribution ranging from 1.0 to 4.7  L/kg after intravenous  dosage. Protein binding is low, about 36%, and muscle tissue binding  is reported as 54%. A blood-brain barrier exists, and when morphine is  introduced outside of the CNS (eg. intravenously ), plasma concentrations of morphine remain higher than the  corresponding CSF morphine levels. Conversely, when morphine is  injected into the intrathecal  space, it diffuses out into the systemic circulation slowly, accounting  for the long duration of action of morphine administered by this route.    Morphine has a total plasma clearance which ranges from 0.9 to 1.2  L/kg/h (liters/kilogram/hour) in postoperative patients, but shows  considerable interindividual variation. The major pathway of clearance  is hepatic glucuronidation to morphine-3-glucuronide, which is  pharmacologically inactive. The major excretion path of the conjugate  is through the kidneys, with about 10% in the feces. Morphine is also  eliminated by the kidneys, 2 to 12% being excreted unchanged in the  urine. Terminal half-life is commonly reported to vary from 1.5 to 4.5  hours, although the longer half-lives were obtained when morphine  levels were monitored over protracted periods with very sensitive  radioimmunoassay methods. The accepted elimination half-life in normal  subject is 1.5 to 2 hours.   "Selective" blockade of pain sensation is possible by neuraxial  application of morphine. In addition, duration of analgesia may be much  longer by this route compared to systemic administration. However, CNS  effects, associated with systemic administration, are still seen. These  include respiratory depression, sedation, nausea and vomiting, pruritus  and urinary retention. In particular, both early and late respiratory  depression (up to 24 hours post dosing) have been reported following  neuraxial administration. Circulation of the spinal fluid may also  result in high concentrations of morphine reaching the brain stem  directly.   The incidence of unwanted CNS effects, including delayed respiratory  depression, associated with neuraxial application of morphine, is  related to the circulatory dynamics of the epidural venous plexus and  the spinal fluid. The lipid solubility and degree of ionization of  morphine plays an important part in both the onset and duration of  analgesia and the CNS effects. Morphine has a pKa  7.9, with an octanol/water partition coefficient of 1.42 at pH 7.4. At  this pH, the tertiary amino group in each of the opioids is mostly  ionized, making the molecule water soluble. Morphine, with additional  hydroxyl groups on the molecule, is significantly more water-soluble  than any other opioid in clinical use.   Morphine, injected into the epidural space , is rapidly absorbed into the general circulation. Absorption is so  rapid that the plasma concentration-time profiles closely resemble  those obtained after intravenous or intramuscular administration. Peak  plasma concentrations averaging 33-40 ng/mL (range 5-62 ng/mL) are  achieved within 10 to 15 minutes after administration of 3 mg of  morphine. Plasma concentrations decline in a multiexponential fashion.  The terminal half-life is reported to range from 39 to 249 minutes  (mean of 90 ± 34.3 min) and, though somewhat shorter, is similar in  magnitude as values reported after intravenous and intramuscular  administration (1.5-4.5 h). CSF concentrations of morphine, after  epidural doses of 2 to 6 mg in postoperative patients, have been  reported to be 50 to 250 times higher than corresponding plasma  concentrations. The CSF levels of morphine exceed those in plasma after  only 15 minutes and are detectable for as long as 20 hours after the  injection of 2 mg of epidural morphine. Approximately 4% of the dose  injected epidurally reaches the CSF. This corresponds to the relative  minimum effective epidural and intrathecal doses of 5 mg and 0.25 mg,  respectively. The disposition of morphine in the CSF follows a biphasic  pattern, with an early half-life of 1.5 h and a late phase half-life of  about 6 h. Morphine crosses the dura slowly, with an absorption  half-life across the dura averaging 22 minutes. Maximum CSF  concentrations are seen 60-90 minutes after injection. Minimum  effective CSF concentrations for postoperative analgesia average 150  ng/mL (range <1-380 ng/mL).   The intrathecal route  of administration circumvents meningeal diffusion barriers and,  therefore, lower doses of morphine produce comparable analgesia to that  induced by the epidural route. After intrathecal bolus injection of  morphine, there is a rapid initial distribution phase lasting 15-30  minutes and a half-life in the CSF of 42-136 min (mean 90 ± 16 min).  Derived from limited data, it appears that the disposition of morphine  in the CSF, from 15 minutes postintrathecal administration to the end  of a six-hour observation period, represents a combination of the  distribution and elimination phases. Morphine concentrations in the CSF  averaged 332 ± 137 ng/mL at 6 hours, following a bolus dose of 0.3  mg of morphine. The apparent volume of distribution of morphine in the  intrathecal space is about 22 ± 8 mL.   Time-to-peak plasma concentrations, however, are similar (5-10 min)  after either epidural or intrathecal bolus administration of morphine.  Maximum plasma morphine concentrations after 0.3 mg intrathecal  morphine have been reported from <1 to 7.8 ng/mL. The minimum  analgesic morphine plasma concentration during Patient-Controlled  Analgesia (PCA) has been reported as 20-40 ng/mL, suggesting that any  analgesic contribution from systemic redistribution would be minimal  after the first 30-60 minutes with epidural administration and  virtually absent with intrathecal administration of  morphine. 


