
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  
                  Ketorolac tromethamine is a nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID) that exhibits analgesic activity in animal models.  Ketorolac tromethamine inhibits synthesis of prostaglandins and may be considered a peripherally acting analgesic.  The biological activity of ketorolac tromethamine is associated with the S-form.  Ketorolac tromethamine possesses no sedative or anxiolytic properties.
                  The peak analgesic effect of ketorolac tromethamine occurs within 2 to 3 hours and is not statistically significantly different over the recommended dosage range of ketorolac tromethamine.  The greatest difference between large and small doses of ketorolac tromethamine by either route is in the duration of analgesia.
                  
 

                  
                  Ketorolac tromethamine is a racemic mixture of [-]S- and [+]R-enantiomeric forms, with the S-form having analgesic activity.
                  
                     Comparison of IV, IM, and Oral Pharmacokinetics
                  
                  The pharmacokinetics of ketorolac tromethamine, following IV, IM and oral doses of ketorolac tromethamine, are compared in Table 1.  In adults, the extent of bioavailability following administration of the oral and IM forms of ketorolac tromethamine was equal to that following an IV bolus.
                  
                     Linear Kinetics
                  
                  In adults, following administration of single ORAL, IM or IV doses of ketorolac tromethamine in the recommended dosage ranges, the clearance of the racemate does not change.  This implies that the pharmacokinetics of ketorolac tromethamine in adults, following single or multiple IM, IV or recommended oral doses of ketorolac tromethamine, are linear.  At the higher recommended doses, there is a proportional increase in the concentrations of free and bound racemate.
                  
                     Distribution
                  
                  The mean apparent volume (Vβ) of ketorolac tromethamine following complete distribution was approximately 13 liters.  This parameter was determined from single-dose data. The ketorolac tromethamine racemate has been shown to be highly protein bound (99%).  Nevertheless, even plasma concentrations as high as 10 mcg/mL will only occupy approximately 5% of the albumin binding sites.  Thus, the unbound fraction for each enantiomer will be constant over the therapeutic range.  A decrease in serum albumin, however, will result in increased free drug concentrations.
                  Ketorolac tromethamine is excreted in human milk (see 
                        PRECAUTIONS,
                     
                         
                     
                     
                        Lactation and Nursing
                     ).
                  
                     Metabolism
                  
                  Ketorolac tromethamine is largely metabolized in the liver.  The metabolic products are hydroxylated and conjugated forms of the parent drug.  The products of metabolism, and some unchanged drug, are excreted in the urine.
                  
                     Excretion
                  
                  The principal route of elimination of ketorolac and its metabolites is renal.  About 92% of a given dose is found in the urine, approximately 40% as metabolites and 60% as unchanged ketorolac.  Approximately 6% of a dose is excreted in the feces.  A single-dose study with 10 mg ketorolac tromethamine (n=9) demonstrated that the S-enantiomer is cleared approximately two times faster than the R-enantiomer and that the clearance was independent of the route of administration.  This means that the ratio of S/R plasma concentrations decreases with time after each dose.  There is little or no inversion of the R- to S-form in humans.  The clearance of the racemate in normal subjects, elderly individuals and in hepatically and renally impaired patients is outlined in Table 2 (see 
                        CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY, Kinetics in Special Populations
                     ).
                  The half-life of the ketorolac tromethamine S-enantiomer was approximately 2.5 hours (SD±0.4) compared with 5 hours (SD ± 1.7) for the R-enantiomer.  In other studies, the half-life for the racemate has been reported to lie within the range of 5 to 6 hours.
                  
                     Accumulation
                  
                  Ketorolac tromethamine administered as an IV bolus every 6 hours for 5 days to healthy subjects (n=13), showed no significant difference in Cmax on Day 1 and Day 5.  Trough levels averaged 0.29 mcg/mL (SD ± 0.13) on Day 1 and 0.55 mcg/mL (SD±0.23) on Day 6.  Steady state was approached after the fourth dose.
                  Accumulation of ketorolac tromethamine has not been studied in special populations (elderly, pediatric, renal failure, or hepatic disease patients).
                  
                     Kinetics in Special Populations
                  
                  
                     
                        Geriatric Patients
                     
                  
                  Based on single-dose data only, the half-life of the ketorolac tromethamine racemate increased from 5 to 7 hours in the elderly (65 to 78 years) compared with young healthy volunteers (24 to 35 years) (see Table 2).  There was little difference in the Cmax for the two groups (elderly, 2.52 mcg/mL ± 0.77; young, 2.99 mcg/mL ± 1.03) (see 
                        PRECAUTIONS
                        , 
                     
                     
                        Geriatric Use
                     ).
                  
                     
                        Pediatric Patients
                     
                  
                  Following a single intravenous bolus dose of 0.5 mg/kg in 10 children 4 to 8 years old, the half-life was 6 hours (range: 3.5 to 10 h), the average clearance was 0.042 L/ hr/kg and the Vd was 0.26 L/kg (range: 0.19 to 0.44 L/kg).  In a second study, following a single intravenous dose of 0.6 mg/kg in 24 children 3 to 18 years old, Cmax was 4.3 ± 1.7 mcg/mL, Tmax was 10.25 ± 1.15 minutes, half-life was 3.8 ± 2.6 hours, CI was 0.0678 L/hr/kg and Vd was 0.25 L/kg.  The volume of distribution and clearance of ketorolac in pediatric patients was twice that observed in adult subjects (see Tables 1 and 2).  There are no pharmacokinetic data available for ketorolac tromethamine administration by the IM route in pediatric patients.
                  
                     
                        Renal Insufficiency
                     
                  
                  Based on single-dose data only, the mean half-life of ketorolac tromethamine in renally impaired patients is between 6 and 19 hours and is dependent on the extent of the impairment.  There is poor correlation between creatinine clearance and total ketorolac tromethamine clearance in the elderly and populations with renal impairment (r=0.5).
                  In patients with renal disease, the AUC∞ of each enantiomer increased by approximately 100% compared with healthy volunteers.  The volume of distribution doubles for the S-enantiomer and increases by 1/5th for the R-enantiomer.  The increase in volume of distribution of ketorolac tromethamine implies an increase in unbound fraction.
                  
                                                                 Table 1
                  
                  
                     Table of Approximate Average Pharmacokinetic Parameters (Mean ± SD)
                     Following Oral, Intramuscular and Intravenous Doses of Ketorolac Tromethamine
                  
                  


                  


%Dose metabolized = < 50                       %Dose excreted in feces = 6
                  %Dose excreted in urine = 91                  %Plasma protein binding = 99
                  
                     * Derived from PO pharmacokinetic studies in 77 normal fasted volunteers
                  
                     † Derived from IM pharmacokinetic studies in 54 normal volunteers
                  
                     ‡ Derived from IV pharmacokinetic studies in 24 normal volunteers
                  
                     # Mean value was simulated from observed plasma concentration data and standard deviation was simulated from percent coefficient of variation for observed Cmax and  Tmax data
                  
                     ll Not applicable because 60 mg is only recommended as a single dose
                  
                     1 Time - to - peak plasma concentration
                  
                     2 Peak plasma concentration
                  
                     3 Trough plasma concentration
                  
                     4 Average plasma concentration
                  
                     5 Volume of distribution
                  
                                                                  Table 2
                  
                  
                     The Influence of Age, Liver and Kidney Function, on the Clearance and Terminal Half-life of Ketorolac Tromethamine (IM
                     
                        1
                     
                     and ORAL
                     
                        2
                     
                     ) In Adult Populations
                  
                  


                  



                     1Estimated from 30 mg single IM doses of ketorolac tromethamine
                  
                     2Estimated from 10 mg single oral doses of ketorolac tromethamine
                  
                     3Liters/hour/kilogram
                  The AUC∞ - ratio of the ketorolac tromethamine enantiomers in healthy subjects and patients remained similar, indicating there was no selective excretion of either enantiomer in patients compared to healthy subjects (see 
                        WARNINGS
                     , 
                        
                           Renal Effects; 
                     see Table 2).
                  
                     Hepatic Insufficiency
                  
                  There was no significant difference in estimates of halflife, AUC∞, and Cmax in 7 patients with liver disease compared to healthy volunteers (see 
                        PRECAUTIONS
                     , 
                        
                           General, 
                     Hepatic Effects; see Table 2).
                  
                     Race
                  
                  Pharmacokinetic differences due to race have not been identified.
                  
                     IV Administration
                  
                  In normal adult subjects (n=37), the total clearance of 30 mg IV-administered ketorolac tromethamine was 0.030 (0.017 to 0.051) L/h/kg.  The terminal half-life was 5.6 (4 to 7.9) hours (see 
                        Kinetics in Special Populations for use of ketorolac tromethamine injection in pediatric patients).
                  
 

                  
                  
                     
                        Adult Patients
                     
                  
                  The analgesic efficacy of intramuscularly, intravenously, and orally administered ketorolac tromethamine was investigated in two postoperative pain models: general surgery (orthopedic, gynecologic, and abdominal) and oral surgery (removal of impacted third molars).  The studies were double-blind, single- and multiple-dose, parallel trial designs in patients with moderate to severe pain at baseline.  Ketorolac tromethamine injection was compared as follows:  IM to meperidine or morphine administered intramuscularly and IV to morphine administered either directly IV or through a PCA (Patient-Controlled Analgesia) pump.
                  
                     Short-Term Use (up to 5 days) Studies
                  
                  In adults, the comparisons of intramuscular administration during the first hour, the onset of analgesic action was similar for ketorolac tromethamine and the narcotics, but the duration of analgesia was longer with ketorolac tromethamine than with the opioid comparators meperidine or morphine.
                  In a multidose, postoperative (general surgery) double-blind trial of ketorolac tromethamine 30 mg IM versus morphine 6 and 12 mg IM, each drug given on an “as needed” basis for up to 5 days, the overall analgesic effect of ketorolac tromethamine 30 mg IM was between that of morphine 6 and 12 mg.  The majority of patients treated with either ketorolac tromethamine or morphine were dosed for up to 3 days; a small percentage of patients received 5 days of dosing.
                  In clinical settings where perioperative morphine was allowed, ketorolac tromethamine 30 mg IV, given once or twice as needed, provided analgesia comparable to morphine 4 mg IV once or twice as needed.
                  There was relatively limited experience with 5 consecutive days of ketorolac tromethamine IV use in controlled clinical trials, as most patients were given the drug for 3 days or less.  The adverse events seen with IV-administered ketorolac tromethamine were similar to those observed with IM-administered ketorolac tromethamine, as would be expected based on the similar pharmacokinetics and bioequivalence (AUC, clearance, plasma half-life) of IV and IM routes of ketorolac tromethamine administration.
                  
                     
                        Pediatric Patients
                     
                  
                  The analgesic efficacy of single doses of ketorolac tromethamine injection has been demonstrated by showing a decrease in the need for supplemental narcotic in pediatric patients receiving ketorolac as compared to placebo. See discussion of these results under Clinical Studies with Concomitant Use of Opioids  
                     below.
                  
                     Clinical Studies with Concomitant Use of Opioids
                  
                  
                     
                        Adult Patients
                     
                  
                  Clinical studies in postoperative pain management have demonstrated that ketorolac tromethamine injection, when used in combination with opioids, significantly reduced opioid consumption.  This combination may be useful in the subpopulation of patients especially prone to opioid-related complications.  Ketorolac tromethamine and narcotics should not be administered in the same syringe.
                  In a postoperative study, where all patients received morphine by a PCA device, patients treated with ketorolac tromethamine IV as fixed intermittent boluses (e.g., 30 mg initial dose followed by 15 mg q3h), required significantly less morphine (26%) than the placebo group.  Analgesia was significantly superior, at various postdosing pain assessment times, in the patients receiving ketorolac tromethamine IV plus PCA morphine as compared to patients receiving PCA-administered morphine alone.
                  
                     Pediatric Patients

                     
                  
                  Ketorolac tromethamine intramuscular injection reduced the need for supplemental opioid (fentanyl) when a 1 mg/kg dose was administered immediately following tonsillectomy compared to saline controls (see 
                        WARNINGS
                     , Hemorrhage).  In another study, when a single bolus dose of 0.9 mg/kg of ketorolac tromethamine intravenous injection was given to pediatric patients ages 5 to 12 years, compared to saline, a reduction in supplemental opioid was needed following various surgical procedures.  In a third study less supplemental morphine was needed in pediatric patients ages 8 to 16 years, who received a 0.8 mg/kg IV injection of ketorolac in conjunction with morphine following orthopedic surgical procedures, compared to morphine alone.  In a study in pediatric patients ages 3 to12 years, ketorolac tromethamine intravenous injection demonstrated a slower onset of analgesia, but a longer duration of action compared to morphine.  There is limited data available to support the use of multiple doses of ketorolac tromethamine injection in pediatric patients.
                  
                     Postmarketing Surveillance Study
                  
                  A large postmarketing observational, nonrandomized study, involving approximately 10,000 patients receiving ketorolac tromethamine, demonstrated that the risk of clinically serious gastrointestinal (GI) bleeding was dose-dependent (see Tables 3A and 3B).  This was particularly true in elderly patients who received an average daily dose greater than 60 mg/day of ketorolac tromethamine (Table 3A).
                  
                                                                      Table 3
                  
                  
                     Incidence of Clinically Serious GI Bleeding as Related to Age,Total Daily Dose, and History of GI Perforation, Ulcer, Bleeding (PUB) after up to 5 Days of Treatment with Ketorolac Tromethamine Injection
                  
                  
                     A. Adult Patients without History of PUB
                  
                  


                  



                     B. Adult Patients with History of PUB
                  
                  


                  



 

               
               
            
         