


CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY






Mechanism of Action
Valdecoxib is a nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID) that exhibits anti-inflammatory, analgesic and antipyretic properties in animal models. The mechanism of action is believed to be due to inhibition of prostaglandin synthesis primarily through inhibition of cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2).  At therapeutic plasma concentrations in humans valdecoxib does not inhibit cyclooxygenase-1 (COX-1).







Pharmacokinetics






Absorption
Valdecoxib achieves maximal plasma concentrations in approximately 3 hours.  The absolute bioavailability of valdecoxib is 83% following oral administration of BEXTRA compared to intravenous infusion of valdecoxib.Dose proportionality was demonstrated after single doses (1–400 mg) of valdecoxib.  With multiple doses (up to 100 mg/day for 14 days), valdecoxib exposure as measured by the AUC, increases in a more than proportional manner at doses above 10 mg BID.  Steady state plasma concentrations of valdecoxib are achieved by day 4.The steady state pharmacokinetic parameters of valdecoxib in healthy male subjects are shown in Table 1.




    No clinically significant age or gender differences were seen in pharmacokinetic parameters that would require dosage adjustments.







Effect of Food and Antacid
BEXTRA can be taken with or without food.  Food had no significant effect on either the peak plasma concentration (Cmax) or extent of absorption (AUC) of valdecoxib when BEXTRA was taken with a high fat meal.  The time to peak plasma concentration (Tmax), however, was delayed by 1–2 hours.  Administration of BEXTRA with antacid (aluminum/magnesium hydroxide) had no significant effect on either the rate or extent of absorption of valdecoxib.max) or extent of absorption (AUC) of valdecoxib when BEXTRA was taken with a high fat meal.  The time to peak plasma concentration (T







Distribution
    Plasma protein binding for valdecoxib is about 98% over the concentration range (21–2384 ng/mL). Steady state apparent volume of distribution (Vss/F) of valdecoxib is approximately 86 L after oral administration.  Valdecoxib and its active metabolite preferentially partition into erythrocytes with a blood to plasma concentration ratio of about 2.5:1.  This ratio remains approximately constant with time and therapeutic blood concentrations.







Metabolism
In humans, valdecoxib undergoes extensive hepatic metabolism involving both P450 isoenzymes (3A4 and 2C9) and non-P450 dependent pathways (i.e., glucuronidation).  Concomitant administration of BEXTRA with known CYP 3A4 and 2C9 inhibitors (e.g., fluconazole and ketoconazole) can result in increased plasma exposure of valdecoxib (see PRECAUTIONS — Drug Interactions).PRECAUTIONS — Drug Interactions).One active metabolite of valdecoxib has been identified in human plasma at approximately 10% the concentration of valdecoxib.  This metabolite, which is a less potent COX-2 specific inhibitor than the parent, also undergoes extensive metabolism and constitutes less than 2% of the valdecoxib dose excreted in the urine and feces.  Due to its low concentration in the systemic circulation, it is not likely to contribute significantly to the efficacy profile of BEXTRA.







Excretion
Valdecoxib is eliminated predominantly via hepatic metabolism with less than 5% of the dose excreted unchanged in the urine and feces.  About 70% of the dose is excreted in the urine as metabolites, and about 20% as valdecoxib N-glucuronide.  The apparent oral clearance (CL/F) of valdecoxib is about 6 L/hr. The mean elimination half-life (T1/2) ranges from 8–11 hours, and increases with age.1/2) ranges from 8–11 hours, and increases with age.









Special Populations






Geriatric
In elderly subjects (> 65 years), weight-adjusted steady state plasma concentrations (AUC(0–12hr)) are about 30% higher than in young subjects.  No dose adjustment is needed based on age.(0–12hr)) are about 30% higher than in young subjects.  No dose adjustment is needed based on age.







Pediatric
BEXTRA has not been investigated in pediatric patients below 18 years of age.







Race
Pharmacokinetic differences due to race have not been identified in clinical and pharmacokinetic studies conducted to date.







Hepatic Insufficiency
Valdecoxib plasma concentrations are significantly increased (130%) in patients with moderate (Child-Pugh Class B) hepatic impairment. In clinical trials, doses of BEXTRA above those recommended have been associated with fluid retention.  Hence, treatment with BEXTRA should be initiated with caution in patients with mild to moderate hepatic impairment and fluid retention.  The use of BEXTRA in patients with severe hepatic impairment (Child-Pugh Class C) is not recommended.







Renal Insufficiency
The pharmacokinetics of valdecoxib have been studied in patients with varying degrees of renal impairment. Because renal elimination of valdecoxib is not important to its disposition, no clinically significant changes in valdecoxib clearance were found even in patients with severe renal impairment or in patients undergoing renal dialysis. In patients undergoing hemodialysis the plasma clearance (CL/F) of valdecoxib was similar to the CL/F found in healthy elderly subjects (CL/F about 6 to 7 L/hr.) with normal renal function (based on creatinine clearance).NSAIDs have been associated with worsening renal function and use in advanced renal disease is not recommended (see PRECAUTIONS — Renal Effects).PRECAUTIONS — Renal Effects).









Drug Interactions
For quantitative information on the following drug interaction studies, see PRECAUTIONS — Drug Interactions.PRECAUTIONS — Drug Interactions.





General
Valdecoxib undergoes both P450 (CYP) dependent and non-P450 dependent (glucuronidation) metabolism. In vitro studies indicate that valdecoxib is not a significant inhibitor of CYP 1A2, 3A4, or 2D6 and is a weak inhibitor of CYP 2C9 and a weak to moderate inhibitor of CYP 2C19 at therapeutic concentrations.  The P450-mediated metabolic pathway of valdecoxib predominantly involves the 3A4 and 2C9 isozymes.  Using prototype inhibitors and substrates of these isozymes, the following results were obtained. Coadministration of a known inhibitor of CYP 2C9/3A4 (fluconazole) and a CYP 3A4 inhibitor (ketoconazole) enhanced the total plasma exposure (AUC) of valdecoxib. Coadministration of valdecoxib with a CYP 3A4 inducer (phenytoin) decreased total plasma exposure (AUC) of valdecoxib. (See PRECAUTIONS — Drug Interactions.) PRECAUTIONS — Drug Interactions.) Coadministration of valdecoxib with warfarin (a CYP 2C9 substrate) caused a small, but statistically significant increase in plasma exposures of R-warfarin and S-warfarin, and also in the pharmacodynamic effects (International Normalized Ratio-INR) of warfarin. (See PRECAUTIONS — Drug Interactions.)PRECAUTIONS — Drug Interactions.)Coadministration of valdecoxib with diazepam (a CYP 2C19/3A4 substrate) resulted in increased exposure of diazepam, but not its major metabolite, desmethyldiazepam. (See PRECAUTIONS — Drug Interactions.)PRECAUTIONS — Drug Interactions.)Coadministration of valdecoxib with glyburide (a CYP 2C9 substrate) (40 mg valdecoxib QD with 10 mg glyburide BID) resulted in increased exposure of glyburide. (See PRECAUTIONS — Drug Interactions.) PRECAUTIONS — Drug Interactions.)Coadministration of valdecoxib with an oral contraceptive, 1 mg norethindrone/0.035 mg ethinyl estradiol (CYP 3A4 substrates), resulted in increased exposure of both norethindrone and ethinyl estradiol. (See PRECAUTIONS — Drug Interactions.)PRECAUTIONS — Drug Interactions.)Coadministration of valdecoxib with omeprazole (a CYP 3A4/2C19 substrate) caused an increase in omeprazole exposure.  (See PRECAUTIONS — Drug Interactions.)PRECAUTIONS — Drug Interactions.)Coadministration of valdecoxib with dextromethorphan (a CYP 2D6/3A4 substrate) resulted in an increase in dextromethorphan plasma levels above those seen in subjects with normal levels of CYP 2D6.  Even so these levels were almost 5-fold lower than those seen in CYP 2D6 poor metabolizers.  (See PRECAUTIONS — Drug Interactions.)PRECAUTIONS — Drug Interactions.)Coadministration of valdecoxib with phenytoin (a CYP 2C9/2C19 substrate) did not affect the pharmacokinetics of phenytoin.Coadministration of valdecoxib, or its injectable prodrug, with substrates of CYP 2C9 (propofol) and CYP 3A4 (midazolam, alfentanil, fentanyl) did not inhibit the metabolism of these substrates.






