
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY 
               
                  
                     Mechanism of Action
                        In vitro studies and in vivo 
pharmacologic studies have demonstrated that albuterol has a preferential effect 
on beta2-adrenergic receptors compared with 
isoproterenol. While it is recognized that beta2-adrenergic receptors are the predominant receptors on 
bronchial smooth muscle, data indicate that there is a population of beta2 receptors in the human heart existing in a concentration 
between 10% and 50% of cardiac beta-adrenergic receptors. The precise function 
of these receptors has not been established. (See 
                          WARNINGS
                      for 
                          Cardiovascular Effects
                     .)
                  Activation of beta2-adrenergic receptors on airway 
smooth muscle leads to the activation of adenylcyclase and to an increase in the 
intracellular concentration of cyclic-3',5'-adenosine monophosphate (cyclic 
AMP). This increase of cyclic AMP leads to the activation of protein kinase A, 
which inhabits the phosphorylation of myosin and lowers intracellular ionic 
calcium concentrations, resulting in relaxation. Albuterol relaxes the smooth 
muscles of all airways, from the trachea to the terminal bronchioles. Albuterol 
acts as a functional antagonist to relax the airway irrespective of the 
spasmogen involved, thus protecting against all bronchoconstricor challenges. 
Increased cyclic AMP concentrations are also associated with the inhibition of 
release of mediators from mast cells in the airway.
                  Albuterol has been shown in most clinical trials to have more effect on the 
respiratory tract, in the form of bronchial smooth muscle relaxation, than 
isoproterenol at comparable doses while producing fewer cardiovascular effects. 
Controlled clinical studies and other clinical experience have shown that 
inhaled albuterol, like other beta-adrenergic agonist drugs, can produce a 
significant cardiovascular effect in some patients, as measured by pulse rate, 
blood pressure, symptoms, and/or electrocardiographic changes.
                  
                  
                  
                     Preclinical   Intravenous studies in rats 
with albuterol sulfate have demonstrated that albuterol crosses the blood-brain 
barrier and reaches brain concentrations amounting to approximately 5% of the 
plasma concentrations. In structures outside the blood-brain barrier (pineal and 
pituitary glands), albuterol concentrations were found to be 100 times those in 
the whole brain.
                  Studies in laboratory animals (minipigs, rodents, and dogs) have demonstrated 
the occurrence of cardiac arrhythmias and sudden death (with histologic evidence 
of myocardial necrosis) when β-agonist and methylxanthines were administered 
concurrently. The clinical significance of these findings is unknown.
                  Propellant HFA-134a is devoid of pharmacological activity except at very high 
doses in animals (380-1300 times the maximum human exposure based on comparisons 
of AUC values), primarily producing ataxia, tremors, dyspnea, or salivation. 
These are similar to effects produced by the structurally related 
chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs), which have been used extensively in metered dose 
inhalers.
                  In animals and humans, propellant HFA-134a was found to be rapidly absorbed 
and rapidly eliminated, with an elimination half-life of 3 to 27 minutes in 
animals and 5 to 7 minutes in humans. Time to maximum plasma concentration 
(Tmax) and mean residence time are both extremely short leading to a transient 
appearance of HFA-134a in the blood with no evidence of accumulation.
                  
                  
                  
                     Pharmacokinetics   In a single-dose 
bioavailability study which enrolled six healthy, male volunteers, transient low 
albuterol levels (close to the lower limit of quantitation) were observed after 
administration of two puffs from both PROVENTIL HFA Inhalation Aerosol and a CFC 
11/12 propelled albuterol inhaler. No formal pharmacokinetic analyses were 
possible for either treatment, but systemic albuterol levels appeared 
similar.
                  
                  
                  
                     Clinical Trials   In a 12-week, 
randomized, double-blind, double-dummy, active- and placebo-controlled trial, 
565 patients with asthma were evaluated for the bronchodilator efficacy of 
PROVENTIL HFA Inhalation Aerosol (193 patients) in comparison to a CFC 11/12 
propelled albuterol inhaler (186 patients) and an HFA-134a placebo inhaler (186 
patients).
                  Serial FEV1 measurements (shown below as percent 
change from test-day baseline) demonstrated that two inhalations of PROVENTIL 
HFA Inhalation Aerosol produced significantly greater improvement in pulmonary 
function than placebo and produced outcomes which were clinically comparable to 
a CFC 11/12 propelled albuterol inhaler.
                  The mean time to onset of a 15% increase in FEV1 was 6 
minutes and the mean time to peak effect was 50 to 55 minutes. The mean duration 
of effect as measured by a 15% increase in FEV1 was 3 
hours. In some patients, duration of effect was as long as 6 hours.
                  In another clinical study in adults, two inhalations of PROVENTIL HFA 
Inhalation Aerosol taken 30 minutes before exercise prevented exercise-induced 
bronchospasm as demonstrated by the maintenance of FEV1 
within 80% of baseline values in the majority of patients.
                  In a 4-week, randomized, open-label trial, 63 children, 4 to 11 years of age, 
with asthma were evaluated for the bronchodilator efficacy of PROVENTIL HFA 
Inhalation Aerosol (33 pediatric patients) in comparison to a CFC 11/12 
propelled albuterol inhaler (30 pediatric patients).
                  
                  Serial FEV1 measurements as percent change from 
test-day baseline demonstrated that two inhalations of PROVENTIL HFA Inhalation 
Aerosol produced outcomes which were clinically comparable to a CFC 11/12 
propelled albuterol inhaler.
                  The mean time to onset of a 12% increase in FEV1 for 
PROVENTIL HFA Inhalation Aerosol was 7 minutes and the mean time to peak effect 
was approximately 50 minutes. The mean duration of effect as measured by a 12% 
increase in FEV1 was 2.3 hours. In some pediatric 
patients, duration of effect was as long as 6 hours.
                  In another clinical study in pediatric patients, two inhalations of PROVENTIL 
HFA Inhalation Aerosol taken 30 minutes before exercise provided comparable 
protection against exercise-induced bronchospasm as a CFC 11/12 propelled 
albuterol inhaler.
               
               
               
                  
                     image of FEV graph
                     
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         