
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        The precise mechanism by which anagrelide reduces blood platelet count is unknown. In cell culture studies, anagrelide suppressed expression of transcription factors including GATA-1 and FOG-1 required for megakaryocytopoiesis, ultimately leading to reduced platelet production.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        In blood withdrawn from normal volunteers treated with anagrelide, a disruption was found in the postmitotic phase of megakaryocyte development and a reduction in megakaryocyte size and ploidy. At therapeutic doses, anagrelide does not produce significant changes in white cell counts or coagulation parameters, and may have a small, but clinically insignificant effect on red cell parameters. The active metabolite, 3-hydroxy anagrelide, has similar potency and efficacy to that of anagrelide in the platelet lowering effect; however, exposure (measured by plasma AUC) to 3-hydroxy anagrelide is approximately 2-fold higher compared to anagrelide. Anagrelide and 3-hydroxy anagrelide inhibit cyclic AMP phosphodiesterase 3 (PDE3) and 3-hydroxy anagrelide is approximately forty times more potent than anagrelide (IC50s = 0.9 and 36nM, respectively). PDE3 inhibition does not alter platelet production. PDE3 inhibitors, as a class can inhibit platelet aggregation. However, significant inhibition of platelet aggregation is observed only at doses of anagrelide higher than those typically required to reduce platelet count. PDE3 inhibitors have cardiovascular (CV) effects including vasodilation, positive inotropy and chronotropy.
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                    Cardiac Electrophysiology
                                 
                              
                              The effect of anagrelide dose (0.5 mg and 2.5 mg single doses) on the heart rate and QTc interval prolongation potential was evaluated in a double-blind, randomized, placebo- and active-controlled, cross-over study in 60 healthy adult men and women.
                              A dose-related increase in heart rate was observed, with the maximum increase occurring around the time of maximal drug concentration (0.5 – 4 hours). The maximum change in mean heart rate occurred at 2 hours after administration and was +7.8 beats per minute (bpm) for 0.5 mg and +29.1 bpm for 2.5 mg.
                              Dose-related increase in mean QTc was observed. The maximum mean (95% upper confidence bound) change in QTcI (individual subject correction) from placebo after baseline-correction was 7.0 (9.8) ms and 13.0 (15.7) ms following anagrelide doses of 0.5 mg and 2.5 mg, respectively.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        Dose proportionality has been found in the dose range 0.5 mg to 2.5 mg.
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Absorption
                              
                              Following oral administration of AGRYLIN, at least 70% is absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract. In fasted subjects, anagrelide peak plasma concentrations occur within about 1 hour after administration.
                              Pharmacokinetic data obtained from healthy volunteers comparing the pharmacokinetics of anagrelide in the fed and fasted states showed that administration of a 1 mg dose of anagrelide with food decreased the Cmax by 14%, but increased the AUC by 20%. Food decreased the Cmax of the active metabolite 3-hydroxy-anagrelide by 29%, although it had no effect on the AUC.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Metabolism
                              
                              Anagrelide is primarily metabolized by CYP1A2 to the active metabolite, 3-hydroxy-anagrelide, which is subsequently metabolized by CYP1A2 to the inactive metabolite, RL603. Less than 1% of the administered dose is recovered in the urine as anagrelide, and approximately 3% and 16-20% of the administered dose is recovered as 3-hydroxy-anagrelide and RL603, respectively.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Elimination
                              
                              Anagrelide and 3-hydroxy-anagrelide are eliminated with plasma half-lives of approximately 1.5 and 2.5 hours, respectively. Anagrelide and 3-hydroxy-anagrelide do not accumulate in plasma when the clinical dose regimens are administered.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Drug Interactions
                              
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Aspirin: In two pharmacodynamic interaction studies in healthy subjects, co-administration of single-dose anagrelide 1 mg and aspirin 900 mg or repeat-dose anagrelide 1 mg once daily and aspirin 75 mg once daily showed greater ex vivo anti-platelet aggregation effects than administration of aspirin alone. Co-administered anagrelide 1mg and aspirin 900mg single-doses had no effect on bleeding time, prothrombin time (PT) or activated partial thromboplastin time (aPTT).
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Digoxin or warfarin: In vivo interaction studies in humans have demonstrated that anagrelide does not affect the pharmacokinetic properties of digoxin or warfarin, nor does digoxin or warfarin affect the pharmacokinetic properties of anagrelide.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Specific Populations
                              
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Pediatric: Dose-normalized Cmax and AUC of anagrelide were higher in children and adolescents (age range 7-16 years) with essential thrombocythemia, by 17% and 56%, respectively, than in adult patients (19-57 years).
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Geriatric: Cmax and AUC of anagrelide were 36% and 61% higher, respectively, in elderly patients (age range 65-75 years), than in younger adults (age range 22-50 years), but Cmax and AUC of the active metabolite, 3-hydroxy anagrelide, were 42% and 37% lower, respectively, in the elderly patients.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Renal Impairment: Pharmacokinetic study at a single dose of 1 mg anagrelide in subjects with severe renal impairment (creatinine clearance <30 mL/min) showed no significant effects on the pharmacokinetics of anagrelide.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Hepatic Impairment: A pharmacokinetic study at a single dose of 1 mg anagrelide in subjects with moderate hepatic impairment (Child Pugh score 7-9) showed a 2-fold increase in mean anagrelide Cmax and an 8-fold increase in total exposure (AUC) to anagrelide compared with healthy subjects. Additionally, subjects with moderate hepatic impairment showed 24% lower mean 3-hydroxy-anagrelide Cmax and 77% higher mean 3-hydroxy-anagrelide AUC compared to healthy subjects. 
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         