
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Treprostinil is a prostacyclin analogue. The major pharmacologic actions of treprostinil are direct vasodilation of pulmonary and systemic arterial vascular beds and inhibition of platelet aggregation.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        In a clinical trial of 240 healthy volunteers, single doses of Tyvaso 54 mcg (the target maintenance dose per session) and 84 mcg (supratherapeutic inhalation dose) prolonged the corrected QTc interval by approximately 10 ms. The QTc effect dissipated rapidly as the concentration of treprostinil decreased.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        Pharmacokinetic information for single doses of inhaled treprostinil was obtained in healthy volunteers in three separate studies. Treprostinil systemic exposure (AUC and Cmax) post-inhalation was shown to be proportional to the doses administered (18 mcg – 90 mcg).
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Absorption and Distribution
                              
                              In a three-period crossover study, the bioavailability of two single doses of Tyvaso (18 mcg and 36 mcg) was compared with that of intravenous treprostinil in 18 healthy volunteers. Mean estimates of the absolute systemic bioavailability of treprostinil after inhalation were approximately 64% (18 mcg) and 72% (36 mcg).
                              Treprostinil plasma exposure data were obtained from two studies at the target maintenance dose, 54 mcg. The mean Cmax at the target dose was 0.91 and 1.32 ng/mL with corresponding mean Tmax of 0.25 and 0.12 hr, respectively. The mean AUC for the 54 mcg dose was 0.81 and 0.97 hr∙ng/mL, respectively.
                              Following parenteral infusion, the apparent steady state volume of distribution (Vss) of treprostinil is approximately 14 L/70 kg ideal body weight.
                              
                                 In vitro treprostinil is 91% bound to human plasma proteins over the 330-10,000 mcg/L concentration range.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Metabolism and Excretion
                              
                              Of subcutaneously administered treprostinil, only 4% is excreted unchanged in urine. Treprostinil is substantially metabolized by the liver, primarily by CYP2C8. Metabolites are excreted in urine (79%) and feces (13%) over 10 days. Five apparently inactive metabolites were detected in the urine, each accounting for 10-15% of the dose administered. Four of the metabolites are products of oxidation of the 3-hydroxyloctyl side chain and one is a glucuroconjugated derivative (treprostinil glucuronide).
                              The elimination of treprostinil (following subcutaneous administration of treprostinil) is biphasic, with a terminal elimination half-life of approximately 4 hours using a two compartment model.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Special Populations
                              
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Hepatic Insufficiency
                                    
                                    Plasma clearance of treprostinil, delivered subcutaneously, was reduced up to 80% in subjects presenting with mild-to-moderate hepatic insufficiency. Treprostinil has not been studied in patients with severe hepatic insufficiency [see Dosage and Administration (2.2), Warnings and Precautions (5.3) and Use in Specific Populations (8.6)].
                                    
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Renal Insufficiency 
                                    
                                    No studies have been performed in patients with renal insufficiency; therefore, since treprostinil and its metabolites are excreted mainly through the urinary route, there is the potential for an increase in both parent drug and its metabolites and an increase in systemic exposure [see Dosage and Administration (2.3), Warnings and Precautions (5.3) and Use in Specific Populations (8.7)].
                                    
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         