
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Leuprolide acetate, a GnRH agonist, acts as an inhibitor of gonadotropin secretion. Animal studies indicate that following an initial stimulation, continuous administration of leuprolide acetate results in suppression of ovarian and testicular steroidogenesis. This effect was reversible upon discontinuation of drug therapy.
                        Administration of leuprolide acetate has resulted in inhibition of the growth of certain hormone dependent tumors (prostatic tumors in Noble and Dunning male rats and DMBA-induced mammary tumors in female rats) as well as atrophy of the reproductive organs.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        In humans, administration of leuprolide acetate results in an initial increase in circulating concentrations of luteinizing hormone (LH) and follicle stimulating hormone (FSH), leading to a transient increase in concentrations of the gonadal steroids (testosterone and dihydrotestosterone in males, and estrone and estradiol in premenopausal females). However, continuous administration of leuprolide acetate results in decreased concentrations of LH and FSH. In males, testosterone is reduced to castrate concentrations. In premenopausal females, estrogens are reduced to postmenopausal concentrations. These decreases occur within two to four weeks after initiation of treatment, and castrate concentrations  of testosterone in prostatic cancer patients have been demonstrated for more than five years.
                        Leuprolide acetate is not active when given orally.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        
                           Absorption
                        
                        
                           LUPRON DEPOT 7.5 mg for 1-Month Administration
                        
                        Following a single injection of LUPRON DEPOT 7.5 mg for 1-month administration to patients, mean plasma measured concentrations were 20 ng/mL at 4 hours and 0.36 ng/mL at 4 weeks. However, intact leuprolide and an inactive major metabolite could not be distinguished by the assay which was employed in the study.
                        
                           LUPRON DEPOT 22.5 mg for 3-Month Administration
                        
                        Following a single injection of LUPRON DEPOT 22.5 mg for 3-month administration in patients, mean peak plasma concentrations were 48.9 ng/mL at 4 hours and then declined to 0.67 ng/mL at 12 weeks. Leuprolide appeared to be released at a constant rate following the onset of steady-state concentrations during the third week after dosing, providing steady plasma concentrations through the 12-week dosing interval. However, intact leuprolide and an inactive major metabolite could not be distinguished by the assay which was employed in the study. The initial burst, followed by a decline to a steady-state concentration, was similar to the release pattern seen with the monthly formulation.
                        
                           LUPRON DEPOT 30 mg for 4-Month Administration
                        
                        Following a single injection of LUPRON DEPOT 30 mg for 4-month administration in sixteen orchiectomized prostate cancer patients, mean plasma concentrations were 59.3 ng/mL at 4 hours and then declined to 0.30 ng/mL at 16 weeks. Mean plasma concentrations from weeks 3.5 to 16 was 0.44 ± 0.20 ng/mL (range: 0.20-1.06). Leuprolide appeared to be released at a constant rate following the onset of steady-state concentrations during the fourth week after dosing, providing steady plasma concentrations throughout the 16-week dosing interval. However, intact leuprolide and an inactive major metabolite could not be distinguished by the assay which was employed in the study. The initial burst, followed by a decline to a steady-state concentration, was similar to the release pattern seen with the other depot formulations.
                        
                           LUPRON DEPOT 45 mg for 6-Month Administration
                        
                        Following a single injection of LUPRON DEPOT 45 mg for 6-month administration in 26 prostate cancer patients, mean peak plasma concentration of 6.7 ng/mL was observed at 2 hours and then declined to 0.07 ng/mL at 24 weeks. Leuprolide appeared to be released continuously following the onset of steady-state concentrations during the third week after dosing providing steady plasma concentrations through the 24-week dosing interval. The initial burst, followed by a decline to a steady-state concentration, was similar to the release pattern seen with the other depot formulations. In this study, mean plasma concentration-time profiles were similar after the first and second dose.
                        
                           Distribution
                        
                        The mean steady-state volume of distribution of leuprolide following intravenous bolus administration to healthy male volunteers was 27 L. In vitro binding to human plasma proteins ranged from 43% to 49%.
                        
                           Elimination
                        
                        The mean systemic clearance of leuprolide following intravenous bolus administration to healthy male volunteers was 7.6 L/h, and terminal elimination half-life was approximately 3 hours based on a two compartment model.
                        Following administration of LUPRON DEPOT 3.75 mg to 3 patients, less than 5% of the dose was recovered as parent and M-I metabolite in the urine.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         