
               
               
               
                  CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  Diagnostically (for skin testing) the allergen combines with IgE antibodies fixed to mast cells in the skin.3  This complexing causes an increase in cellular permeability and degranulation of the mast cells releasing chemical mediators.  These mediators (such as histamine) are responsible for a local inflammatory response of wheal and erythema typical of a positive skin test reaction and also, the symptoms commonly associated with allergic disease.  The more mediator released, the larger the reaction (wheal and erythema).
                  Treatment consists of the subcutaneous injection of gradually increasing doses of the allergens to which the patient is allergic.  It has been demonstrated that this method of treatment induces an increased tolerance to the allergens responsible for the symptoms on subsequent exposure.  Although the exact relationships between allergen, skin-sensitizing antibody (IgE) and the blocking antibody (IgG) have not been precisely established, clinically confirmed immunological studies have adduced evidence of the efficacy of hyposensitization therapy.
                  Numerous controlled studies have demonstrated the clinical efficacy of immunotherapy with cat, dust mites and some pollen, including grass pollen extracts.4  Nevertheless, responses are variable, and in a few studies patients reported no appreciable benefit.
                  Puncture test data with 10,000 BAU/mL Grass Pollen Extract CBER reference preparations, in 15 grass allergic patients yielded the following sizes of wheal and erythema (Ʃ = sum of longest diameter and orthogonal cross diameter). 5
                  
                  


                  


The intradermal dose (BAU50) of the CBER (FDA) Grass Pollen Extract Reference Preparation  required producing a 50 mm Sum of Erythema was calculated based on titration in sensitive individuals.
                  


                  


An analysis of relative potency of the 1:10 w/v unstandardized grass pollen extracts utilizing the ELISA Inhibition method shows the relative potency in BAU/mL in the following table.  CAUTION:   By the very nature of unstandardized extracts individual lots of the unstandardized extracts may vary more than 1 log from the average value expressed in these tables. 
                  


                  


*The BAU/mL range for equivalence to the FDA 100,000 BAU/mL reference is 69,900-143,100.
                  *The BAU/mL range for equivalence to the FDA 10,000 BAU/mL reference is 6,990-14,310.
                  
                      
                  
               
               
            
         