
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  Pentamidine isethionate, an aromatic diamidine, is known to have activity against 
                        Pneumocystis carinii
                     .  The mode of action of pentamidine is not fully understood.  
                        In vitro
                      studies indicate that the drug interferes with protozoal nuclear metabolism by inhibition of DNA, RNA, phospholipid and protein synthesis.
               
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        Pharmacokinetic parameters following the administration of 4 mg/kg pentamidine isethionate as a single two-hour intravenous infusion or after a single intramuscular injection to 12 patients with AIDS are presented in the following table: 
                        


                        


In seven patients treated with daily IM doses of pentamidine at 4 mg/kg for 10 to 12 days, plasma concentrations were between 300 to 500 ng/mL.  The concentrations did not appreciably change with time after injection or from day to day.  Higher plasma concentrations were encountered in patients with an elevated blood urea nitrogen.  The patients continued to excrete decreasing amounts of pentamidine in urine up to 6 to 8 weeks after cessation of the treatment.
                        Following multiple intravenous administration of pentamidine isethionate (3.7 to 4 mg/kg/day infused over 4 hours) to 6 patients with AIDS being treated for PCP, the pharmacokinetic parameters obtained on Days 1,4 and 7 are summarized in the following table:
                        

                        


                        


*derived from Lidman
                        Compared to the mean AUC on Day 1, AUC on Day 4 and Day 7 were about 2 and 3 fold higher, respectively, suggesting that steady state was not achieved by Day 7 of dosing.
                        In other published reports of pharmacokinetics of pentamidine following daily intravenous doses of 2 to 4 mg/kg/day, clearance ranged from 30 to 40 mL/min/kg and Vdss ranged from 200 to 400 L/kg.  Reported values for terminal half-lives of 2.8 to 12 days is suggestive of a deep peripheral compartment.  In the urine, up to 12% of the administered dose has been recovered during a dosing interval as unchanged pentamidine.
                        Tissue distribution was studied in mice given a single intraperitoneal injection of pentamidine at 10 mg/kg.  The concentration was highest in the kidneys followed by the liver.  In mice, pentamidine was excreted unchanged, primarily via the kidneys with some elimination in the feces.  The ratio of amounts excreted in the urine and feces (4:1) was constant over the period of study.
                        Tissue distribution has also been studied in normal and in renally impaired dogs (N = 3 each) given 13 mg/kg of pentamidine IV, in 2 doses separated by five weeks.  The concentration of pentamidine was highest in the liver followed by kidneys and lungs.  Pentamidine was concentrated in these organs approximately 70 to 1000 times that of the peak serum concentration.  Similar findings were reported in normal and in renally impaired dogs (N = 2 each) given 97.5 mg/kg of pentamidine IV, in 15 daily doses.  After repeated doses, the organs showed a further 3 to 7 fold accumulation while serum concentrations remained unchanged.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         