
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  Bisoprolol and hydrochlorothiazide have been used individually and in combination for the treatment of hypertension. The antihypertensive effects of these agents are additive; hydrochlorothiazide 6.25 mg significantly increases the antihypertensive effect of bisoprolol. The incidence of hypokalemia with the bisoprolol fumarate and hydrochlorothiazide 6.25 mg combination (B/H) is significantly lower than with hydrochlorothiazide 25 mg. In clinical trials of bisoprolol fumarate and hydrochlorothiazide, mean changes in serum potassium for patients treated with bisoprolol fumarate and hydrochlorothiazide 2.5 mg/6.25 mg, 5 mg/6.25 mg or 10 mg/6.25 mg or placebo were less than ± 0.1 mEq/L. Mean changes in serum potassium for patients treated with any dose of bisoprolol in combination with hydrochlorothiazide 25 mg ranged from -0.1 to -0.3 mEq/L.
                  Bisoprolol is a beta1-selective (cardioselective) adrenoceptor blocking agent without significant membrane stabilizing or intrinsic sympathomimetic activities in its therapeutic dose range. At higher doses (≥ 20 mg) bisoprolol fumarate also inhibits beta2-adrenoreceptors located in bronchial and vascular musculature. To retain relative selectivity, it is important to use the lowest effective dose.
                  Hydrochlorothiazide is a benzothiadiazine diuretic. Thiazides affect renal tubular mechanisms of electrolyte reabsorption and increase excretion of sodium and chloride in approximately equivalent amounts. Natriuresis causes a secondary loss of potassium.
               
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Pharmacokinetics and Metabolism
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Bisoprolol Fumarate and Hydrochlorothiazide
                           
                              In healthy volunteers, both bisoprolol and hydrochlorothiazide are well absorbed following oral administration of bisoprolol fumarate and hydrochlorothiazide. No change is observed in the bioavailability of either agent when given together in a single tablet. Absorption is not affected whether bisoprolol fumarate and hydrochlorothiazide is taken with or without food. Mean peak bisoprolol plasma concentrations of about 9.0 ng/mL, 19 ng/mL and 36 ng/mL occur approximately 3 hours after the administration of the 2.5 mg/6.25 mg, 5 mg/6.25 mg and 10 mg/6.25 mg combination tablets, respectively. Mean peak plasma hydrochlorothiazide concentrations of 30 ng/mL occur approximately 2.5 hours following the administration of the combination. Dose proportional increases in plasma bisoprolol concentrations are observed between the 2.5 and 5, as well as between the 5 mg and 10 mg doses. The elimination T1/2 of bisoprolol ranges from 7 to 15 hours and that of hydrochlorothiazide ranges from 4 to 10 hours. The percent of dose excreted unchanged in urine is about 55% for bisoprolol and about 60% for hydrochlorothiazide.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Bisoprolol
                           
                              The absolute bioavailability after a 10 mg oral dose of bisoprolol fumarate is about 80%. The first pass metabolism of bisoprolol is about 20%.
                              The pharmacokinetic profile of bisoprolol has been examined following single doses and at steady-state. Binding to serum proteins is approximately 30%. Peak plasma concentrations occur within 2 to 4 hours of dosing with 2.5 mg to 20 mg, and mean peak values range from 9.0 ng/mL at 2.5 mg to 70 ng/mL at 20 mg. Once-daily dosing with bisoprolol results in less than 2-fold intersubject variation in peak plasma concentrations. Plasma concentrations are proportional to the administered dose in the range of 2.5 mg to 20 mg. The plasma elimination half-life is 9 to 12 hours and is slightly longer in elderly patients, in part because of decreased renal function. Steady-state is attained within 5 days with once daily dosing. In both young and elderly populations, plasma accumulation is low; the accumulation factor ranges from 1.1 to 1.3, and is what would be expected from the half-life and once daily dosing. Bisoprolol is eliminated equally by renal and nonrenal pathways with about 50% of the dose appearing unchanged in the urine and the remainder in the form of inactive metabolites. In humans, the known metabolites are labile or have no known pharmacologic activity. Less than 2% of the dose is excreted in the feces. The pharmacokinetic characteristics of the two enantiomers are similar. Bisoprolol is not metabolized by cytochrome P450 II D6 (debrisoquin hydroxylase).
                              In subjects with creatinine clearance less than 40 mL/min, the plasma half-life is increased approximately 3-fold compared to healthy subjects.
                              In patients with liver cirrhosis, the rate of elimination of bisoprolol is more variable and significantly slower than that in healthy subjects, with a plasma half-life ranging from 8 to 22 hours.
                              In elderly subjects, mean plasma concentrations at steady-state are increased, in part attributed to lower creatinine clearance. However, no significant differences in the degree of bisoprolol accumulation is found between young and elderly populations.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Hydrochlorothiazide
                           
                              Hydrochlorothiazide is well absorbed (65% to 75%) following oral administration. Absorption of hydrochlorothiazide is reduced in patients with congestive heart failure.
                              Peak plasma concentrations are observed within 1 to 5 hours of dosing, and range from 70 to 490 ng/mL following oral doses of 12.5 mg to 100 mg. Plasma concentrations are linearly related to the administered dose. Concentrations of hydrochlorothiazide are 1.6 to 1.8 times higher in whole blood than in plasma. Binding to serum proteins has been reported to be approximately 40% to 68%. The plasma elimination half-life has been reported to be 6 to 15 hours. Hydrochlorothiazide is eliminated primarily by renal pathways. Following oral doses of 12.5 mg to 100 mg, 55% to 77% of the administered dose appears in urine and greater than 95% of the absorbed dose is excreted in urine as unchanged drug. Plasma concentrations of hydrochlorothiazide are increased and the elimination half-life is prolonged in patients with renal disease.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Pharmacodynamics
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Bisoprolol
                           
                              Findings in clinical hemodynamics studies with bisoprolol are similar to those observed with other beta-blockers. The most prominent effect is the negative chronotropic effect, giving a reduction in resting and exercise heart rate. There is a fall in resting and exercise cardiac output with little observed change in stroke volume, and only a small increase in right atrial pressure, or pulmonary capillary wedge pressure at rest or during exercise.
                              In normal volunteers, bisoprolol therapy resulted in a reduction of exercise-and isoproterenol-induced tachycardia. The maximal effect occurred within 1 to 4 hours post-dosing. Effects generally persisted for 24 hours at doses of 5 mg or greater.
                              In controlled clinical trials, bisoprolol given as a single daily dose has been shown to be an effective antihypertensive agent when used alone or concomitantly with thiazide diuretics (see CLINICAL STUDIES).
                              The mechanism of bisoprolol's antihypertensive effect has not been completely established. Factors that may be involved include:
                              
                                  Decreased cardiac output,
                                  Inhibition of renin release by the kidneys,
                                  Diminution of tonic sympathetic outflow from vasomotor centers in the brain.
                              
                              Beta1-selectivity of bisoprolol has been demonstrated in both animal and human studies. No effects at therapeutic doses on beta2-adrenoreceptor density have been observed. Pulmonary function studies have been conducted in healthy volunteers, asthmatics, and patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Doses of bisoprolol fumarate ranged from 5 mg to 60 mg, atenolol from 50 mg to 200 mg, metoprolol from 100 mg to 200 mg, and propranolol from 40 mg to 80 mg. In some studies, slight, asymptomatic increases in airway resistance (AWR) and decreases in forced expiratory volume (FEV1) were observed with doses of bisoprolol fumarate 20 mg and higher, similar to the small increases in AWR noted with other cardioselective beta-blocking agents. The changes induced by beta-blockade with all agents were reversed by bronchodilator therapy.
                              Electrophysiology studies in man have demonstrated that bisoprolol significantly decreases heart rate, increases sinus node recovery time, prolongs AV node refractory periods, and, with rapid atrial stimulation, prolongs AV nodal conduction.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Hydrochlorothiazide
                           
                              Acute effects of thiazides are thought to result from a reduction in blood volume and cardiac output, secondary to a natriuretic effect, although a direct vasodilatory mechanism has also been proposed. With chronic administration, plasma volume returns toward normal, but peripheral vascular resistance is decreased.
                              Thiazides do not affect normal blood pressure. Onset of action occurs within 2 hours of dosing, peak effect is observed at about 4 hours, and activity persists for up to 24 hours.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         