
               
               
               DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
                  

                  

                  When Ciprofloxacin Tablet is given concomitantly with food, there 
is a delay in the absorption of the drug, resulting in peak concentrations that 
occur closer to 2 hours after dosing rather than 1 hour. The overall absorption 
of Ciprofloxacin Tablet, however, is not substantially affected. Concurrent 
administration of antacids containing magnesium hydroxide or aluminum hydroxide 
may reduce the bioavailability of ciprofloxacin by as much as 90%. (See PRECAUTIONS.) 
                  The serum concentrations of ciprofloxacin and metronidazole were not altered 
when these two drugs were given concomitantly. Concomitant administration with 
tizanidine is contraindicated. (See CONTRAINDICATIONS.) 
                  Concomitant administration of ciprofloxacin with theophylline decreases the 
clearance of theophylline resulting in elevated serum theophylline levels and 
increased risk of a patient developing CNS or other adverse reactions. 
Ciprofloxacin also decreases caffeine clearance and inhibits the formation of 
paraxanthine after caffeine administration. (See WARNINGS: PRECAUTIONS.) 
                  
                  
                  Special PopulationsPharmacokinetic studies of the oral (single dose) and intravenous 
(single and multiple dose) forms of ciprofloxacin indicate that plasma 
concentrations of ciprofloxacin are higher in elderly subjects (> 65 years) 
as compared to young adults. Although the Cmax is 
increased 16 to 40%, the increase in mean AUC is approximately 30%, and can be 
at least partially attributed to decreased renal clearance in the elderly. 
Elimination half-life is only slightly (~20%) prolonged in the elderly. These 
differences are not considered clinically significant. (See 
                        PRECAUTIONS: Geriatric Use
                     .)
                  In patients with reduced renal function, the half-life of ciprofloxacin is 
slightly prolonged. Dosage adjustments may be required. (See 
                        DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION
                     .)
                  In preliminary studies in patients with stable chronic liver cirrhosis, no 
significant changes in ciprofloxacin pharmacokinetics have been observed. The 
kinetics of ciprofloxacin in patients with acute hepatic insufficiency, however, 
have not been fully elucidated.
                  
                     

                  
                  

               
               
            
         