
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              S
                              ero
                              t
                              o
                              n
                              e
                              r
                              g
                              i
                              c Drugs (e.g., MAOIs, triptans, SSRIs,      other SNRIs, linezolid, lithium, tramadol, or      St. John's wort): Potential for serotonin syndrome. Careful      patient observation is advised (4.2, 5.2,      7.3)
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     7.1 Central Nervous System (CNS)-Active Drugs
                     
                        The risk of using venlafaxine in combination with other CNS-active drugs has not been systematically evaluated. Consequently, caution is advised when venlafaxine hydrochloride extended-release capsules is taken in combination with other CNS- active drugs.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     7.2 Monoamine Oxidase Inhibitors
                     
                        Adverse reactions, some of which were serious, have been reported in patients who have recently been discontinued from an MAOI and started on antidepressants with pharmacological properties similar to venlafaxine hydrochloride extended-release capsules (SNRIs or SSRIs), or who have recently had SNRI or SSRI therapy discontinued prior to initiation of an MAOI [see Dosage and Administration (2.9), Contraindications (4.2) and Warnings and Precautions (5.2)].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     7.3 Serotonergic Drugs
                     
                        Based on the mechanism of action of venlafaxine hydrochloride extended-release capsules and the potential for serotonin syndrome, caution is advised when venlafaxine hydrochloride extended-release capsule is coadministered with other drugs that may affect the serotonergic neurotransmitter systems, such as triptans, SSRIs, other SNRIs, linezolid (an antibiotic which is a reversible non-selective MAOI), lithium, tramadol, or St. John's wort. If concomitant treatment with venlafaxine hydrochloride extended-release capsules and these drugs is clinically warranted, careful observation of the patient is advised, particularly during treatment initiation and dose increases. The concomitant use of venlafaxine hydrochloride extended-release capsules with tryptophan supplements is not recommended [see Dosage and Administration (2.9), Contraindications (4.2), and Warnings and Precautions (5.2)].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     7.4 Drugs that Interfere with Hemostasis (e.g., NSAIDs, Aspirin, and Warfarin)
                     
                        Serotonin release by platelets plays an important role in hemostasis. The use of psychotropic drugs that interfere with serotonin reuptake is associated with the occurrence of upper gastrointestinal bleeding and concurrent use of an NSAID or aspirin may potentiate this risk of bleeding [see Warnings and Precautions (5.4)]. Altered anticoagulant effects, including increased bleeding, have been reported when SSRIs and SNRIs are coadministered with warfarin. Patients receiving warfarin therapy should be carefully monitored when venlafaxine hydrochloride extended-release capsules are initiated or discontinued.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     7.5 Weight Loss Agents
                     
                        The safety and efficacy of venlafaxine therapy in combination with weight loss agents, including phentermine, have not been established. Coadministration of venlafaxine hydrochloride extended-release capsules and weight loss agents is not recommended. Venlafaxine hydrochloride extended-release capsule is not indicated for weight loss alone or in combination with other products.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     7.6 Effects of Other Drugs on Venlafaxine Hydrochloride Extended-Release Capsules
                     
                        
                           Figure 1: Effect of interacting drugs on the pharmacokinetics of venlafaxine and active metabolite O-desmethylvenlafaxine (ODV).
                        
                        
                        Abbreviations:  ODV, O-desmethylvenlafaxine; AUC, area under the curve; Cmax, peak plasma concentrations; EM's, extensive metabolizers; PM's, poor metabolizers
                        * No dose adjustment on co-administration with CYP2D6 inhibitors (Fig 3 and Metabolism Section 12.3)
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     7.7 Effects of Venlafaxine Hydrochloride Extended-Release Capsules on Other Drugs
                     
                        
                           Figure 2: Effect of venlafaxine on the pharmacokinetics interacting drugs and their active metabolites.
                        
                        
                        Abbreviations:  AUC, area under the curve; Cmax, peak plasma concentrations; OH, hydroxyl
                        * Data for 2-OH desipramine were not plotted to enhance clarity; the fold change and 90% CI for Cmax and AUC of 2-OH desipramine were 6.6 (5.5, 7.9) and 4.4 (3.8, 5.0), respectively.
                        
                           Note:
                        
                        *: Administration of venlafaxine in a stable regimen did not exaggerate the psychomotor and psychometric effects induced by ethanol in these same subjects when they were not receiving venlafaxine.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     7.8 Drug-Laboratory Test Interactions
                     
                        False-positive urine immunoassay screening tests for phencyclidine (PCP) and amphetamine have been reported in patients taking venlafaxine. This is due to lack of specificity of the screening tests. False positive test results may be expected for several days following discontinuation of venlafaxine therapy. Confirmatory tests, such as gas chromatography/mass spectrometry, will distinguish venlafaxine from PCP and amphetamine.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     Figure 1
                     
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     Figure 2
                     
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         