
               
               
               12     CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
					
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1     Mechanism of Action
							
                     
                        Fingolimod is metabolized by sphingosine kinase to the active metabolite, fingolimod-phosphate. Fingolimod-phosphate is a sphingosine 1-phosphate receptor modulator, and binds with high affinity to sphingosine 1-phosphate receptors 1, 3, 4, and 5. Fingolimod-phosphate blocks the capacity of lymphocytes to egress from lymph nodes, reducing the number of lymphocytes in peripheral blood. The mechanism by which fingolimod exerts therapeutic effects in multiple sclerosis is unknown, but may involve reduction of lymphocyte migration into the central nervous system.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2     Pharmacodynamics
							
                     
                        
                           Heart Rate and Rhythm
                        
                        Fingolimod causes a transient reduction in heart rate and AV conduction at treatment initiation [see Warnings and Precautions (5.1)].
                        Heart rate progressively increases after the first day, returning to baseline values within 1 month of the start of chronic treatment. 
                        Autonomic responses of the heart, including diurnal variation of heart rate and response to exercise, are not affected by fingolimod treatment. 
                        Fingolimod treatment is not associated with a decrease in cardiac output.
                        
                           Potential to Prolong the QT Interval
                        
                        In a thorough QT interval study of doses of 1.25 or 2.5 mg fingolimod at steady-state, when a negative chronotropic effect of fingolimod was still present, fingolimod treatment resulted in a prolongation of QTc, with the upper boundary of the 90% confidence interval (CI) of 14.0 msec. There is no consistent signal of increased incidence of QTc outliers, either absolute or change from baseline, associated with fingolimod treatment. In MS studies, there was no clinically relevant prolongation of the QT interval, but patients at risk for QT prolongation were not included in clinical studies.
                        
                           Immune System
                        
                        
                           Effects on Immune Cell Numbers in the Blood
                        
                        In a study in which 12 subjects received GILENYA 0.5 mg daily, the lymphocyte count decreased to approximately 60% of baseline within 4 to 6 hours after the first dose. With continued daily dosing, the lymphocyte count continued to decrease over a 2-week period, reaching a nadir count of approximately 500 cells/mcL or approximately 30% of baseline. In a placebo-controlled study in 1272 MS patients (of whom 425 received fingolimod 0.5 mg daily and 418 received placebo), 18% (N=78) of patients on fingolimod 0.5 mg reached a nadir of <200 cells/mcL on at least 1 occasion. No patient on placebo reached a nadir of <200 cells/mcL. Low lymphocyte counts are maintained with chronic daily dosing of GILENYA 0.5 mg daily. 
                        Chronic fingolimod dosing leads to a mild decrease in the neutrophil count to approximately 80% of baseline. Monocytes are unaffected by fingolimod.
                        Peripheral lymphocyte count increases are evident within days of stopping fingolimod treatment and typically normal counts are reached within 1 to 2 months.
                        
                           Effect on Antibody Response
                        
                        GILENYA reduces the immune response to vaccination, as evaluated in 2 studies. 
                        In the first study, the immunogenicity of keyhole limpet hemocyanin (KLH) and pneumococcal polysaccharide vaccine (PPV-23) immunization were assessed by IgM and IgG titers in a steady-state, randomized, placebo-controlled study in healthy volunteers. Compared to placebo, antigen-specific IgM titers were decreased by 91% and 25% in response to KLH and PPV-23, respectively, in subjects on GILENYA 0.5 mg. Similarly, IgG titers were decreased by 45% and 50%, in response to KLH and PPV-23, respectively, in subjects on GILENYA 0.5 mg daily compared to placebo. The responder rate for GILENYA 0.5 mg as measured by the number of subjects with a >4-fold increase in KLH IgG was comparable to placebo and 25% lower for PPV-23 IgG, while the number of subjects with a >4 fold increase in KLH and PPV-23 IgM was 75% and 40% lower, respectively, compared to placebo. The capacity to mount a skin delayed-type hypersensitivity reaction to Candida and tetanus toxoid was decreased by approximately 30% in subjects on GILENYA 0.5 mg daily, compared to placebo. Immunologic responses were further decreased with fingolimod 1.25 mg (a dose higher than recommended in MS) [see Warnings and Precautions (5.2)].
                        In the second study, the immunogenicity of Northern hemisphere seasonal influenza and tetanus toxoid vaccination was assessed in a 12-week steady-state, randomized, placebo-controlled study of GILENYA 0.5 mg in multiple sclerosis patients (n=136). The responder rate 3 weeks after vaccination, defined as seroconversion or a ≥4-fold increase in antibody directed against at least 1 of the 3 influenza strains, was 54% for GILENYA 0.5 mg and 85% in the placebo group. The responder rate 3 weeks after vaccination, defined as seroconversion or a ≥4-fold increase in antibody directed against tetanus toxoid was 40% for GILENYA 0.5 mg and 61% in the placebo group.
                        
                           Pulmonary Function
                        
                        Single fingolimod doses ≥5 mg (10-fold the recommended dose) are associated with a dose-dependent increase in airway resistance. In a 14-day study of 0.5, 1.25, or 5 mg/day, fingolimod was not associated with impaired oxygenation or oxygen desaturation with exercise or an increase in airway responsiveness to methacholine. Subjects on fingolimod treatment had a normal bronchodilator response to inhaled beta-agonists.
                        In a 14-day placebo-controlled study of patients with moderate asthma, no effect was seen for GILENYA 0.5 mg (recommended dose in MS). A 10% reduction in mean FEV1 at 6 hours after dosing was observed in patients receiving fingolimod 1.25 mg (a dose higher than recommended for use in MS) on Day 10 of treatment. Fingolimod 1.25 mg was associated with a 5-fold increase in the use of rescue short acting beta-agonists.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3     Pharmacokinetics
							
                     
                        
                           Absorption
                        
                        The Tmax of fingolimod is 12-16 hours. The apparent absolute oral bioavailability is 93%.
                        Food intake does not alter Cmax or exposure (AUC) of fingolimod or fingolimod-phosphate. Therefore GILENYA may be taken without regard to meals.
                        Steady-state blood concentrations are reached within 1 to 2 months following once-daily administration and steady-state levels are approximately 10-fold greater than with the initial dose.
                        
                           Distribution
                        
                        Fingolimod highly (86%) distributes in red blood cells. Fingolimod-phosphate has a smaller uptake in blood cells of <17%. Fingolimod and fingolimod-phosphate are >99.7% protein bound. Fingolimod and fingolimod-phosphate protein binding is not altered by renal or hepatic impairment. 
                        Fingolimod is extensively distributed to body tissues with a volume of distribution of about 1200±260 L. 
                        
                           Metabolism
                        
                        The biotransformation of fingolimod in humans occurs by 3 main pathways: by reversible stereoselective phosphorylation to the pharmacologically active (S)-enantiomer of fingolimod-phosphate, by oxidative biotransformation catalyzed mainly by the cytochrome P450 4F2 (CYP4F2) and possibly other CYP4F isoenzymes with subsequent fatty acid-like degradation to inactive metabolites, and by formation of pharmacologically inactive non-polar ceramide analogs of fingolimod.
                        Inhibitors or inducers of CYP4F2 and possibly other CYP4F isozymes might alter the exposure of fingolimod or fingolimod-phosphate. In vitro studies in hepatocytes indicated that CYP3A4 may contribute to fingolimod metabolism in the case of strong induction of CYP3A4.
                        Following single oral administration of [14C] fingolimod, the major fingolimod-related components in blood, as judged from their contribution to the AUC up to 816 hours post-dose of total radiolabeled components, are fingolimod itself (23.3%), fingolimod-phosphate (10.3%), and inactive metabolites [M3 carboxylic acid metabolite (8.3%), M29 ceramide metabolite (8.9%), and M30 ceramide metabolite (7.3%)]. 
                        
                           Elimination
                        
                        Fingolimod blood clearance is 6.3±2.3 L/h, and the average apparent terminal half-life (t1/2) is 6 to 9 days. Blood levels of fingolimod-phosphate decline in parallel with those of fingolimod in the terminal phase, yielding similar half-lives for both.
                        After oral administration, about 81% of the dose is slowly excreted in the urine as inactive metabolites. Fingolimod and fingolimod-phosphate are not excreted intact in urine but are the major components in the feces with amounts of each representing less than 2.5% of the dose. 
                        
                           Specific Populations
                        
                        
                           Geriatric Patients
                        
                        The mechanism for elimination and results from population pharmacokinetics suggest that dose adjustment would not be necessary in elderly patients. However, clinical experience in patients aged above 65 years is limited.
                        
                           Gender
                        
                        Gender has no clinically significant influence on fingolimod and fingolimod-phosphate pharmacokinetics.
                        
                           Race
                        
                        The effects of race on fingolimod and fingolimod-phosphate pharmacokinetics cannot be adequately assessed due to a low number of non-white patients in the clinical program.
                        
                           Renal Impairment
                        
                        In patients with severe renal impairment, fingolimod Cmax and AUC are increased by 32% and 43%, respectively, and fingolimod-phosphate Cmax and AUC are increased by 25% and 14%, respectively, with no change in apparent elimination half-life. Based on these findings, the GILENYA 0.5 mg dose is appropriate for use in patients with renal impairment. The systemic exposure of 2 metabolites (M2 and M3) is increased by 3- and 13-fold, respectively. The toxicity of these metabolites has not been fully characterized. 
                        A study in patients with mild or moderate renal impairment has not been conducted. 
                        
                           Hepatic Impairment
                        
                        In subjects with mild, moderate, or severe hepatic impairment (Child-Pugh class A, B, and C), no change in fingolimod Cmax was observed, but fingolimod AUC0-∞ was increased respectively by 12%, 44%, and 103%. In patients with severe hepatic impairment (Child-Pugh class C), fingolimod-phosphate Cmax was decreased by 22% and AUC0-96 hours was decreased by 29%. The pharmacokinetics of fingolimod-phosphate was not evaluated in patients with mild or moderate hepatic impairment. The apparent elimination half-life of fingolimod is unchanged in subjects with mild hepatic impairment, but is prolonged by about 50% in patients with moderate or severe hepatic impairment. 
                        Patients with severe hepatic impairment (Child-Pugh class C) should be closely monitored, as the risk of adverse reactions is greater [see Warnings and Precautions (5.7)].
                        No dose adjustment is needed in patients with mild or moderate hepatic impairment (Child-Pugh class A and B). 
                        
                           Drug Interactions
                        
                        
                           Ketoconazole
                        
                        The coadministration of ketoconazole (a potent inhibitor of CYP3A and CYP4F) 200 mg twice-daily at steady-state and a single dose of fingolimod 5 mg led to a 70% increase in AUC of fingolimod and fingolimod-phosphate. Patients who use GILENYA and systemic ketoconazole concomitantly should be closely monitored, as the risk of adverse reactions is greater [see Drug Interactions (7)].
                        
                           Carbamazepine
                        
                        The coadministration of carbamazepine (a potent CYP450 enzyme inducer) 600 mg twice-daily at steady-state and a single dose of fingolimod 2 mg decreased blood concentrations (AUC) of fingolimod and fingolimod-phosphate by approximately 40%. The clinical impact of this decrease is unknown.
                        Other strong CYP450 enzyme inducers, e.g., rifampicin, phenytoin, phenobarbital, and St. John’s wort, may also reduce AUC of fingolimod and fingolimod-phosphate. The clinical impact of this potential decrease is unknown.
                        
                           Potential of Fingolimod and Fingolimod-phosphate to Inhibit the Metabolism of Comedications
                        
                        In vitro inhibition studies using pooled human liver microsomes and specific metabolic probe substrates demonstrate that fingolimod has little or no capacity to inhibit the activity of the following CYP enzymes: CYP1A2, CYP2A6, CYP2B6, CYP2C8, CYP2C9, CYP2C19, CYP2D6, CYP2E1, CYP3A4/5, or CYP4A9/11 (fingolimod only), and similarly fingolimod-phosphate has little or no capacity to inhibit the activity of CYP1A2, CYP2A6, CYP2B6, CYP2C8, CYP2C9, CYP2C19, CYP2D6, CYP2E1, or CYP3A4 at concentrations up to 3 orders of magnitude of therapeutic concentrations. Therefore, fingolimod and fingolimod-phosphate are unlikely to reduce the clearance of drugs that are mainly cleared through metabolism by the major CYP isoenzymes described above. 
								
                        
                           Potential of Fingolimod and Fingolimod-phosphate to Induce its Own and/or the Metabolism of Comedications
                        
                        Fingolimod was examined for its potential to induce human CYP3A4, CYP1A2, CYP4F2, and MDR1 (P-glycoprotein) mRNA and CYP3A, CYP1A2, CYP2B6, CYP2C8, CYP2C9, CYP2C19, and CYP4F2 activity in primary human hepatocytes. Fingolimod did not induce mRNA or activity of the different CYP enzymes and MDR1 with respect to the vehicle control; therefore, no clinically relevant induction of the tested CYP enzymes or MDR1 by fingolimod are expected at therapeutic concentrations. Fingolimod-phosphate was also examined for its potential to induce mRNA and/or activity of human CYP1A2, CYP2B6, CYP2C8, CYP2C9, CYP2C19, CYP3A, CYP4F2, CYP4F3B, and CYP4F12. Fingolimod-phosphate is not expected to have clinically significant induction effects on these enzymes at therapeutic dose of fingolimod. In vitro experiments did not provide an indication of CYP induction by fingolimod-phosphate.
                        
                           Transporters 
                        
                        Based on in vitro data, fingolimod as well as fingolimod-phosphate are not expected to inhibit the uptake of comedications and/or biologics transported by the organic anion transporting polypeptides OATP1B1, OATP1B3, or the sodium taurocholate co-transporting polypeptide (NTCP). Similarly, they are not expected to inhibit the efflux of comedications and/or biologics transported by the breast cancer resistance protein (BCRP), the bile salt export pump (BSEP), the multidrug resistance-associated protein 2 (MRP2), or P-glycoprotein (P-gp) at therapeutic concentrations.
                        
                           Oral Contraceptives
                        
                        The coadministration of fingolimod 0.5 mg daily with oral contraceptives (ethinylestradiol and levonorgestrel) did not elicit any clinically significant change in oral contraceptives exposure. Fingolimod and fingolimod-phosphate exposure were consistent with those from previous studies. No interaction studies have been performed with oral contraceptives containing other progestagens; however, an effect of fingolimod on their exposure is not expected.
                        
                           Cyclosporine
                        
                        The pharmacokinetics of single-dose fingolimod was not altered during coadministration with cyclosporine at steady-state, nor was cyclosporine steady-state pharmacokinetics altered by fingolimod. These data indicate that GILENYA is unlikely to reduce or increase the clearance of drugs cleared mainly by CYP3A4. Potent inhibition of transporters MDR1 (P-gp), MRP2, and OATP-1B1 does not influence fingolimod disposition. 
                        
                           Isoproterenol, Atropine, Atenolol, and Diltiazem
                        
                        Single-dose fingolimod and fingolimod-phosphate exposure was not altered by coadministered isoproterenol or atropine. Likewise, the single-dose pharmacokinetics of fingolimod and fingolimod-phosphate and the steady-state pharmacokinetics of both atenolol and diltiazem were unchanged during the coadministration of the latter 2 drugs individually with fingolimod. 
                        
                           Population Pharmacokinetics Analysis
                        
                        A population pharmacokinetics evaluation performed in MS patients did not provide evidence for a significant effect of fluoxetine and paroxetine (strong CYP2D6 inhibitors) on fingolimod or fingolimod-phosphate predose concentrations. In addition, the following commonly coprescribed substances had no clinically relevant effect (<20%) on fingolimod or fingolimod-phosphate predose concentrations: baclofen, gabapentin, oxybutynin, amantadine, modafinil, amitriptyline, pregabalin, and corticosteroids. 
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         