
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS

               
                  Ketorolac is highly bound to human plasma protein (mean 99.2%). There is no evidence in animal or human studies that ketorolac induces or inhibits hepatic enzymes capable of metabolizing itself or other drugs.

               
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           Concomitant use with anticoagulants may increase the risk of serious GI bleeding. (7.1)

                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 Warfarin, Digoxin, Salicylate, and Heparin

                     
                        The in vitro binding of warfarin to plasma proteins is only slightly reduced by ketorolac (99.5% control vs. 99.3%) when ketorolac plasma concentrations reach 5 to 10 mcg/mL. Ketorolac does not alter digoxin protein binding. In vitro studies indicate that, at therapeutic concentrations of salicylate (300 mcg/mL), the binding of ketorolac was reduced from approximately 99.2% to 97.5%, representing a potential twofold increase in unbound ketorolac plasma levels. Therapeutic concentrations of digoxin, warfarin, ibuprofen, naproxen, piroxicam, acetaminophen, phenytoin, and tolbutamide did not alter ketorolac protein binding.

                        The effects of warfarin and NSAIDs, in general, on GI bleeding are synergistic, such that the users of both drugs together have a risk of serious GI bleeding higher than the users of either drug alone.

                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 Aspirin

                     
                        When ketorolac is administered with aspirin, its protein binding is reduced, although the clearance of free ketorolac is not altered. The clinical significance of this interaction is not known; however, as with other NSAIDs, concomitant administration of SPRIX and aspirin is not generally recommended because of the potential of increased adverse effects [see Warnings and Precautions (5.2, 5.5, 5.11)].
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3 Diuretics

                     
                        Clinical studies, as well as postmarketing observations, have shown that ketorolac can reduce the natriuretic effect of furosemide and thiazides in some patients. This response has been attributed to inhibition of renal prostaglandin synthesis. During concomitant therapy with SPRIX, observe the patient closely for signs of renal failure [see Warnings and Precautions (5.4, 5.6)], as well as to assure diuretic efficacy.

                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4 Probenecid

                     
                        Concomitant administration of oral ketorolac and probenecid resulted in decreased clearance and volume of distribution of ketorolac and significant increases in ketorolac plasma levels (total AUC increased approximately threefold from 5.4 to 17.8 mcg/h/mL), and terminal half-life increased approximately twofold from 6.6 to 15.1 hours. Therefore, concomitant use of SPRIX and probenecid is contraindicated.

                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.5 Lithium

                     
                        NSAIDs have produced an elevation of plasma lithium levels and a reduction in renal lithium clearance. The mean minimum lithium concentration increased 15%, and the renal clearance was decreased by approximately 20%. These effects have been attributed to inhibition of renal prostaglandin synthesis by the NSAID. Thus, when SPRIX and lithium are administered concurrently, observe patients carefully for signs of lithium toxicity.

                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.6 Methotrexate

                     
                        NSAIDs have been reported to competitively inhibit methotrexate accumulation in rabbit kidney slices. This may indicate that they could enhance the toxicity of methotrexate. Use caution when SPRIX is administered concomitantly with methotrexate.

                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.7 ACE Inhibitors/Angiotensin II Receptor Antagonists

                     
                        Concomitant use of ACE inhibitors and/or angiotensin II receptor antagonists may increase the risk of renal impairment, particularly in volume-depleted patients. Reports suggest that NSAIDs may diminish the antihypertensive effect of ACE inhibitors and/or angiotensin II receptor antagonists. Consider this interaction in patients taking SPRIX concomitantly with ACE inhibitors and/or angiotensin II receptor antagonists [see Warnings and Precautions (5.4, 5.6)].

                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.8 Antiepileptic Drugs

                     
                        Sporadic cases of seizures have been reported during concomitant use of ketorolac and antiepileptic drugs (phenytoin, carbamazepine).

                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.9 Psychoactive Drugs

                     
                        Hallucinations have been reported when ketorolac was used in patients taking psychoactive drugs (fluoxetine, thiothixene, alprazolam).

                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.10 Pentoxifylline

                     
                        When ketorolac is administered concurrently with pentoxifylline, there is an increased tendency to bleeding. Therefore, concomitant use of SPRIX and Pentoxifylline is contraindicated [see Contraindications (4) and Warnings and Precautions (5.3)].

                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.11 Nondepolarizing Muscle Relaxants

                     
                        In postmarketing experience there have been reports of a possible interaction between ketorolac and nondepolarizing muscle relaxants that resulted in apnea. The concurrent use of ketorolac with muscle relaxants has not been formally studied.

                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.12 Selective Serotonin Reuptake Inhibitors (SSRIs)

                     
                        There is an increased risk of gastrointestinal bleeding when selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) are combined with NSAIDs. Use caution when SPRIX is administered concomitantly with SSRIs.

                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.13 Fluticasone

                     
                        The rate and extent of absorption of ketorolac from SPRIX administration (31.5 mg dose) were assessed in subjects with allergic rhinitis before and after the administration of a single daily dose of 200 mcg (as 2 x 50 mcg in each nostril) of fluticasone propionate nasal spray for 7 consecutive days.  There was no effect on the pharmacokinetic characteristics of SPRIX that can be considered clinically significant [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.4)].

                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.14 Oxymetazoline

                     
                        The rate and extent of absorption of ketorolac from SPRIX administration were assessed in subjects with allergic rhinitis before and 30 min after a single dose (3 sprays in each nostril) of oxymetazoline hydrochloride nasal spray.  There was no effect on the pharmacokinetic characteristics of SPRIX that can be considered clinically significant [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.4)].

                     
                     
                  
               
            
         