
               
               
               
                  CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  Norethindrone acetate induces secretory changes in an estrogen-primed endometrium. On a weight basis, it is twice as potent as norethindrone.
                  
                     Pharmacokinetics
                  
                  
                     Absorption
                  
                  Norethindrone acetate is completely and rapidly deacetylated to norethindrone (NET) after oral administration, and the disposition of norethindrone acetate is indistinguishable from that of orally administered norethindrone. Norethindrone acetate is rapidly absorbed from norethindrone acetate tablets, with maximum plasma concentration of norethindrone generally occurring at about 2 hours post-dose. The pharmacokinetic parameters of norethindrone following single oral administration of norethindrone acetate in 29 healthy female volunteers are summarized in Table 1.
                  


                  



                     Figure 1. Mean Plasma Concentration Profile after a Single Dose of 5 mg Administered to 29 Healthy Female Volunteers under Fasting Conditions
                  
                  
                     
                     

                     Effect of Food
                  
                  The effect of food administration on the pharmacokinetics of norethindrone acetate has not been studied.

                  
                  
                     Distribution
                  
                  Norethindrone is 36% bound to sex hormone-binding globulin (SHBG) and 61% bound to albumin. Volume of distribution of norethindrone is about 4 L/kg.

                  
                  
                     Metabolism
                  
                  Norethindrone undergoes extensive biotransformation, primarily via reduction, followed by sulfate and glucuronide conjugation. The majority of metabolites in the circulation are sulfates, with glucuronides accounting for most of the urinary metabolites.

                  
                  
                     Excretion
                  
                  Plasma clearance value for norethindrone is approximately 0.4 L/hr/kg. Norethindrone is excreted in both urine and feces, primarily as metabolites. The mean terminal elimination half-life of norethindrone following a single dose administration of norethindrone acetate is approximately 9 hours.

                  
                  
                     Special Populations
                  
                  
                     Geriatrics
                  
                  The effect of age on the pharmacokinetics of norethindrone after norethindrone acetate administration has not been evaluated.
                  
                     Race
                  
                  The effect of race on the disposition of norethindrone after norethindrone acetate administration has not been evaluated.
                  
                     Renal Insufficiency
                  
                  The effect of renal disease on the disposition of norethindrone after norethindrone acetate administration has not been evaluated. In premenopausal women with chronic renal failure undergoing peritoneal dialysis who received multiple doses of an oral contraceptive containing ethinyl estradiol and norethindrone, plasma norethindrone concentration was unchanged compared to concentrations in premenopausal women with normal renal function.
                  
                     Hepatic Insufficiency
                  
                  The effect of hepatic disease on the disposition of norethindrone after norethindrone acetate administration has not been evaluated. However, norethindrone acetate is contraindicated in markedly impaired liver function or liver disease.
                  
                     Drug Interactions
                  
                  No pharmacokinetic drug interaction studies investigating any drug-drug interactions with norethindrone acetate have been conducted.
               
               
            
         