
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  In a study of five healthy adults administered a single 500 mg dose of nafcillin by intravenous injection over seven minutes, the mean plasma concentration of the drug was approximately 30 mcg/mL at 5 minutes after injection. The mean area under the plasma concentration-versus-time curve (AUC) for nafcillin in this study was 18.06 mcg·h/mL. 
                  The serum half-life of nafcillin administered by the intravenous route ranged from 33 to 61 minutes as measured in three separate studies. 
                  In contrast to the other penicillinase-resistant penicillins, only about 30% of nafcillin is excreted as unchanged drug in the urine of normal volunteers, and most within the first six hours. Nafcillin is primarily eliminated by nonrenal routes, namely hepatic inactivation and excretion in the bile.
                  Nafcillin binds to serum proteins, mainly albumin. The degree of protein binding reported for nafcillin is 89.9 ± 1.5%. Reported values vary with the method of study and the investigator. 
                  The concurrent administration of probenecid with nafcillin increases and prolongs plasma concentrations of nafcillin. Probenecid significantly reduces the total body clearance of nafcillin with renal clearance being decreased to a greater extent than nonrenal clearance. 
                  The penicillinase-resistant penicillins are widely distributed in various body fluids, including bile, pleural, amniotic and synovial fluids. With normal doses insignificant concentrations are found in the aqueous humor of the eye. High nafcillin CSF levels have been obtained in the presence of inflamed meninges. 
                  Renal failure does not appreciably affect the serum half-life of nafcillin; therefore, no modification of the usual nafcillin dosage is necessary in renal failure with or without hemodialysis. Hemodialysis does not accelerate the rate of clearance of nafcillin from the blood. 
                  A study which assessed the effects of cirrhosis and extrahepatic biliary obstruction in man demonstrated that the plasma clearance of nafcillin was significantly decreased in patients with hepatic dysfunction. In these patients with cirrhosis and extrahepatic obstruction, nafcillin excretion in the urine was significantly increased from about 30 to 50% of the administered dose, suggesting that renal disease superimposed on hepatic disease could further decrease nafcillin clearance.
               
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Microbiology
                     
                        Penicillinase-resistant penicillins exert a bactericidal action against penicillin-susceptible microorganisms during the state of active multiplication. All penicillins inhibit the biosynthesis of the bacterial cell wall. Nafcillin sodium has been shown to be active against most isolates of the following microorganism, both in vitro and in clinical infections as described in the INDICATIONS AND USAGE section.
                        Gram-Positive Bacteria
                        
                           Staphylococcus aureus
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Susceptibility Test Methods
                     
                        Susceptibility of staphylococcal isolates to nafcillin may be inferred by testing penicillin and either oxacillin or cefoxitin1.  For staphylococcal isolates, penicillin susceptibility implies susceptibility to other beta-lactam agents, and penicillin resistance implies resistance to penicillinase-labile penicillins.  Resistance to oxacillin (or cefoxitin) implies resistance to all other beta-lactam agents, except newer agents with activity against methicillin-resistant S. aureus.  Routine testing of nafcillin is not advised.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         