
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        L-glutamine has important functions in regulation of gastrointestinal cell growth, function, and regeneration. Under normal conditions, glutamine concentration is maintained in the body by dietary intake and synthesis from endogenous glutamate. Data from clinical studies indicate that the role of and nutritional requirements for glutamine during catabolic illness, trauma, and infection may differ significantly from the role of and nutritional requirements for glutamine in healthy individuals. Glutamine concentrations decrease and tissue glutamine metabolism increases during many catabolic disease states, and thus glutamine is often considered a "conditionally essential" amino acid.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        When glutamine was administered in combination with rhGH to rats, villous height, bowel growth, plasma insulin-like growth factor I, and body weight were significantly higher than in rats treated with either glutamine or rhGH alone.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        The pharmacokinetics of L-glutamine as described below are based on literature data in healthy subjects. The pharmacokinetics in patients with SBS have not been determined. The plasma glutamine concentrations in these patients following oral administration are expected to be highly variable depending on the length, segment, and presence/ absence of ileal-cecal valve for the remnant bowel.
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Absorption
                              
                              Following single dose oral administration of glutamine at 0.1 g/kg to six subjects, mean peak blood glutamine concentration was 1028 µM (or 150 mcg/mL) occurring approximately 30 minutes after administration. The pharmacokinetics following multiple oral doses have not been adequately characterized.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Distribution
                              
                              After an intravenous bolus dose in three subjects, the volume of distribution was estimated to be approximately 200 mL/kg.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Metabolism
                              
                              Endogenous glutamine participates in various metabolic activities, including the formation of glutamate, and synthesis of proteins, nucleotides, and amino sugars. Exogenous glutamine is anticipated to undergo similar metabolism.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Elimination
                              
                              Metabolism is the major route of elimination for glutamine. Although glutamine is eliminated by glomerular filtration, it is almost completely reabsorbed by the renal tubules. After an IV bolus dose in three subjects, the terminal half-life of glutamine was approximately 1 hour.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Specific Populations
                              
                              There are no studies to determine the effect of race, age, or gender on the pharmacokinetics of L-glutamine.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Drug-Drug Interactions
                              
                              No drug-drug interaction studies have been conducted. Because metabolism of glutamine is mediated via non-CYP enzymes, glutamine pharmacokinetics are unlikely to be affected by other agents through CYP enzyme inhibition or induction.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         