
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Omeprazole belongs to a class of antisecretory compounds, the substituted benzimidazoles, that do not exhibit anticholinergic or H2 histamine antagonistic properties, but that suppress gastric acid secretion by specific inhibition of the H+/K+ ATPase enzyme system at the secretory surface of the gastric parietal cell. Because this enzyme system is regarded as the acid (proton) pump within the gastric mucosa, omeprazole has been characterized as a gastric acid‑pump inhibitor, in that it blocks the final step of acid production. This effect is dose related and leads to inhibition of both basal and stimulated acid secretion irrespective of the stimulus. Animal studies indicate that after rapid disappearance from plasma, omeprazole can be found within the gastric mucosa for a day or more.
                        Omeprazole is acid labile and thus rapidly degraded by gastric acid. ZEGERID Capsules and Powder for Oral Suspension are immediate‑release formulations that contain sodium bicarbonate which raises the gastric pH and thus protects omeprazole from acid degradation.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        
                           Antisecretory Activity
                        
                        Results from a PK/PD study of the antisecretory effect of repeated once‑daily dosing of 40 mg and 20 mg of ZEGERID Oral Suspension in healthy subjects are shown in Table 5 below.
                        
                           Table 5: Effect of ZEGERID Oral Suspension on Intragastric pH, Day 7
                        
                        


                        


Results from a separate PK/PD study of antisecretory effect on repeated once‑daily dosing of 40 mg/1100 mg and 20 mg/1100 mg of ZEGERID Capsules in healthy subjects show similar effects in general on the above three PD parameters as those for ZEGERID 40 mg/1680 mg and 20 mg/1680 mg Oral Suspension, respectively.
                        The antisecretory effect lasts longer than would be expected from the very short (1 hour) plasma half‑life, apparently due to irreversible binding to the parietal H+/K+ ATPase enzyme.
                        
                           Enterochromaffin‑like (ECL) Cell Effects
                        
                        In 24-month carcinogenicity studies in rats, a dose‑related significant increase in gastric carcinoid tumors and ECL cell hyperplasia was observed in both male and female animals [See Nonclinical Toxicology (13.1)]. Carcinoid tumors have also been observed in rats subjected to fundectomy or long‑term treatment with other proton pump inhibitors or high doses of H2‑receptor antagonists. Human gastric biopsy specimens have been obtained from more than 3000 patients treated with omeprazole in long‑term clinical trials. The incidence of ECL cell hyperplasia in these studies increased with time; however, no case of ECL cell carcinoids, dysplasia, or neoplasia has been found in these patients. These studies are of insufficient duration and size to rule out the possible influence of long‑term administration of omeprazole on the development of any premalignant or malignant conditions.
                        
                           Serum Gastrin Effects
                        
                        In studies involving more than 200 patients, serum gastrin levels increased during the first 1 to 2 weeks of once‑daily administration of therapeutic doses of omeprazole in parallel with inhibition of acid secretion. No further increase in serum gastrin occurred with continued treatment. In comparison with histamine H2‑receptor antagonists, the median increases produced by 20 mg doses of omeprazole were higher (1.3 to 3.6 fold vs. 1.1 to 1.8 fold increase). Gastrin values returned to pretreatment levels, usually within 1 to 2 weeks after discontinuation of therapy.
                        Increased gastrin causes enterochromaffin-like cell hyperplasia and increased serum Chromogranin A (CgA) levels. The increased CgA levels may cause false positive results in diagnostic investigations for neuroendocrine tumors.
                        
                           Other Effects
                        
                        Systemic effects of omeprazole in the CNS, cardiovascular and respiratory systems have not been found to date. Omeprazole, given in oral doses of 30 or 40 mg for 2 to 4 weeks, had no effect on thyroid function, carbohydrate metabolism, or circulating levels of parathyroid hormone, cortisol, estradiol, testosterone, prolactin, cholecystokinin or secretin.
                        No effect on gastric emptying of the solid and liquid components of a test meal was demonstrated after a single dose of omeprazole 90 mg. In healthy subjects, a single I.V. dose of omeprazole (0.35 mg/kg) had no effect on intrinsic factor secretion. No systematic dose‑dependent effect has been observed on basal or stimulated pepsin output in humans. However, when intragastric pH is maintained at 4.0 or above, basal pepsin output is low, and pepsin activity is decreased.
                        As do other agents that elevate intragastric pH, omeprazole administered for 14 days in healthy subjects produced a significant increase in the intragastric concentrations of viable bacteria. The pattern of the bacterial species was unchanged from that commonly found in saliva. All changes resolved within three days of stopping treatment.
                        The course of Barrett’s esophagus in 106 patients was evaluated in a U.S. double‑blind controlled study of omeprazole 40 mg b.i.d. for 12 months followed by 20 mg b.i.d. for 12 months or ranitidine 300 mg b.i.d. for 24 months. No clinically significant impact on Barrett’s mucosa by antisecretory therapy was observed. Although neosquamous epithelium developed during antisecretory therapy, complete elimination of Barrett’s mucosa was not achieved. No significant difference was observed between treatment groups in development of dysplasia in Barrett’s mucosa and no patient developed esophageal carcinoma during treatment. No significant differences between treatment groups were observed in development of ECL cell hyperplasia, corpus atrophic gastritis, corpus intestinal metaplasia, or colon polyps exceeding 3 mm in diameter.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        
                           Absorption
                        
                        In separate in vivo bioavailability studies, when ZEGERID Oral Suspension and Capsules are administered on an empty stomach 1 hour prior to a meal, the absorption of omeprazole is rapid, with mean peak plasma levels (% CV) of omeprazole being 1954 ng/mL (33%) and 1526 ng/mL (49%), respectively, and time to peak of approximately 30 minutes (range 10‑90 min) after a single‑dose or repeated‑dose administration. Absolute bioavailability of ZEGERID Powder for Oral Suspension (compared to I.V. administration) is about 30‑40% at doses of 20 – 40 mg, due in large part to presystemic metabolism.
                        When ZEGERID Oral Suspension 40 mg/1680 mg was administered in a two‑dose loading regimen, the omeprazole AUC (0‑inf) (ng×hr/mL) was 1665 after Dose 1 and 3356 after Dose 2, while Tmax was approximately 30 minutes for both Dose 1 and Dose 2.
                        Following single or repeated once daily dosing, peak plasma concentrations of omeprazole from ZEGERID are approximately proportional from 20 to 40 mg doses, but a greater than linear mean AUC (three‑fold increase) is observed when doubling the dose to 40 mg. The bioavailability of omeprazole from ZEGERID increases upon repeated administration.
                        When ZEGERID is administered 1 hour after a meal, the omeprazole AUC is reduced by approximately 24% relative to administration 1 hour prior to a meal.
                        
                           Distribution
                        
                        Omeprazole is bound to plasma proteins. Protein binding is approximately 95%.
                        
                           Metabolism
                        
                        Following single‑dose oral administration of omeprazole, the majority of the dose (about 77%) is eliminated in urine as at least six metabolites. Two metabolites have been identified as hydroxyomeprazole and the corresponding carboxylic acid. The remainder of the dose was recoverable in feces. This implies a significant biliary excretion of the metabolites of omeprazole. Three metabolites have been identified in plasma – the sulfide and sulfone derivatives of omeprazole, and hydroxyomeprazole. These metabolites have very little or no antisecretory activity.
                        
                           Excretion
                        
                        Following single‑dose oral administration of omeprazole, little if any, unchanged drug is excreted in urine.  The mean plasma omeprazole half-life in healthy subjects is approximately 1 hour (range 0.4 to 3.2 hours) and the total body clearance is 500‑600 mL/min.
                        
                           Concomitant Use with Clopidogrel
                        
                        In a crossover clinical study, 72 healthy subjects were administered clopidogrel (300 mg loading dose followed by 75 mg per day) alone and with omeprazole (80 mg at the same time as clopidogrel) for 5 days. The exposure to the active metabolite of clopidogrel was decreased by 46% (Day 1) and 42% (Day 5) when clopidogrel and omeprazole were administered together.
                        Results from another crossover study in healthy subjects showed a similar pharmacokinetic interaction between clopidogrel (300 mg loading dose/75 mg daily maintenance dose) and omeprazole 80 mg daily when coadministered for 30 days. Exposure to the active metabolite of clopidogrel was reduced by 41% to 46% over this time period.
                        In another study, 72 healthy subjects were given the same doses of clopidogrel and 80 mg omeprazole but the drugs were administered 12 hours apart; the results were similar, indicating that administering clopidogrel and omeprazole at different times does not prevent their interaction.
                        
                           Concomitant Use with Mycophenolate Mofetil
                        
                        Administration of omeprazole 20 mg twice daily for 4 days and a single 1000 mg dose of MMF approximately one hour after the last dose of omeprazole to 12 healthy subjects in a cross-over study resulted in a 52% reduction in the Cmax and 23% reduction in the AUC of MPA.
                        
                           Special Populations
                        
                        
                           Geriatric
                        
                        The elimination rate of omeprazole was somewhat decreased in the elderly, and bioavailability was increased. Omeprazole was 76% bioavailable when a single 40-mg oral dose of omeprazole (buffered solution) was administered to healthy elderly subjects, versus 58% in young subjects given the same dose. Nearly 70% of the dose was recovered in urine as metabolites of omeprazole and no unchanged drug was detected. The plasma clearance of omeprazole was 250 mL/min (about half that of young subjects) and its plasma half‑life averaged one hour, similar to that of young healthy subjects. 
                        
                           Pediatric
                        
                        The pharmacokinetics of ZEGERID has not been studied in patients < 18 years of age.
                        
                           Gender
                        
                        There are no known differences in the absorption or excretion of omeprazole between males and females.
                        
                           Hepatic Insufficiency
                        
                        In patients with chronic hepatic disease, the bioavailability of omeprazole from a buffered solution increased to approximately 100% compared to an I.V. dose, reflecting decreased first‑pass effect, and the mean plasma half‑life of the drug increased to nearly 3 hours compared to the mean half‑life of 1 hour in normal subjects. Plasma clearance averaged 70 mL/min, compared to a value of 500‑600 mL/min in normal subjects. Dose reduction, particularly where maintenance of healing of erosive esophagitis is indicated, for the hepatically impaired should be considered.
                        
                           Renal Insufficiency
                        
                        In patients with chronic renal impairment, whose creatinine clearance ranged between 10 and 62 mL/min/1.73 m2, the disposition of omeprazole from a buffered solution was very similar to that in healthy subjects, although there was a slight increase in bioavailability. Because urinary excretion is a primary route of excretion of omeprazole metabolites, their elimination slowed in proportion to the decreased creatinine clearance. No dose reduction is necessary in patients with renal impairment.
                        
                           Asian Population
                        
                        In pharmacokinetic studies of single 20-mg omeprazole doses, an increase in AUC of approximately four‑fold was noted in Asian subjects compared to Caucasians. Dose adjustment, particularly where maintenance of healing of erosive esophagitis is indicated, for Asian subjects should be considered.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         