
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  Systemic AbsorptionA systemic absorption study was performed in which Ciprofloxacin 
Ophthalmic Solution was administered in each eye every two hours while awake for 
two days followed by every four hours while awake for an additional 5 days. The 
maximum reported plasma concentration of ciprofloxacin was less than 5 ng/mL. 
The mean concentration was usually less than 2.5 ng/mL. 
                  
                  
                  Microbiology Ciprofloxacin has in vitro activity 
against a wide range of gram-negative and gram-positive organisms. The 
bactericidal action of ciprofloxacin results from interference with the enzyme 
DNA gyrase which is needed for the synthesis of bacterial DNA. 
                  Ciprofloxacin has been shown to be active against most strains of the 
following organisms both in vitro and in clinical 
infections. (See INDICATIONS AND 
USAGE section). 
                  
                     Gram-Positive 
                  
                  
                     Staphylococcus aureus
                  
                  
                     Staphylococcus epidermidis
                  
                  
                     Streptococcus pneumoniae
                  
                  
                     Streptococcus (Viridans Group)
                  
                     Gram-Negative
                  
                  
                     Haemophilus influenzae
                  
                  
                     Pseudomonas aeruginosa
                  
                  
                     Serratia marcescens
                  
                  Ciprofloxacin has been shown to be active in vitro 
against most strains of the following organisms, however, the clinical significance of these data is unknown:
                  
                  
                     Gram-Positive
                  
                  
                     Enterococcus faecalis (Many strains are only 
moderately susceptible)
                  
                     Staphylococcus haemolyticus
                  
                  
                     Staphylococcus hominis
                  
                  
                     Staphylococcus saprophyticus
                  
                  
                     Streptococcus pyogenes
                  
                  
                     Gram-Negative 
                  
                  
                     Acinetobacter calcoaceticus subsp. anitratus 
                  
                  
                     Aeromonas caviae
                  
                  
                     Aeromonas hydrophila
                  
                  
                     Brucella melitensis
                  
                  
                     Campylobacter coli
                  
                  
                     Campylobacter jejuni
                  
                  
                     Citrobacter diversus
                  
                  
                     Citrobacter freundii
                  
                  
                     Edwardsiella tarda
                  
                  
                     Enterobacter aerogenes
                  
                  
                     Enterobacter cloacae
                  
                  
                     Escherichia coli
                  
                  
                     Haemophilus ducreyi
                  
                  
                     Haemophilus parainfluenzae
                  
                  
                     Klebsiella pneumoniae
                  
                  
                     Klebsiella oxytoca
                  
                  
                     Legionella pneumophila 
                  
                  
                     Moraxella (Branhamella) catarrhalis 
                  
                  
                     Morganella morganii
                  
                  
                     Neisseria gonorrhoeae
                  
                  
                     Neisseria meningitidis
                  
                  
                     Pasteurella multocida
                  
                  
                     Proteus mirabilis
                  
                  
                     Proteus vulgaris
                  
                  
                     Providencia rettgeri
                  
                  
                     Providencia stuartii
                  
                  
                     Salmonella enteritidis
                  
                  
                     Salmonella typhi
                  
                  
                     Shigella sonneii
                  
                  
                     Shigella flexneri
                  
                  
                     Vibrio cholerae
                  
                  
                     Vibrio parahaemolyticus
                  
                  
                     Vibrio vulnificus
                  
                  
                     Yersinia enterocolitica 
                  
                  
                  
                  Other Organisms 
                     Chlamydia trachomatis (only moderately 
susceptible) and Mycobacterium tuberculosis (only 
moderately susceptible).
                  Most strains of Pseudomonas cepacia and some 
strains of Pseudomonas maltophilia are resistant to 
ciprofloxacin as are most anaerobic bacteria, including Bacteroides fragilis and Clostridium 
difficile. 
                  
                  The minimal bactericidal concentration (MBC) generally does not exceed the 
minimal inhibitory concentration (MIC) by more than a factor of 2. Resistance to 
ciprofloxacin in vitro usually develops slowly 
(multiple-step mutation).
                  Ciprofloxacin does not cross-react with other antimicrobial agents such as 
beta-lactams or aminoglycosides; therefore, organisms resistant to these drugs 
may be susceptible to ciprofloxacin.
                  
                  
                  Clinical StudiesFollowing therapy with Ciprofloxacin Ophthalmic Solution, 76% of 
the patients with corneal ulcers and positive bacterial cultures were clinically 
cured and complete re-epithelialization occurred in about 92% of the ulcers. 

                  In 3 and 7 day multicenter clinical trials, 52% of the patients with 
conjunctivitis and positive conjunctival cultures were clinically cured and 
70-80% had all causative pathogens eradicated by the end of treatment. 
               
               
            
         