
               
               
               
12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY

               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
12.1 Mechanism of Action

                     
                        Choline C 11 Injection is a radiolabeled analog of choline, a precursor molecule essential for the biosynthesis of cell membrane phospholipids. Choline is involved in synthesis of the structural components of cell membranes, as well as modulation of trans-membrane signaling. Increased phospholipid synthesis (i.e., increased uptake of choline) has been associated with cell proliferation and the transformation process that occurs in tumor cells.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
12.2 Pharmacodynamics

                     
                        In a study of men with prostatic hyperplasia or primary prostate cancer, PET imaging showed 11C-choline radioactivity accumulated rapidly within the prostate; uptake appeared to peak by five minutes following injection of the drug and activity was retained over the subsequent 30 minute scanning period. Little uptake was observed in the bladder and rectum.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
12.3 Pharmacokinetics

                     
                        
                           Distribution:  11C-choline distributes mainly to the pancreas, kidneys, liver, spleen and colon [see Dosage and Administration (2.4)]. Based upon the relatively low urinary excretion of radioactivity, renal distribution is predominantly to the organ itself, rather than via formation of urine.
                        
                           Metabolism:  Following intravenous administration, 11C-choline undergoes metabolism resulting in the detection of 11C-betaine as the major metabolite in blood. In a study of patients with prostate cancer or brain disorders, the fractional activities of 11C-choline and 11C-betaine in human arterial plasma appeared to reach a plateau within 25 minutes, with 11C-betaine representing 82% ± 9% of the total 11C detected at that time point. A small amount of unmetabolized 11C-choline was detected within the blood at the final sampling time point (40 minutes).
                        
                           Elimination:  Urinary excretion of 11C-choline was < 2% of the injected radioactivity at 1.5 hours after injection of the drug. The rate of 11C-choline excretion in urine was 0.014 mL/min.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         