
               
               
               
                  12  CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY

               
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                        12.1	Mechanism of Action

                     
                     
                        Clonidine stimulates alpha-adrenoreceptors in the brain stem. This action results in reduced sympathetic outflow from the central nervous system and in decreases in peripheral resistance, renal vascular resistance, heart rate, and blood pressure. The patient’s maximum blood pressure decrease occurred within 6 to 8 hours. Renal blood flow and glomerular filtration rate remain essentially unchanged. Normal postural reflexes are intact; therefore, orthostatic symptoms are mild and infrequent.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                        12.2	Pharmacodynamics

                     
                     
                        NEXICLON XR was studied in an open-label crossover, force titration, partially randomized trial in patients with mild and moderate essential hypertension who were on two or fewer antihypertensive medications. The trial was designed to compare steady-state exposures between the NEXICLON XR and clonidine immediate-release tablets. There were up- and down-titration phases. There was no washout period between phases or treatments.
                        Studies with immediate-release clonidine hydrochloride have demonstrated a moderate reduction (15% to 20%) in cardiac output in the supine position with no change in the peripheral resistance. At a 45° tilt, there is a smaller reduction in cardiac output and a decrease of peripheral resistance. During long-term therapy, cardiac output tends to return to control values, while peripheral resistance remains decreased. Slowing of the pulse rate has been observed in most patients given clonidine, but the drug does not alter normal hemodynamic response to exercise.
                        Tolerance to the antihypertensive effect may develop in some patients, necessitating a re-evaluation of therapy.
                        Other studies in patients have provided evidence of a reduction in plasma renin activity and in the excretion of aldosterone and catecholamines. The exact relationship of these pharmacologic actions to the antihypertensive effect of clonidine has not been fully elucidated.
                        Clonidine acutely stimulates growth hormone release in both children and adults, but does not produce a chronic elevation of growth hormone with long-term use.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                        12.3	Pharmacokinetics

                     
                     
                        Following single doses of NEXICLON XR 0.17 mg, clonidine mean (S.D.) peak plasma concentrations of 0.49 (±0.09) ng/mL occurred at 7.8 (±1.7) hours. The plasma half-life of clonidine was 13.7 (±3.0) hours. There was no effect of food on the pharmacokinetic parameters.
                        [IC] [/IC]
                        A = NEXICLON XR Tablets (0.17 mg QD) Fasted
                        B = Clonidine IR Tablet (0.1 mg clonidine hydrochloride Q12h) Fasted
                        C = NEXICLON XR Tablets (017 mg QD) Fed
                        In the multi-dose study, mild to moderate hypertensive patients were randomized to ER and BID IR clonidine formulations. The following plot shows the sitting blood pressure values for each treatment group at Day 22.
                        [IC] [/IC]
                        The half-life may increase up to 41 hours in patients with severe impairment of renal function. Following oral administration of clonidine about 40 to 60% of the absorbed dose is recovered in the urine as unchanged drug in 24 hours. About 50% of the absorbed dose is metabolized in the liver.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         