
                     
                     
                     Drug Interactions
                     
                        There has been a report of a patient who passed an orange rubbery precipitate in his stool the day after ingesting carbamazepine suspension immediately followed by Thorazine®* solution. Subsequent testing has shown that mixing carbamazepine suspension and chlorpromazine solution (both generic and brand name) as well as carbamazepine suspension and liquid Mellaril®* resulted in the occurrence of this precipitate. Because the extent to which this occurs with other liquid medications is not known, carbamazepine suspension should not be administered simultaneously with other liquid medicinal agents or diluents (See DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION).
                        Clinically meaningful drug interactions have occurred with concomitant medications and include, but are not limited to, the following:
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Agents That May Affect Carbamazepine Plasma Levels
                           
                              CYP 3A4 inhibitors inhibit carbamazepine metabolism and can thus increase plasma carbamazepine levels. Drugs that have been shown, or would be expected, to increase plasma carbamazepine levels include:
                              
                                 
                                     cimetidine, danazol, diltiazem, macrolides, erythromycin, troleandomycin, clarithromycin, fluoxetine, fluvoxamine, nefazodone, trazodone, loxapineincreased levels of the active 10,11-epoxide, olanzapine, quetiapine, loratadine, terfenadine, omeprazole, oxybutynin, dantrolene, isoniazid, niacinamide, nicotinamide, ibuprofen, propoxyphene, azoles (e.g., ketoconazole, itraconazole, fluconazole, voriconazole), acetazolamide, verapamil, ticlopidine, grapefruit juice, protease inhibitors, valproate.
                              
                              CYP 3A4 inducers can increase the rate of carbamazepine metabolism. Drugs that have been shown, or that would be expected, to decrease plasma carbamazepine levels include:
                              
                                 
                                     cisplatin, doxorubicin HCl, felbamate, fosphenytoin, rifampin, phenobarbital, phenytoin, primidone, methsuximide, theophylline, aminophylline.
                              
                              When carbamazepine is given with drugs that can increase or decrease carbamazepine levels, close monitoring of carbamazepine levels is indicated and dosage adjustment may be required.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Effect of Carbamazepine on Plasma Levels of Concomitant Agents
                           
                              Increased levels: clomipramine HCl, phenytoin, primidone.
                              Carbamazepine is a potent inducer of hepatic CYP 3A4 and may therefore reduce plasma concentrations of comedications mainly metabolized by 3A4 through induction of their metabolism. Carbamazepine causes, or would be expected to cause, decreased levels of the following:
                              
                                 
                                     acetaminophen, alprazolam, bupropion, dihydropyridine calcium channel blockers (e.g., felodipine), citalopram, cyclosporine, corticosteroids (e.g., prednisolone, dexamethasone), clonazepam, clozapine, dicumarol, doxycycline, ethosuximide, everolimus, haloperidol, imatinib, itraconazole, lamotrigine, levothyroxine, methadone, methsuximide, midazolam, olanzapine, oral and other hormonal contraceptives, oxcarbazepine, phensuximide, phenytoin, praziquantel, protease inhibitors, risperidone, theophylline, tiagabine, topiramate, tramadol, trazodone, tricyclic antidepressants (e.g., imipramine, amitriptyline, nortriptyline), valproate, warfarin, ziprasidone, zonisamide.
                              
                              In concomitant use with carbamazepine, dosage adjustment of the above agents may be necessary.
                              Coadministration of carbamazepine with nefazodone results in insufficient plasma concentrations of nefazodone and its active metabolite to achieve a therapeutic effect. Coadministration of carbamazepine with nefazodone is contraindicated. (See CONTRAINDICATIONS).
                              Concomitant administration of carbamazepine and lithium may increase the risk of neurotoxic side effects.
                              Concomitant use of carbamazepine and isoniazid has been reported to increase isoniazidinduced hepatotoxicity.
                              Concomitant medication with carbamazepine and some diuretics (hydrochlorothiazide, furosemide) may lead to symptomatic hyponatremia.
                              Carbamazepine may antagonize the effects of nondepolarizing muscle relaxants (e.g., pancuronium).
                              Their dosage may need to be raised, and patients should be monitored closely for more rapid recovery from neuromuscular blockade than expected.
                              Alterations of thyroid function have been reported in combination therapy with other anticonvulsant medications.
                              Concomitant use of carbamazepine with hormonal contraceptive products (e.g., oral, and levonorgestrel subdermal implant contraceptives) may render the contraceptives less effective because the plasma concentrations of the hormones may be decreased. Breakthrough bleeding and unintended pregnancies have been reported. Alternative or back-up methods of contraception should be considered.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               