
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY

               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action

                     
                        Regulation of glucose metabolism is the primary activity of insulins and insulin analogs, including insulin lispro. Insulins lower blood glucose by stimulating peripheral glucose uptake by skeletal muscle and fat, and by inhibiting hepatic glucose production. Insulins inhibit lipolysis and proteolysis, and enhance protein synthesis.

                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics

                     
                        HUMALOG has been shown to be equipotent to human insulin on a molar basis. One unit of HUMALOG has the same glucose-lowering effect as one unit of regular human insulin. Studies in normal volunteers and patients with diabetes demonstrated that HUMALOG has a more rapid onset of action and a shorter duration of activity than regular human insulin when given subcutaneously.

                        The time course of action of insulin and insulin analogs, such as HUMALOG, may vary considerably in different individuals or within the same individual. The parameters of HUMALOG activity (time of onset, peak time, and duration) as designated in Figure 1 should be considered only as general guidelines. The rate of insulin absorption, and consequently the onset of activity are known to be affected by the site of injection, exercise, and other variables [see Warnings and Precautions (5.1)].

                        
                           Figure 1: Blood Glucose Levels After Subcutaneous Injection of Regular Human Insulin or HUMALOG (0.2 unit/kg) Immediately Before a High Carbohydrate Meal in 10 Patients with Type 1 Diabetes.a
                           
                        
                        
                           a Baseline insulin concentration was maintained by infusion of 0.2 mU/min/kg human insulin.

                     
                     
                     
                        
                           Figure 1

                           
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics

                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Absorption and Bioavailability — Studies in healthy volunteers and patients with diabetes demonstrated that HUMALOG is absorbed more quickly than regular human insulin. In healthy volunteers given subcutaneous doses of HUMALOG ranging from 0.1 to 0.4 unit/kg, peak serum levels were seen 30 to 90 minutes after dosing. When healthy volunteers received equivalent doses of regular human insulin, peak insulin levels occurred between 50 to 120 minutes after dosing. Similar results were seen in patients with type 1 diabetes (see

                                 Figure 2).

                              
                                 Figure 2: Serum HUMALOG and Insulin Levels After Subcutaneous Injection of Regular Human Insulin or HUMALOG (0.2 unit/kg) Immediately Before a High Carbohydrate Meal in 10 Patients with Type 1 Diabetes.a
                                 
                              
                              
                                 a Baseline insulin concentration was maintained by infusion of 0.2 mU/min/kg human insulin.

                              HUMALOG was absorbed at a consistently faster rate than regular human insulin in healthy male volunteers given 0.2 unit/kg at abdominal, deltoid, or femoral subcutaneous sites. After HUMALOG was administered in the abdomen, serum drug levels were higher and the duration of action was slightly shorter than after deltoid or thigh administration. Bioavailability of HUMALOG is similar to that of regular human insulin. The absolute bioavailability after subcutaneous injection ranges from 55% to 77% with doses between 0.1 to 0.2 unit/kg, inclusive.

                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           Figure 2

                           
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Distribution — After subcutaneous administration, the volume of distribution for HUMALOG is identical to that of regular human insulin, with a range of 0.26 to 0.36 L/kg. When administered intravenously, the volume of distribution of HUMALOG (range of 0.26 to 0.36 L/kg) was similar to that of regular human insulin (range of 0.32 to 0.67 L/kg).

                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Metabolism — Human metabolism studies have not been conducted. However, animal studies indicate that the metabolism of HUMALOG is identical to that of regular human insulin.

                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Elimination — After subcutaneous administration of HUMALOG, the t1/2 is shorter than that of regular human insulin (1 versus 1.5 hours, respectively). When administered intravenously, HUMALOG and regular human insulin demonstrated similar dose-dependent elimination, with a t1/2 of 0.44 hours (26 min) and 0.34 hours (20 min), respectively (0.1 unit/kg dose) and 0.86 hours (52 min) and 1.1 hours (66 min), respectively (0.2 unit/kg dose).

                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Specific Populations
                              
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Age — The effect of age on the pharmacokinetics of HUMALOG has not been studied. However, in large clinical trials, sub-group analysis based on age did not indicate any difference in postprandial glucose parameters between HUMALOG and regular human insulin.

                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Gender — The effect of gender on the pharmacokinetics of HUMALOG has not been studied. However, in large clinical trials, sub-group analysis based on gender did not indicate any difference in postprandial glucose parameters between HUMALOG and regular human insulin.

                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Renal Impairment — Type 2 diabetic patients with varying degree of renal impairment showed no difference in pharmacokinetics of regular insulin and HUMALOG. However, the sensitivity of the patients to insulin did change, with an increased response to insulin as the renal function declined. Some studies with human insulin have shown increased circulating levels of insulin in patients with renal impairment. Careful glucose monitoring and dose adjustments of insulin, including HUMALOG, may be necessary in patients with renal dysfunction [see Warnings and Precautions (5.5)].

                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Hepatic Impairment — Type 2 diabetic patients with impaired hepatic function showed no effect on the pharmacokinetic of HUMALOG as compared to patients with no hepatic dysfunction. However, some studies with human insulin have shown increased circulating levels of insulin in patients with liver failure. Careful glucose monitoring and dose adjustments of insulin, including HUMALOG, may be necessary in patients with hepatic dysfunction.

                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Race – The effects of race on the pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of HUMALOG have not been studied.

                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Obesity – The effect of obesity on the pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of HUMALOG has not been studied.

                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Pregnancy – The effect of pregnancy on the pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of HUMALOG has not been studied [see Use in Specific Populations (8.1)].

                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Smoking – The effect of smoking on the pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of HUMALOG has not been studied.

                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         