
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
                  Many drugs affect thyroid hormone pharmacokinetics and metabolism (e.g., synthesis, secretion, catabolism, protein binding, and target tissue response) and may alter the therapeutic response to Levothyroxine Sodium for Injection.  In addition, thyroid hormones and thyroid status have varied effects on the pharmacokinetics and actions of other drugs (see Section 12.3). 
               
               
               
                  
                     
                        Many drugs affect thyroid hormone pharmacokinetics and metabolism (e.g., absorption, synthesis, secretion, catabolism, protein binding, and target tissue response) and may alter the therapeutic response to Levothyroxine Sodium for Injection. (
                              
                                 7
                              
                           , 
                              
                                 12.3
                              
                           )
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 Antidiabetic Therapy

                     
                     
                        Addition of levothyroxine to antidiabetic or insulin therapy may result in increased antidiabetic agent or insulin requirements.  Careful monitoring of diabetic control is recommended, especially when thyroid therapy is started, changed, or discontinued.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 Oral Anticoagulants

                     
                     
                        Levothyroxine increases the response to oral anticoagulant therapy.  Therefore, a decrease in the dose of anticoagulant may be warranted with correction of the hypothyroid state or when the Levothyroxine Sodium for Injection dose is increased.  Prothrombin time should be closely monitored to permit appropriate and timely dosage adjustments.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3 Digitalis Glycosides

                     
                     
                        The therapeutic effects of digitalis glycosides may be reduced by levothyroxine.  Serum digitalis glycoside levels may be decreased when a hypothyroid patient becomes euthyroid, necessitating an increase in the dose of digitalis glycosides.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4 Antidepressant Therapy

                     
                     
                        Concurrent use of tricyclic (e.g., amitriptyline) or tetracyclic (e.g., maprotiline) antidepressants and levothyroxine may increase the therapeutic and toxic effects of both drugs, possibly due to increased receptor sensitivity to catecholamines.  Toxic effects may include increased risk of cardiac arrhythmias and CNS stimulation; onset of action of tricyclics may be accelerated. Administration of sertraline in patients stabilized on levothyroxine may result in increased levothyroxine requirements.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.5 Ketamine

                     
                     
                        Concurrent use may produce marked hypertension and tachycardia; cautious administration to patients receiving thyroid hormone therapy is recommended.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.6 Sympathomimetics

                     
                     
                        Concurrent use may increase the effects of sympathomimetics or thyroid hormone.  Thyroid hormones may increase the risk of coronary insufficiency when sympathomimetic agents are administered to patients with coronary artery disease.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.7 Drug-Laboratory Test Interactions

                     
                     
                        Changes in thyroxine binding globulin (TBG) concentration must be considered when interpreting levothyroxine and triiodothyronine values, which necessitates measurement and evaluation of unbound (free) hormone and/or determination of the free levothyroxine index. Pregnancy, infectious hepatitis, estrogens, estrogen containing oral contraceptives, and acute intermittent porphyria increase TBG concentrations.  Decreases in TBG concentrations are observed in nephrosis, severe hypoproteinemia, severe liver disease, acromegaly, and after androgen or corticosteroid therapy.  Familial hyper or hypo thyroxine binding globulinemias have been described, with the incidence of TBG deficiency approximating 1 in 9000.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         