
               
               
               DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
                  
                  Drugs or herbal products that induce certain enzymes, including CYP3A4, may decrease the effectiveness of contraceptive drug products. Counsel patients to use a back-up method or alternative method of contraception when enzyme inducers are used with Medroxyprogesterone Acetate Injectable Suspension, USP. (7.1)
                  
 

                  
                  If a woman on hormonal contraceptives takes a drug or herbal product that induces enzymes, including CYP3A4, that metabolize contraceptive hormones, counsel her to use additional contraception or a different method of contraception. Drugs or herbal products that induce such enzymes may decrease the plasma concentrations of contraceptive hormones, and may decrease the effectiveness of hormonal contraceptives. Some drugs or herbal products that may decrease the effectiveness of hormonal contraceptives include:
                  
                     barbiturates
                     bosentan
                     carbamazepine
                     felbamate
                     griseofulvin
                     oxcarbazepine
                     phenytoin
                     rifampin
                     St. John's wort
                     topiramate
                  
                  
 

                  
                  
                     HIV protease inhibitors and non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors: Significant changes (increase or decrease) in the plasma levels of progestin have been noted in some cases of co-administration of HIV protease inhibitors. Significant changes (increase or decrease) in the plasma levels of the progestin have been noted in some cases of co-administration with non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors.
                  
 

                  
                  
                     Antibiotics: There have been reports of pregnancy while taking hormonal contraceptives and antibiotics, but clinical pharmacokinetic studies have not shown consistent effects of antibiotics on plasma concentrations of synthetic steroids.
                  Consult the labeling of all concurrently-used drugs to obtain further information about interactions with hormonal contraceptives or the potential for enzyme alterations.
                  
 

                  
                  The pathologist should be advised of progestin therapy when relevant specimens are submitted.
                  The following laboratory tests may be affected by progestins including Medroxyprogesterone Acetate Injectable Suspension, USP:
                  (a)Plasma and urinary steroid levels are decreased (e.g., progesterone, estradiol, pregnanediol, testosterone, cortisol).(b)Gonadotropin levels are decreased.(c)Sex-hormone-binding-globulin concentrations are decreased.(d)Protein-bound iodine and butanol extractable protein-bound iodine may increase.
                  T
                  
                     3
                  
                  -uptake values may decrease.(e)Coagulation test values for prothrombin (Factor II), and Factors VII, VIII, IX, and X may increase.(f)Sulfobromophthalein and other liver function test values may be increased.(g)The effects of medroxyprogesterone acetate on lipid metabolism are inconsistent. Both increases and decreases in total cholesterol, triglycerides, low-density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol, and high-density lipoprotein (HDL) cholesterol have been observed in studies.
                  
 

               
               
            
         