
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  Mechanism of ActionFexofenadine hydrochloride, the major active metabolite of 
terfenadine, is an antihistamine with selective peripheral H1-receptor antagonist activity. Fexofenadine hydrochloride 
inhibited antigen-induced bronchospasm in sensitized guinea pigs and histamine 
release from peritoneal mast cells in rats. In laboratory animals, no 
anticholinergic or alpha1-adrenergic-receptor blocking 
effects were observed. Moreover, no sedative or other central nervous system 
effects were observed. Radiolabeled tissue distribution studies in rats 
indicated that fexofenadine does not cross the blood-brain barrier.
                  Pseudoephedrine hydrochloride is an orally active sympathomimetic amine and 
exerts a decongestant action on the nasal mucosa. Pseudoephedrine hydrochloride 
is recognized as an effective agent for the relief of nasal congestion due to 
allergic rhinitis. Pseudoephedrine produces peripheral effects similar to those 
of ephedrine and central effects similar to, but less intense than, 
amphetamines. It has the potential for excitatory side effects. At the 
recommended oral dose, it has little or no pressor effect in normotensive 
adults.
                  
                  PharmacokineticsThe pharmacokinetics of fexofenadine hydrochloride in subjects 
with seasonal allergic rhinitis were similar to those in healthy 
volunteers.
                  
                  AbsorptionThe pharmacokinetics of fexofenadine hydrochloride and 
pseudoephedrine hydrochloride when administered separately have been well 
characterized. Fexofenadine pharmacokinetics were linear for oral doses of 
fexofenadine hydrochloride up to a total daily dose of 240 mg (120 mg twice 
daily). Peak fexofenadine plasma concentrations were similar between adolescent 
(12–16 years of age) and adult subjects.
                  The bioavailability of fexofenadine hydrochloride and pseudoephedrine 
hydrochloride from the extended-release tablets is similar to that achieved with 
separate administration of the components. Coadministration of fexofenadine and 
pseudoephedrine does not significantly affect the bioavailability of either 
component.
                  Fexofenadine hydrochloride was rapidly absorbed following single-dose 
administration of the 60 mg fexofenadine hydrochloride/120 mg pseudoephedrine 
hydrochloride tablet with median time to mean maximum fexofenadine plasma 
concentration of 191 ng/mL occurring 2 hours post-dose. Pseudoephedrine 
hydrochloride produced a mean single-dose pseudoephedrine peak plasma 
concentration of 206 ng/mL which occurred 6 hours post-dose. Following multiple 
dosing to steady-state, a fexofenadine peak concentration of 255 ng/mL was 
observed 2 hours post-dose. Following multiple dosing to steady-state, a 
pseudoephedrine peak concentration of 411 ng/mL was observed 5 hours post-dose. 
The administration of Fexofenadine Hydrochloride and Pseudoephedrine 
Hydrochloride Extended-Release Tablets with a high fat meal decreased the 
bioavailability of fexofenadine by approximately 50% (AUC 42% and Cmax 46%). 
Time to maximum concentration (Tmax) was delayed by 50%. 
The rate or extent of pseudoephedrine absorption was not affected by food. 
Therefore, Fexofenadine Hydrochloride and Pseudoephedrine Hydrochloride 
Extended-Release Tablets should be taken on an empty stomach with water (see DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION).
                  
                  DistributionFexofenadine is 60% to 70% bound to plasma proteins, primarily 
albumin and α1-acid glycoprotein. The protein binding of 
pseudoephedrine in humans is not known. Pseudoephedrine hydrochloride is 
extensively distributed into extravascular sites (apparent volume of 
distribution between 2.6 and 3.5 L/kg).
                  
                  MetabolismApproximately 5% of the total dose of fexofenadine hydrochloride 
and less than 1% of the total oral dose of pseudoephedrine hydrochloride were 
eliminated by hepatic metabolism.
                  
                  EliminationThe mean elimination half-life of fexofenadine was 14.4 hours 
following administration of 60 mg fexofenadine hydrochloride, twice daily, to 
steady-state in healthy volunteers. Human mass balance studies documented a 
recovery of approximately 80% and 11% of the [14C] 
fexofenadine hydrochloride dose in the feces and urine, respectively. Because 
the absolute bioavailability of fexofenadine hydrochloride has not been 
established, it is unknown if the fecal component is primarily unabsorbed drug 
or the result of biliary excretion.
                  Pseudoephedrine has been shown to have a mean elimination half-life of 4–6 
hours which is dependent on urine pH. The elimination half-life is decreased at 
urine pH lower than 6 and may be increased at urine pH higher than 8.
                  
                  Special PopulationsPharmacokinetics in special populations (for renal, hepatic 
impairment, and age), obtained after a single dose of 80 mg fexofenadine 
hydrochloride, were compared to those from healthy subjects in a separate study 
of similar design.
                  
                  Effect of AgeIn older subjects (greater than or equal to 65 years old), peak plasma levels of 
fexofenadine were 99% greater than those observed in younger subjects (less than 65 
years old). Mean fexofenadine elimination half-lives were similar to those 
observed in younger subjects.
                  
                  Renally ImpairedIn subjects with mild (creatinine clearance 41–80 mL/min) to 
severe (creatinine clearance 11–40 mL/min) renal impairment, peak plasma levels 
of fexofenadine were 87% and 111% greater, respectively, and mean elimination 
half-lives were 59% and 72% longer, respectively, than observed in healthy 
volunteers. Peak plasma levels in subjects on dialysis (creatinine clearance less than or equal to 10 
mL/min) were 82% greater and half-life was 31% longer than observed in healthy 
volunteers.
                  No data are available on the pharmacokinetics of pseudoephedrine in 
renally-impaired subjects. However, most of the oral dose of pseudoephedrine 
hydrochloride (43–96%) is excreted unchanged in the urine. A decrease in renal 
function is, therefore, likely to decrease the clearance of pseudoephedrine 
significantly, thus prolonging the half-life and resulting in accumulation.
                  Based on increases in bioavailability and half-life of fexofenadine 
hydrochloride and pseudoephedrine hydrochloride, a dose of one tablet once daily 
is recommended as the starting dose in patients with decreased renal function 
(see DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION).
                  
                  Hepatically ImpairedThe pharmacokinetics of fexofenadine hydrochloride in subjects 
with hepatic disease did not differ substantially from that observed in healthy 
volunteers. The effect on pseudoephedrine pharmacokinetics is unknown.
                  
                  Effect of GenderAcross several trials, no clinically significant gender-related 
differences were observed in the pharmacokinetics of fexofenadine 
hydrochloride.
                  
                  Pharmacodynamics
                  Wheal and FlareHuman histamine skin wheal and flare studies following single and 
twice daily doses of 20 mg and 40 mg fexofenadine hydrochloride demonstrated 
that the drug exhibits an antihistamine effect by 1 hour, achieves maximum 
effect at 2–3 hours, and an effect is still seen at 12 hours. There was no 
evidence of tolerance to these effects after 28 days of dosing. The clinical 
significance of these observations is unknown.
                  
                  Effects on QTc
                  In dogs (30 mg/kg orally twice daily for 5 days) and rabbits (10 
mg/kg intravenously over 1 hour), fexofenadine hydrochloride did not prolong 
QTc at plasma concentrations that were at least 17 and 38 
times, respectively, the therapeutic plasma concentrations in man (based on a 60 
mg twice daily fexofenadine hydrochloride dose). No effect was observed on 
calcium channel current, delayed K+ channel current, or 
action potential duration in guinea pig myocytes, Na+ 
current in rat neonatal myocytes, or on the delayed rectifier K+ channel cloned from human heart at concentrations up to 1 × 
10-5 M of fexofenadine. This concentration was at least 
21 times the therapeutic plasma concentration in man (based on a 60 mg twice 
daily fexofenadine hydrochloride dose).
                  No statistically significant increase in mean QTc 
interval compared to placebo was observed in 714 subjects with seasonal allergic 
rhinitis given fexofenadine hydrochloride capsules in doses of 60 mg to 240 mg 
twice daily for 2 weeks or in 40 healthy volunteers given fexofenadine 
hydrochloride as an oral solution at doses up to 400 mg twice daily for 6 
days.
                  A 1-year study designed to evaluate safety and tolerability of 240 mg of 
fexofenadine hydrochloride (n=240) compared to placebo (n=237) in healthy 
volunteers, did not reveal a statistically significant increase in the mean 
QTc interval for the fexofenadine hydrochloride treated 
group when evaluated pretreatment and after 1, 2, 3, 6, 9, and 12 months of 
treatment.
                  Administration of the 60 mg fexofenadine hydrochloride/120 mg pseudoephedrine 
hydrochloride combination tablet for approximately 2 weeks to 213 subjects with 
seasonal allergic rhinitis demonstrated no statistically significant increase in 
the mean QTc interval compared to fexofenadine 
hydrochloride administered alone (60 mg twice daily, n=215), or compared to 
pseudoephedrine hydrochloride (120 mg twice daily, n=215) administered 
alone.
                  
                  Clinical StudiesIn a 2-week, multicenter, randomized, double-blind, 
active-controlled trial in subjects 12–65 years of age with seasonal allergic 
rhinitis due to ragweed allergy (n=651), the 60 mg fexofenadine 
hydrochloride/120 mg pseudoephedrine hydrochloride combination tablet 
administered twice daily significantly reduced the intensity of sneezing, 
rhinorrhea, itchy nose/palate/throat, itchy/watery/red eyes, and nasal 
congestion.
                  In three, 2-week, multicenter, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled 
trials in subjects 12–68 years of age with seasonal allergic rhinitis (n=1634), 
fexofenadine hydrochloride 60 mg twice daily significantly reduced total symptom 
scores (the sum of the individual scores for sneezing, rhinorrhea, itchy 
nose/palate/throat, itchy/watery/red eyes) compared to placebo. Statistically 
significant reductions in symptom scores were observed following the first 60 mg 
dose, with the effect maintained throughout the 12-hour interval. In general, 
there was no additional reduction in total symptom scores with higher doses of 
fexofenadine hydrochloride up to 240 mg twice daily. Although the number of 
subjects in some of the subgroups was small, there were no significant 
differences in the effect of fexofenadine hydrochloride across subgroups of 
subjects defined by gender, age, and race. Onset of action for reduction in 
total symptom scores, excluding nasal congestion, was observed at 60 minutes 
compared to placebo following a single 60 mg fexofenadine hydrochloride dose 
administered to subjects with seasonal allergic rhinitis who were exposed to 
ragweed pollen in an environmental exposure unit.
               
               
            
         