
               
               
               
                  7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           Mixed agonists/antagonists and partial agonist analgesics: Avoid use with ZOHYDRO ER because they may reduce analgesic effect of ZOHYDRO ER or precipitate withdrawal symptoms. (7.4)
                           The use of MAO inhibitors or tricyclic antidepressants with ZOHYDRO ER may increase the effect of either the antidepressant or ZOHYDRO ER. (7.5)
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        7.1 Alcohol
                     
                     
                        Concomitant use of alcohol with ZOHYDRO ER can result in an increase of hydrocodone plasma levels and potentially fatal overdose of hydrocodone. Instruct patients not to consume alcoholic beverages or use prescription or non-prescription products containing alcohol while on ZOHYDRO ER therapy [see 
                           
                              Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)
                           
                           ].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        7.2 CNS Depressants
                     
                     
                        The concomitant use of ZOHYDRO ER with other CNS depressants including sedatives, hypnotics, tranquilizers, general anesthetics, phenothiazines, other opioids, and alcohol, can increase the risk of respiratory depression, profound sedation, coma, or death. Monitor patients receiving CNS depressants and ZOHYDRO ER for signs of respiratory depression, sedation, and hypotension. 
                        When combined therapy with any of the above medications is considered, the dose of one or both agents should be reduced [see Dosage and Administration (2.1) and 
                           
                              Warnings and Precautions (5.4)
                           
                           ]. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        7.3 Drugs
Affecting Cytochrome P450 Isoenzymes
                     
                     
                        
                           
                              Inhibitors of CYP3A4 and 2D6 

                              
                           Because the CYP3A4 isoenzyme plays a major role in the metabolism of hydrocodone, drugs that inhibit CYP3A4 activity may cause decreased clearance of hydrocodone which could lead to an increase in hydrocodone plasma concentrations and result in increased or prolonged opioid effects. These effects could be more pronounced with concomitant use of CYP2D6 and 3A4 inhibitors. If co-administration with ZOHYDRO ER is necessary, monitor patients for respiratory depression and sedation at frequent intervals and consider dose adjustments until stable drug effects are achieved [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)]. 
                        
                        
                           
                              Inducers of CYP3A4

                              
                           Cytochrome P450 3A4 inducers may induce the metabolism of hydrocodone and, therefore, may cause increased clearance of the drug which could lead to a decrease in hydrocodone plasma concentrations, lack of efficacy or, possibly, development of a withdrawal syndrome in a patient who had developed physical dependence to hydrocodone. If co-administration with ZOHYDRO ER is necessary, monitor for signs of opioid withdrawal and consider dose adjustments until stable drug effects are achieved [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                        
                         After stopping the treatment of a CYP3A4 inducer, as the effects of the inducer decline, the hydrocodone plasma concentration will increase which could increase or prolong both the therapeutic and adverse effects, and may cause serious respiratory depression [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        7.4 Interactions
with Mixed Agonist/Antagonist Opioid Analgesics
                     
                     
                        Mixed agonist/antagonist (i.e., pentazocine, nalbuphine, butorphanol) and partial agonist (buprenorphine) analgesics may reduce the analgesic effect of hydrocodone or precipitate withdrawal symptoms. Avoid the use of mixed agonist/antagonist and partial agonist analgesics in patients receiving ZOHYDRO ER.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        7.5 Monoamine
Oxidase Inhibitors (MAOI)
                     
                     
                        The effects of opioid analgesics may be potentiated by MAOIs. ZOHYDRO ER is not recommended for use in patients who have received MAO inhibitors within 14 days as severe and unpredictable potentiation by MAO inhibitors has been reported with opioid analgesics. No specific interaction between hydrocodone and MAO inhibitors has been observed, but caution in the use of any opioid in patients taking this class of drugs is appropriate.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        7.6
                         Anticholinergics
                     
                     
                        Anticholinergics or other drugs with anticholinergic activity when used concurrently with opioid analgesics may increase the risk of urinary retention or severe constipation, which may lead to paralytic ileus. Monitor patients for signs of urinary retention and constipation in addition to respiratory and central nervous system depression when ZOHYDRO ER is used concurrently with anticholinergic drugs.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         