
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  PROMETRIUM Capsules are an oral dosage form of micronized 
progesterone which is chemically identical to progesterone of ovarian origin. 
The oral bioavailability of progesterone is increased through 
micronization.
                  
                  Pharmacokinetics
                  
                     Absorption: After oral 
administration of progesterone as a micronized soft-gelatin capsule formulation, 
maximum serum concentrations were attained within 3 hours. The absolute 
bioavailability of micronized progesterone is not known. Table 
1 summarizes the mean pharmacokinetic parameters in postmenopausal women 
after five oral daily doses of PROMETRIUM Capsules 100 mg as a micronized 
soft-gelatin capsule formulation.
                  
                  


                  


a Mean ± S.D.
                   Serum progesterone concentrations appeared linear and dose proportional 
following multiple dose administration of PROMETRIUM Capsules 100 mg over the 
dose range 100 mg/day to 300 mg/day in postmenopausal women. Although doses 
greater than 300 mg/day were not studied in females, serum concentrations from a 
study in male volunteers appeared linear and dose proportional between 
100 mg/day and 400 mg/day. The pharmacokinetic parameters in male volunteers 
were generally consistent with those seen in postmenopausal women.
                  
                  
                     Distribution: Progesterone is 
approximately 96% to 99% bound to serum proteins, primarily to serum albumin 
(50% to 54%) and transcortin (43% to 48%).
                  
                  
                     Metabolism: Progesterone is 
metabolized primarily by the liver largely to pregnanediols and pregnanolones. 
Pregnanediols and pregnanolones are conjugated in the liver to glucuronide and 
sulfate metabolites. Progesterone metabolites which are excreted in the bile may 
be deconjugated and may be further metabolized in the gut via reduction, 
dehydroxylation, and epimerization.
                  
                  
                     Excretion: The glucuronide and 
sulfate conjugates of pregnanediol and pregnanolone are excreted in the bile and 
urine. Progesterone metabolites which are excreted in the bile may undergo 
enterohepatic recycling or may be excreted in the feces.
                  
                  
                     Special Populations: The 
pharmacokinetics of PROMETRIUM Capsules have not been assessed in low body 
weight or obese patients.
                  
                  
                     Race: There is 
insufficient information available from trials conducted with PROMETRIUM 
Capsules to compare progesterone pharmacokinetics in different racial 
groups.
                  
                  
                     Hepatic Insufficiency: No 
formal studies have evaluated the effect of hepatic disease on the disposition 
of progesterone. However, since progesterone is metabolized by the liver, use in 
patients with severe liver dysfunction or disease is contraindicated. (See 
                        CONTRAINDICATIONS
                     .) If treatment with 
progesterone is indicated in patients with mild to moderate hepatic dysfunction, 
these patients should be monitored carefully.
                  
                  
                     Renal Insufficiency: No 
formal studies have evaluated the effect of renal disease on the disposition of 
progesterone. Since progesterone metabolites are eliminated mainly by the 
kidneys, PROMETRIUM Capsules should be used with caution and only with careful 
monitoring in patients with renal dysfunction. (See 
                        PRECAUTIONS
                     .)
                  
                  
                     Food–Drug Interaction: 
Concomitant food ingestion increased the bioavailability of PROMETRIUM Capsules 
relative to a fasting state when administered to postmenopausal women at a dose 
of 200 mg.
               
               
               
                  
                     image of figure 1
                     
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           Drug–Drug Interaction: The 
metabolism of progesterone by human liver microsomes was inhibited by 
ketoconazole (IC50 less than 0.1 μM). Ketoconazole is a known 
inhibitor of cytochrome P450 3A4, hence these data suggest that ketoconazole or 
other known inhibitors of this enzyme may increase the bioavailability of 
progesterone. The clinical relevance of the in vitro 
findings is unknown.
                        Coadministration of conjugated estrogens and PROMETRIUM Capsules to 29 
postmenopausal women over a 12-day period resulted in an increase in total 
estrone concentrations (Cmax 3.68 ng/mL to 4.93 ng/mL) and total equilin 
concentrations (Cmax 2.27 ng/mL to 3.22 ng/mL) and a decrease in circulating 17β 
estradiol concentrations (Cmax 0.037 ng/mL to 0.030 ng/mL). The half-life of the 
conjugated estrogens was similar with coadministration of PROMETRIUM Capsules. 
Table 2 summarizes the pharmacokinetic parameters.
                        
                        


                        


a Total estrogens is the sume of conjugated and unconjugated estrogen.

                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        Clinical Studies
                        
                           Endometrial Protection: In a 
randomized, double-blind clinical trial, 358 postmenopausal women, each with an 
intact uterus, received treatment for up to 36 months. The treatment groups 
were: PROMETRIUM Capsules at the dose of 200 mg/day for 12 days per 28-day cycle 
in combination with conjugated estrogens 0.625 mg/day (n=120); conjugated 
estrogens 0.625 mg/day only (n=119); or placebo (n=119). The subjects in all 
three treatment groups were primarily Caucasian women (87% or more of each 
group). The results for the incidence of endometrial hyperplasia in women 
receiving up to 3 years of treatment are shown in  Table 3. A 
comparison of the PROMETRIUM Capsules plus conjugated estrogens treatment group 
to the conjugated estrogens only group showed a significantly lower rate of 
hyperplasia (6% combination product vs. 64% estrogen alone) in the PROMETRIUM 
Capsules plus conjugated estrogens treatment group throughout 36 months of 
treatment.
                        
                        

a Most advanced result to least advanced result:



  Adenocarcinoma > atypical hyperplasia > complex hyperplasia > simple 
hyperplasia

                        
The times to diagnosis of endometrial hyperplasia over 36 months of treatment 
are shown in  Figure 1. This figure illustrates 
graphically that the proportion of patients with hyperplasia was significantly 
greater for the conjugated estrogens group (64%) compared to the conjugated 
estrogens plus PROMETRIUM Capsules group (6%).

                        
                        

                        Figure 1 Time to Hyperplasia in Women Receiving up to 36 Months of Treatment
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        The discontinuation rates due to hyperplasia over the 36 months of treatment 
are as shown in Table 4. For any degree of hyperplasia, the 
discontinuation rate for patients who received conjugated estrogens plus 
PROMETRIUM Capsules was similar to that of the placebo only group, while the 
discontinuation rate for patients who received conjugated estrogens alone was 
significantly higher. Women who permanently discontinued treatment due to 
hyperplasia were similar in demographics to the overall study population.
                        
                        


                        


In the same 3-year clinical trial, postmenopausal women were treated with 
PROMETRIUM Capsules in combination with conjugated estrogens, conjugated 
estrogens only, or placebo. There was no statistically significant difference 
between the PROMETRIUM Capsules plus conjugated estrogens group and the 
conjugated estrogens only group in increases of HDL-C and triglycerides, or in 
decreases of LDL-C. The changes observed in lipid profiles are shown in Table 5.
                        
                        


                        


a There are no significant changes (p less than 0.05) from conjugated estrogens values.

                        b  Number of subjects (n) varies by parameter.

                        c  Computed from log transformed data.

                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           Secondary Amenorrhea: In a single-center, 
randomized, double-blind clinical study that included premenopausal women with 
secondary amenorrhea for at least 90 days, administration of 10 days of 
PROMETRIUM Capsules therapy resulted in 80% of women experiencing withdrawal 
bleeding within 7 days of the last dose of PROMETRIUM Capsules, 300 mg/day 
(n=20), compared to 10% of women experiencing withdrawal bleeding in the placebo 
group (n=21).
                        The rate of secretory transformation was evaluated in a multicenter, 
randomized, double-blind clinical study in estrogen-primed postmenopausal women. 
PROMETRIUM Capsules administered orally for 10 days at 400 mg/day (n=22) induced 
complete secretory changes in the endometrium in 45% of women compared to 0% in 
the placebo group (n=23).
                        
                        Women's Health Initiative StudiesThe Women's Health Initiative (WHI) enrolled a total of 27,000 
predominantly healthy postmenopausal women to assess the risks and benefits of 
either the use of oral 0.625 mg conjugated estrogens (CE) per day alone or the 
use of oral 0.625 mg conjugated estrogens plus 2.5 mg medroxyprogesterone 
acetate (MPA) per day compared to placebo in the prevention of certain chronic 
diseases. The primary endpoint was the incidence of coronary heart disease (CHD) 
(nonfatal myocardial infarction and CHD death), with invasive breast cancer as 
the primary adverse outcome studied. A “global index” included the earliest 
occurrence of CHD, invasive breast cancer, stroke, pulmonary embolism (PE), 
endometrial cancer, colorectal cancer, hip fracture, or death due to other 
cause. The study did not evaluate the effects of CE or CE/MPA on menopausal 
symptoms.
                        The CE/MPA substudy was stopped early because, according to the predefined 
stopping rule, the increased risk of breast cancer and cardiovascular events 
exceeded the specified benefits included in the “global index.” Results of the 
CE/MPA substudy, which included 16,608 women (average age of 63 years, range 50 
to 79; 83.9% White, 6.5% Black, 5.5% Hispanic), after an average follow-up of 
5.2 years are presented in Table 6 below.
                        
                        


                        


a  adapted from JAMA, 2002; 288:321-333

                        b  includes metastatic and non-metastatic breast cancer with the exception of in situ breast cancer

                        c  a subset of the events was combined in a “global index,” defined as the earliest 
occurrence of CHD events, invasive breast cancer, stroke, pulmonary embolism, 
endometrial cancer, colorectal cancer, hip fracture, or death due to other 
causes

                        d  not included in Global Index
*  nominal confidence intervals unadjusted for multiple looks and multiple comparisons
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        For those outcomes included in the "global index," the absolute excess risks 
per 10,000 women-years in the group treated with CE/MPA were 7 more CHD events, 
8 more strokes, 8 more PEs, and 8 more invasive breast cancers, while the 
absolute risk reductions per 10,000 women-years were 6 fewer colorectal cancers 
and 5 fewer hip fractures. The absolute excess risk of events included in the 
“global index” was 19 per 10,000 women-years. There was no difference between 
the groups in terms of all-cause mortality. (See 
                              BOXED WARNINGS, WARNINGS
                           , 
and 
                              PRECAUTIONS
                           .)
                        
                        Women's Health Initiative Memory StudyThe Women's Health Initiative Memory Study (WHIMS), a substudy of 
WHI, enrolled 4,532 predominantly healthy postmenopausal women 65 years of age 
and older (47% were age 65 to 69 years, 35% were 70 to 74 years, and 18% were 75 
years of age and older) to evaluate the effects of CE/MPA (0.625 mg conjugated 
estrogens plus 2.5 mg medroxyprogesterone acetate) on the incidence of probable 
dementia (primary outcome) compared with placebo.
                        After an average follow-up of 4 years, 40 women in the estrogen/progestin 
group (45 per 10,000 women-years) and 21 in the placebo group (22 per 10,000 
women-years) were diagnosed with probable dementia. The relative risk of 
probable dementia in the hormone therapy group was 2.05 (95% CI, 1.21 to 3.48) 
compared to placebo. Differences between groups became apparent in the first 
year of treatment. It is unknown whether these findings apply to younger 
postmenopausal women. (See 
                              BOXED 
WARNINGS and WARNINGS, Dementia
                           .)
                     
                  
               
            
         