
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  There is no specific evidence which clearly establishes the mechanism by which ergoloid mesylates preparations produce mental effects, nor is there conclusive evidence that the drug particularly affects cerebral arteriosclerosis or cerebrovascular insufficiency.
               
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Pharmacokinetic Properties
                     
                        Pharmacokinetic studies have been performed in normal volunteers with the help of radiolabelled drug as well as employing a specific radioimmunoassay technique. From the urinary excretion quotient of orally and intravenously administered tritium-labelled ergoloid mesylates the absorption of ergoloid was calculated to be 25%. Following oral administration, peak levels of 0.5 ngEq/mL/mg were achieved within 1.5–3 hr. Bioavailability studies with the specific radioimmunoassay confirm that ergoloid is rapidly absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract, with mean peak levels of 0.05–0.13 ng/mL/mg (with extremes of 0.03 and 0.18 ng/mL/mg) achieved within 0.6–1.3 hr (with extremes of 0.4 and 2.8 hr). The finding of lower peak levels of ergoloid compared to the total drug-metabolite composite is consistent with a considerable first pass liver metabolism, with less than 50% of the therapeutic moiety reaching the systemic circulation. The elimination of radioactivity, representing ergoloid plus metabolites bearing the radiolabel, was biphasic with half-lives of 4 and 13 hr. The mean half-life of unchanged ergoloid in plasma is about 2.6–5.1 hr; after 3 half-lives ergoloid plasma levels are less than 10% of radioactivity levels, and by 24 hr no ergoloid is detectable.
                        Bioequivalence studies were performed comparing ergoloid mesylates oral tablets (administered orally) with ergoloid mesylates sublingual tablets (administered sublingually). The oral tablet and sublingual tablet were shown to be bioequivalent.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         