
               
               
               12  CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1  Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Angiotensin II is formed from angiotensin I in a reaction catalyzed
by angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE, kininase II). Angiotensin II
is the principal pressor agent of the renin-angiotensin system, with
effects that include vasoconstriction, stimulation of synthesis and
release of aldosterone, cardiac stimulation, and renal reabsorption
of sodium.  Telmisartan blocks the vasoconstrictor and aldosterone-secreting
effects of angiotensin II by selectively blocking the binding of angiotensin
II to the AT1 receptor in many tissues, such
as vascular smooth muscle and the adrenal gland.  Its action is therefore
independent of the pathways for angiotensin II synthesis.
                        There is also an AT2 receptor found in many tissues, but AT2 is
not known to be associated with cardiovascular homeostasis. Telmisartan
has much greater affinity (>3,000 fold) for the AT1 receptor than for the AT2 receptor.
                        Blockade of the renin-angiotensin system
with ACE inhibitors, which inhibit the biosynthesis of angiotensin
II from angiotensin I, is widely used in the treatment of hypertension.
ACE inhibitors also inhibit the degradation of bradykinin, a reaction
also catalyzed by ACE. Because telmisartan does not inhibit ACE (kininase
II), it does not affect the response to bradykinin. Whether this difference
has clinical relevance is not yet known. Telmisartan does not bind
to or block other hormone receptors or ion channels known to be important
in cardiovascular regulation.
                        Blockade of the angiotensin II receptor inhibits the negative regulatory
feedback of angiotensin II on renin secretion, but the resulting increased
plasma renin activity and angiotensin II circulating levels do not
overcome the effect of telmisartan on blood pressure.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2  Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        In normal volunteers, a dose of telmisartan 80 mg inhibited the pressor
response to an intravenous infusion of angiotensin II by about 90%
at peak plasma concentrations with approximately 40% inhibition persisting
for 24 hours.
                        Plasma concentration
of angiotensin II and plasma renin activity (PRA) increased in a dose-dependent
manner after single administration of telmisartan to healthy subjects
and repeated administration to hypertensive patients. The once-daily
administration of up to 80 mg telmisartan to healthy subjects did
not influence plasma aldosterone concentrations. In multiple dose
studies with hypertensive patients, there were no clinically significant
changes in electrolytes (serum potassium or sodium), or in metabolic
function (including serum levels of cholesterol, triglycerides, HDL,
LDL, glucose, or uric acid).
                        In
30 hypertensive patients with normal renal function treated for 8
weeks with telmisartan 80 mg or telmisartan 80 mg in combination with
hydrochlorothiazide 12.5 mg, there were no clinically significant
changes from baseline in renal blood flow, glomerular filtration rate,
filtration fraction, renovascular resistance, or creatinine clearance.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3  Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        Following oral administration, peak concentrations (Cmax) of telmisartan are reached in 0.5 to 1 hour after dosing. Food
slightly reduces the bioavailability of telmisartan, with a reduction
in the area under the plasma concentration-time curve (AUC) of about
6% with the 40 mg tablet and about 20% after a 160 mg dose. The absolute
bioavailability of telmisartan is dose dependent. At 40 and 160 mg
the bioavailability was 42% and 58%, respectively. The pharmacokinetics
of orally administered telmisartan are nonlinear over the dose range
20 to 160 mg, with greater than proportional increases of plasma concentrations
(Cmax and AUC) with increasing doses. Telmisartan
shows bi-exponential decay kinetics with a terminal elimination half
life of approximately 24 hours. Trough plasma concentrations of telmisartan
with once daily dosing are about 10% to 25% of peak plasma concentrations.
Telmisartan has an accumulation index in plasma of 1.5 to 2.0 upon
repeated once daily dosing.
                        
                           
                              Distribution
                           
                           
Telmisartan
is highly bound to plasma proteins (>99.5%), mainly albumin and α1 - acid glycoprotein. Plasma protein binding is constant
over the concentration range achieved with recommended doses. The
volume of distribution for telmisartan is approximately 500 liters
indicating additional tissue binding.
                        
                           
                              Metabolism and Elimination
                           
                           
Following either intravenous or oral administration
of 14C-labeled telmisartan, most of the
administered dose (>97%) was eliminated unchanged in feces via biliary
excretion; only minute amounts were found in the urine (0.91% and
0.49% of total radioactivity, respectively).
                        Telmisartan is metabolized by conjugation to form a
pharmacologically inactive acyl glucuronide; the glucuronide of the
parent compound is the only metabolite that has been identified in
human plasma and urine. After a single dose, the glucuronide represents
approximately 11% of the measured radioactivity in plasma. The cytochrome
P450 isoenzymes are not involved in the metabolism of telmisartan.
                        Total plasma clearance of telmisartan is
>800 mL/min. Terminal half-life and total clearance appear to be independent
of dose.
                        
                           
                              Specific
Populations
                           
                           

                           
                              Renal
Insufficiency
                           
                           
No dosage adjustment
is necessary in patients with decreased renal function. Telmisartan
is not removed from blood by hemofiltration 
                              [see
Warnings and Precautions (5.5) and
Dosage and Administration (2.1)]
                           .

                           

                           
                              Hepatic Insufficiency
                           
                           
In patients with hepatic insufficiency, plasma
concentrations of telmisartan are increased, and absolute bioavailability
approaches 100% 
                              [see Warnings and Precautions (5.4) and Use in Specific Populations (8.6)]
                           .

                           

                           
                              Gender
                           
                           
Plasma
concentrations of telmisartan are generally 2 to 3 times higher in
females than in males. In clinical trials, however, no significant
increases in blood pressure response or in the incidence of orthostatic
hypotension were found in women. No dosage adjustment is necessary.

                           

                           
                              Geriatric Patients
                           
                           
The pharmacokinetics of telmisartan do not differ between
the elderly and those younger than 65 years 
                              [see
Dosage and Administration (2.1)]
                           .

                           

                           
                              Pediatric
Patients
                           
                           
Telmisartan pharmacokinetics
have not been investigated in patients <18 years of age.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         