
               
               
               12. CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Cefixime is a semisynthetic cephalosporin antibacterial drug [see Microbiology
                           (12.4)].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        Suprax chewable tablets are bioequivalent to oral suspension. 
                        Suprax tablets and suspension, given orally, are about 40% to 50% absorbed whether administered with or without food; however, time to maximal absorption is increased approximately 0.8 hours when administered with food. A single 200 mg tablet of cefixime produces an average peak serum concentration of approximately 2 mcg/mL (range 1 to 4 mcg/mL); a single 400 mg tablet produces an average peak concentration of approximately 3.7 mcg/mL (range 1.3 to 7.7 mcg/mL). The oral suspension produces average peak concentrations approximately 25% to 50% higher than the tablets, when tested in normal adult volunteers. Two hundred and 400 mg doses of oral suspension produce average peak concentrations of 3 mcg/mL (range 1 to 4.5 mcg/mL) and 4.6 mcg/mL (range 1.9 to 7.7 mcg/mL), respectively, when tested in normal adult volunteers. The area under the time versus concentration curve (AUC) is greater by approximately 10% to 25% with the oral suspension than with the tablet after doses of 100 to 400 mg, when tested in normal adult volunteers. This increased absorption should be taken into consideration if the oral suspension is to be substituted for the tablet. Because of the lack of bioequivalence, tablets should not be substituted for oral suspension in the treatment of otitis media [See DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION (2
                           
                           )]. Cross-over studies of tablet versus suspension have not been performed in children.
                        The 400 mg capsule is bioequivalent to the 400 mg tablet under fasting conditions. However, food reduces the absorption following administration of the capsule by approximately 15% based on AUC and 25% based on Cmax.
                        Peak serum concentrations occur between 2 and 6 hours following oral administration of a single 200 mg tablet, a single 400 mg tablet or 400 mg of cefixime suspension. Peak serum concentrations occur between 2 and 5 hours following a single administration of 200 mg of suspension. Peak serum concentrations occur between 3 and 8 hours following oral administration of a single 400 mg capsule.
                        
                           
                              Distribution
                           
                        
                        Serum protein binding is concentration independent with a bound fraction of approximately 65%. In a multiple dose study conducted with a research formulation which is less bioavailable than the tablet or suspension, there was little accumulation of drug in serum or urine after dosing for 14 days. Adequate data on CSF levels of cefixime are not available.
                        
                           
                              Metabolism and Excretion
                           
                        
                        There is no evidence of metabolism of cefixime in vivo. Approximately 50% of the absorbed dose is excreted unchanged in the urine in 24 hours. In animal studies, it was noted that cefixime is also excreted in the bile in excess of 10% of the administered dose. The serum half-life of cefixime in healthy subjects is independent of dosage form and averages 3 to 4 hours but may range up to 9 hours in some normal volunteers.
                        
                           
                              Special Populations
                           
                        
                        
                           
                              Geriatrics: 
                           Average AUCs at steady state in elderly patients are approximately 40% higher than average AUCs in other healthy adults. Differences in the pharmacokinetic parameters between 12 young and 12 elderly subjects who received 400 mg of cefixime once daily for 5 days are summarized as follows:
                        


                        


However, these increases were not clinically significant [See DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION
                           (2)].  
                        
                           
                              Renal Impairment: 
                           In subjects with moderate impairment of renal function (20 to 40 mL/min creatinine clearance), the average serum half-life of cefixime is prolonged to 6.4 hours. In severe renal impairment (5 to 20 mL/min creatinine clearance), the half-life increased to an average of 11.5 hours. The drug is not cleared significantly from the blood by hemodialysis or peritoneal dialysis. However, a study indicated that with doses of 400 mg, patients undergoing hemodialysis have similar blood profiles as subjects with creatinine clearances of 21 to 60 mL/min.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.4 Microbiology
                     
                        Mechanism of Action
                        Bactericidal action of cefixime results from inhibition of cell-wall synthesis. 
                        Cefixime has been shown to be active against most isolates of the following bacteria both in vitro and in clinical infections [see INDICATIONS AND USAGE (1)]:
                        Gram-positive bacteria
                        
                           Streptococcus pneumoniae
                        
                        
                           Streptococcus pyogenes
                        
                        Gram-negative bacteria
                        
                           Haemophilus influenzae
                        
                        
                           Moraxella catarrhalis
                        
                        
                           Escherichia coli
                        
                        
                           Proteus mirabilis
                        
                        
                           Neisseria gonorrhoeae
                        
                        The following in vitro data are available, but their clinical significance is unknown. Suprax exhibits in vitro MICs of 1 mcg/mL or less against most (≥ 90%) isolates of the following bacteria; however, the safety and effectiveness of Suprax in treating clinical infections due to these bacteria have not been established in adequate and well-controlled clinical trials. 
                        Gram-positive bacteria
                        
                           Streptococcus agalactiae
                        
                        Gram-negative bacteria
                        
                           Haemophilus parainfluenzae
                        
                        
                           Proteus vulgaris
                        
                        
                           Klebsiella pneumoniae
                        
                        
                           Klebsiella oxytoca
                        
                        
                           Pasteurella multocida
                        
                        
                           Providencia species
                        
                           Salmonella species
                        
                           Shigella species
                        
                           Citrobacter amalonaticus
                        
                        
                           Citrobacter diversus
                        
                        
                           Serratia marcescens
                        
                        
                           
                              Susceptibility
                              Tests Methods
                           
                        
                        When available, the clinical microbiology laboratory should provide the results of in vitro susceptibility test results for antimicrobial drugs used in resident hospitals to the physician as periodic reports that describe the susceptibility profile of nosocomial and community-acquired pathogens. These reports should aid the physician in selecting an antibacterial drug product for treatment.
                        
                           
                              Dilution Techniques: 
                           Quantitative methods are used to determine the minimum inhibitory concentrations (MICs). These MICs provide estimates of the susceptibility of bacteria to antimicrobial compounds. The MICs should be determined using standardized test methods 1,2 (broth, and/or agar). The MIC values should be interpreted according to the criteria in Table 3.
                        
                           
                              Diffusion Techniques: 
                           Quantitative methods that require measurement of zone diameters can also provide reproducible estimates of the susceptibility of bacteria to antimicrobial compounds. The zone size provides an estimate of the susceptibility of bacteria to antimicrobial compounds. The zone size should be determined using standardized method.2,3 This procedure uses paper disks impregnated with 5 mcg of cefixime to test the susceptibility of bacteria to cefixime. The disk diffusion interpretive criteria are provided in Table 3.  
                        


                        


A report of "Susceptible" indicates that the antimicrobial is likely to inhibit growth of the pathogen if the antimicrobial compound reaches the concentration at the infection site necessary to inhibit growth of the pathogen. A report of "Intermediate" indicates that the result should be considered equivocal, and if the microorganism is not fully susceptible to alternative clinically feasible drugs, the test should be repeated. This category implies possible clinical applicability in body sites where the drug is physiologically concentrated. This category also provides a buffer zone that prevents small uncontrolled technical factors from causing major discrepancies in interpretation. A report of "Resistant" indicates that the antimicrobial is not likely to inhibit growth of the pathogen if the antimicrobial compound reaches the concentrations usually achievable at the infection site; other therapy should be selected.
                        
                           
                              Quality Control
                           
                        
                        Standardized susceptibility test procedures require the use of laboratory controls to monitor and ensure the accuracy and precision of supplies and reagents used in the assay, and the techniques of the individuals performing the test.1, 2, 3 The standard cefixime powder should provide the following range of MIC values provided in Table 4. For the diffusion technique using the 5-mcg cefixime disk the criteria provided in Table 4 should be achieved.
                        


