
               
               
               
                  7     DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  No clinically significant pharmacokinetic interactions were observed when Diovan (valsartan) was coadministered with amlodipine, atenolol, cimetidine, digoxin, furosemide, glyburide, hydrochlorothiazide, or indomethacin. The valsartan-atenolol combination was more antihypertensive than either component, but it did not lower the heart rate more than atenolol alone.
                  Coadministration of valsartan and warfarin did not change the pharmacokinetics of valsartan or the time-course of the anticoagulant properties of warfarin.
                   metabolism studies indicate that CYP 450 mediated drug interactions between valsartan and coadministered drugs are unlikely because of the low extent of metabolism .
                            CYP 450 Interactions: In vitro
                     [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)]
                  
                  The results from an study with human liver tissue indicate that valsartan is a substrate of the hepatic uptake transporter OATP1B1 and the hepatic efflux transporter MRP2. Coadministration of inhibitors of the uptake transporter (rifampin, cyclosporine) or efflux transporter (ritonavir) may increase the systemic exposure to valsartan.
                            Transporters:
                      
                     in vitro
                  
                  Concomitant use of valsartan with other agents that block the renin-angiotensin system, potassium sparing diuretics (e.g. spironolactone, triamterene, amiloride), potassium supplements, or salt substitutes containing potassium may lead to increases in serum potassium and in heart failure patients to increases in serum creatinine. If co-medication is considered necessary, monitoring of serum potassium is advisable.
                            Potassium:
                  
                  In patients who are elderly, volume-depleted (including those on diuretic therapy), or with compromised renal function, coadministration of NSAIDs, including selective COX-2 inhibitors, with angiotensin II receptor antagonists, including valsartan, may result in deterioration of renal function, including possible acute renal failure.  These effects are usually reversible.  Monitor renal function periodically in patients receiving valsartan and NSAID therapy.
                            Non-Steroidal Anti-Inflammatory Agents including Selective Cyclooxygenase-2 Inhibitors (COX-2 Inhibitors):
                  
                  The antihypertensive effect of angiotensin II receptor antagonists, including valsartan may be attenuated by NSAIDs including selective COX-2 inhibitors.
                  Dual blockade of the RAS with angiotensin receptor blockers, ACE inhibitors, or aliskiren is associated with increased risks of hypotension, hyperkalemia, and changes in renal function (including acute renal failure) compared to monotherapy. Closely monitor blood pressure, renal function and electrolytes in patients on Diovan and other agents that affect the RAS.
                            Dual Blockade of the Renin-Angiotensin System (RAS):
                  
                  Do not coadminister aliskiren with Diovan in patients with diabetes.  Avoid use of aliskiren with Diovan in patients with renal impairment (GFR <60 mL/min).
                  Increases in serum lithium concentrations and lithium toxicity have been reported during concomitant administration of lithium with angiotensin II receptor antagonists, including Diovan. Monitor serum lithium levels during concomitant use.
                            Lithium:
                  
               
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           Potassium sparing diuretics, potassium supplements or salt substitutes may lead to increases in serum potassium, and in heart failure patients, increases in serum creatinine ( )
                                        7
                              

                           
                           NSAID use may lead to increased risk of renal impairment and loss of antihypertensive effect ( )
                                        7
                           
                           Dual inhibition of the renin-angiotensin system:  Increased risk of renal impairment, hypotension, and hyperkalemia ( )
                                        7
                           
                           Lithium:  Increases in serum lithium concentrations and lithium toxicity ( )
                                        7
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1     Clinical Laboratory Test Findings
                     
                        In controlled clinical trials, clinically important changes in standard laboratory parameters were rarely associated with administration of Diovan.
                         Minor elevations in creatinine occurred in 0.8% of patients taking Diovan and 0.6% given placebo in controlled clinical trials of hypertensive patients. In heart failure trials, greater than 50% increases in creatinine were observed in 3.9% of Diovan-treated patients compared to 0.9% of placebo-treated patients. In post-myocardial infarction patients, doubling of serum creatinine was observed in 4.2% of valsartan-treated patients and 3.4% of captopril-treated patients.
                                    Creatinine:
                            
                        
                        Greater than 20% decreases in hemoglobin and hematocrit were observed in 0.4% and 0.8%, respectively, of Diovan patients, compared with 0.1% and 0.1% in placebo-treated patients. One valsartan patient discontinued treatment for microcytic anemia.
                                    Hemoglobin and Hematocrit:
                        
                        Occasional elevations (greater than 150%) of liver chemistries occurred in Diovan-treated patients. Three patients (< 0.1%) treated with valsartan discontinued treatment for elevated liver chemistries.
                                    Liver Function Tests:
                        
                        Neutropenia was observed in 1.9% of patients treated with Diovan and 0.8% of patients treated with placebo.
                                    Neutropenia:
                        
                        In hypertensive patients, greater than 20% increases in serum potassium were observed in 4.4% of Diovan-treated patients compared to 2.9% of placebo-treated patients. In heart failure patients, greater than 20% increases in serum potassium were observed in 10.0% of Diovan-treated patients compared to 5.1% of placebo-treated patients.
                                    Serum Potassium:
                        
                        In heart failure trials, greater than 50% increases in BUN were observed in 16.6% of Diovan-treated patients compared to 6.3% of placebo-treated patients.
                                    Blood Urea Nitrogen (BUN):
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         