
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           Aspirin, NSAIDs, and steroids: concomitant use may elevate and prolong serum methotrexate levels and cause increased toxicity (7.1)
                           Proton pump inhibitors: concomitant use may elevate and prolong serum methotrexate levels and cause increased toxicity (7.2)
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1	Aspirin, Nonsteroidal Anti-Inflammatory Drugs, and Steroids
                     
                        Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) should not be administered prior to or concomitantly with the high doses of methotrexate, such as used in the treatment of osteosarcoma. Concomitant administration of some NSAIDs with high dose methotrexate therapy has been reported to elevate and prolong serum methotrexate levels, resulting in deaths from severe hematologic and gastrointestinal toxicity [see Warnings and Precautions (5.1)].
                        
                        Caution should be used when NSAIDs and salicylates are administered concomitantly with lower doses of methotrexate, including Rasuvo. These drugs have been reported to reduce the tubular secretion of methotrexate in an animal model and may enhance its toxicity.
                        Despite the potential interactions, studies of methotrexate in patients with rheumatoid arthritis have usually included concurrent use of constant dosage regimens of NSAIDs, without apparent problems. It should be appreciated, however, that the doses used in rheumatoid arthritis (7.5 to 15 mg/week) are somewhat lower than those used in psoriasis and that larger doses could lead to unexpected toxicity. Aspirin, NSAIDs, and/or low dose steroids may be continued, although the possibility of increased toxicity with concomitant use of NSAIDs including salicylates has not been fully explored. Steroids may be reduced gradually in patients who respond to methotrexate.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2	Proton Pump Inhibitors (PPIs) and H2 Blockers
                     
                        Use caution if high-dose methotrexate is administered to patients receiving proton pump inhibitor (PPI) therapy. Case reports and published population pharmacokinetic studies suggest that concomitant use of some PPIs, such as omeprazole, esomeprazole, and pantoprazole, with methotrexate (primarily at high dose), may elevate and prolong serum levels of methotrexate and/or its metabolite hydroxymethotrexate, possibly leading to methotrexate toxicities. In two of these cases, delayed methotrexate elimination was observed when high-dose methotrexate was co-administered with PPIs, but was not observed when methotrexate was co-administered with ranitidine. However, no formal drug interaction studies of methotrexate with ranitidine have been conducted.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3	Oral Antibiotics
                     
                        Oral antibiotics such as tetracycline, chloramphenicol, and nonabsorbable broad spectrum antibiotics, may decrease intestinal absorption of methotrexate or interfere with the enterohepatic circulation by inhibiting bowel flora and suppressing metabolism of the drug by bacteria.
                        Penicillins may reduce the renal clearance of methotrexate; increased serum concentrations of methotrexate with concomitant hematologic and gastrointestinal toxicity have been observed with high and low dose methotrexate. Use of Rasuvo with penicillins should be carefully monitored.
                        Trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole has been reported rarely to increase bone marrow suppression in patients receiving methotrexate, probably by decreased tubular secretion and/or an additive antifolate effect.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4	Hepatotoxins
                     
                        The potential for increased hepatotoxicity when methotrexate is administered with other hepatotoxic agents has not been evaluated. However, hepatotoxicity has been reported in such cases. Therefore, patients receiving concomitant therapy with Rasuvo and other potential hepatotoxins (e.g., azathioprine, retinoids, and sulfasalazine) should be closely monitored for possible increased risk of hepatotoxicity.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.5	Theophylline
                     
                        Methotrexate may decrease the clearance of theophylline; theophylline levels should be monitored when used concurrently with Rasuvo.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.6	Folic Acid and Antifolates
                     
                        Vitamin preparations containing folic acid or its derivatives may decrease responses to systemically administered methotrexate. Preliminary animal and human studies have shown that small quantities of intravenously administered leucovorin enter the CSF primarily as 5-methyltetrahydrofolate and, in humans, remain 1 to 3 orders of magnitude lower than the usual methotrexate concentrations following intrathecal administration. However, high doses of leucovorin may reduce the efficacy of intrathecally administered methotrexate. Folate deficiency states may increase methotrexate toxicity.
                        Trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole has been reported rarely to increase bone marrow suppression in patients receiving methotrexate, probably by decreased tubular secretion and/or an additive antifolate effect.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.7	Mercaptopurine
                     
                        Methotrexate increases the plasma levels of mercaptopurine. The combination of Rasuvo and mercaptopurine may therefore require dose adjustment.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.8	Other Drugs
                     
                        Methotrexate is partially bound to serum albumin, and toxicity may be increased because of displacement by certain drugs, such as salicylates, phenylbutazone, phenytoin, and sulfonamides.
                        Renal tubular transport is also diminished by probenecid; use of Rasuvo with this drug should be carefully monitored.
                        Combined use of methotrexate with gold, penicillamine, hydroxychloroquine, sulfasalazine, or cytotoxic agents, has not been studied and may increase the incidence of adverse effects.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         