
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Ciprofloxacin is a fluoroquinolone antimicrobial (see 12.4 Clinical Pharmacology, Microbiology).
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        The plasma concentrations of ciprofloxacin were not measured following administration of 0.25 mL Ciprofloxacin Otic Solution (total dose: 0.5 mg ciprofloxacin). However, the maximum plasma concentration of ciprofloxacin is anticipated to be less than 5 ng/mL. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.4	 Microbiology
                     
                        The bactericidal action of ciprofloxacin results from interference with the enzyme DNA gyrase, which is needed for the synthesis of bacterial DNA. 
                        Bacterial resistance to quinolones can develop through chromosomally- or plasmid-mediated mechanisms. 
                        The mechanism of action of fluoroquinolones, including ciprofloxacin, is different from that of macrolides.  Therefore, ciprofloxacin may be active against pathogens that are resistant to these antibiotics, and these antibiotics may be active against pathogens that are resistant to ciprofloxacin.  In vitro studies demonstrated cross-resistance between ciprofloxacin and some fluoroquinolones. 
                        Ciprofloxacin has been shown to be active against most isolates of the following bacteria, both in vitro and in clinical infections of acute otitis externa as described in Section 1 Indications and Usage.
                        
                           
                               
                              Staphylococcus aureus
                           
                           
                               
                              Pseudomonas aeruginosa.
                           
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         