
                     
                     
                     
                         DRUG INTERACTIONS

                     
                     
                        
                           In vitro studies of cytochrome P450 isoenzymes using human liver microsomes indicate that neither tizanidine nor the major metabolites are likely to affect the metabolism of other drugs metabolized by cytochrome P450 isoenzymes.
                        
                           Fluvoxamine: The effect of fluvoxamine on the pharmacokinetics of a single 4 mg dose of tizanidine was studied in 10 healthy subjects. The Cmax, AUC, and half-life of tizanidine increased by 12-fold, 33-fold, and 3-fold, respectively. These changes resulted in significantly decreased blood pressure, increased drowsiness, and increased psychomotor impairment. (See CONTRAINDICATIONS and WARNINGS).
                        
                           Ciprofloxacin: The effect of ciprofloxacin on the pharmacokinetics of a single 4 mg dose of tizanidine was studied in 10 healthy subjects. The Cmax and AUC of tizanidine increased by 7-fold and 10-fold, respectively. These changes resulted in significantly decreased blood pressure, increased drowsiness, and increased psychomotor impairment. (See CONTRAINDICATIONS and WARNINGS).
                        
                           CYP1A2 inhibitors: The interaction between tizanidine and either fluvoxamine or ciprofloxacin is most likely due to inhibition of CYP1A2 by fluvoxamine or ciprofloxacin. Although there have been no clinical studies evaluating the effects of other CYP1A2 inhibitors on tizanidine, other CYP1A2 inhibitors, including zileuton, other fluroquinolones, antiarrythmics (amiodarone, mexiletine, propafenone, and verapamil), cimetidine and famotidine, oral contraceptives, acyclovir, and ticlopidine may also lead to substantial increases in tizanidine blood concentrations. Concomitant use of tizanidine with CYP1A2 inhibitors should ordinarily be avoided. If their use is clinically necessary, they should be used with caution (see WARNINGS).
                        
                           Acetaminophen: Tizanidine delayed the Tmax of acetaminophen by 16 minutes. Acetaminophen did not affect the pharmacokinetics of tizanidine.
                        
                           Alcohol: Alcohol increased the AUC of tizanidine by approximately 20% while also increasing its Cmax by approximately 15%. This was associated with an increase in side effects of tizanidine. The CNS depressant effects of tizanidine and alcohol are additive.
                        
                           Oral Contraceptives: No specific pharmacokinetic study was conducted to investigate interaction between oral contraceptives and tizanidine, but retrospective analysis of population pharmacokinetic data following single and multiple dose administration of 4 mg tizanidine showed that women concurrently taking oral contraceptives had 50% lower clearance of tizanidine than women not on oral contraceptives.
                     
                     
                  
               