
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Clinical Pharmacology
                     
                        Following an intravenous dose of 1 gram, serum concentrations were 110 mcg/mL at 5 minutes, declining to less than 1 mcg/mL at 4 hours. The half-life after an intravenous dose is 41 to 59 minutes. Approximately 85% of cefoxitin is excreted unchanged by the kidneys over a 6-hour period, resulting in high urinary concentrations. Probenecid slows tubular excretion and produces higher serum levels and increases the duration of measurable serum concentrations.
                        Cefoxitin passes into pleural and joint fluids and is detectable in antibacterial concentrations in bile.
                        In a published study of geriatric patients ranging in age from 64 to 88 years with normal renal function for their age (creatinine clearance ranging from 31.5 to 174.0 mL/min), the half-life for cefoxitin ranged from 51 to 90 minutes, resulting in higher plasma concentrations than in younger adults. These changes were attributed to decreased renal function associated with the aging process. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Microbiology
                     
                        The bactericidal action of cefoxitin results from inhibition of cell wall synthesis. Cefoxitin has in vitro activity against a wide range of gram-positive and gram-negative organisms. The methoxy group in the 7α position provides cefoxitin with a high degree of stability in the presence of beta-lactamases, both penicillinases and cephalosporinases, of gram-negative bacteria.
                        Cefoxitin has been shown to be active against most strains of the following microorganisms, both in vitro and in clinical infections as described in the INDICATIONS AND USAGE section.
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Aerobic gram-positive microorganisms
                           
                              
                                 
                                     
                                    Staphylococcus aureus
                                    a  (including penicillinase-producing strains)
                                 
                                     
                                    Staphylococcus epidermidis
                                    a
                                 
                                 
                                     
                                    Streptococcus agalactiae
                                 
                                 
                                     
                                    Streptococcus pneumoniae
                                 
                                 
                                     
                                    Streptococcus pyogenes
                                 
                                 
                                     
                                    a Staphylococci resistant to methicillin/oxacillin should be considered resistant to cefoxitin.
                                 
                                     Most strains of enterococci, e.g. Enterococcus faecalis, are resistant.
                              
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Aerobic gram-negative microorganisms
                           
                              
                                 
                                     
                                    Escherichia coli
                                 
                                 
                                     
                                    Haemophilus influenzae
                                 
                                 
                                     
                                    Klebsiella spp. (including K. pneumoniae)
                                 
                                     
                                    Morganella morganii
                                 
                                 
                                     
                                    Neisseria gonorrhoeae (including penicillinase-producing strains)
                                 
                                     
                                    Proteus mirabilis
                                 
                                 
                                     
                                    Proteus vulgaris
                                 
                                 
                                     
                                    Providencia spp. (including Providencia rettgeri)
                              
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Anaerobic gram-positive microorganisms
                           
                              
                                 
                                     
                                    Clostridium spp.
                                 
                                     
                                    Peptococcus niger
                                 
                                 
                                     
                                    Peptostreptococcus spp.
                              
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Anaerobic gram-negative microorganisms
                           
                              
                                 
                                     
                                    Bacteroides distasonis
                                 
                                 
                                     
                                    Bacteroides fragilis
                                 
                                 
                                     
                                    Bacteroides ovatus
                                 
                                 
                                     
                                    Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron
                                 
                                 
                                     
                                    Bacteroides spp.
                              
                              The following in vitro data are available, 
                                    but their clinical significance is unknown.
                                 
                              
                              Cefoxitin exhibits in vitro minimum inhibitory concentrations (MIC’s) of 8 mcg/mL or less for aerobic microorganisms and 16 mcg/mL or less for anaerobic microorganisms against most (≥90%) strains of the following microorganisms; however, the safety and effectiveness of cefoxitin in treating clinical infections due to these microorganisms have not been established in adequate and well-controlled clinical trials.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Aerobic gram-negative microorganisms
                           
                              
                                 
                                     
                                    Eikenella corrodens (non-β-lactamase producers)
                                 
                                     
                                    Klebsiella oxytoca
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Anaerobic gram-positive microorganisms
                           
                              
                                 
                                     
                                    Clostridium perfringens
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Anaerobic gram-negative microorganisms
                           
                              
                                 
                                     
                                    Prevotella bivia (formerly Bacteroides bivius)
                              
                              Cefoxitin is inactive in vitro against most strains of Pseudomonas aeruginosa and enterococci and many strains of Enterobacter cloacae.
                              
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Susceptibility Tests
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Dilution Techniques:
                           
                              Quantitative methods are used to determine antimicrobial minimum inhibitory concentrations (MIC’s). These MIC’s provide estimates of the susceptibility of bacteria to antimicrobial compounds. The MIC’s should be determined using a standardized procedure. Standardized procedures are based on a dilution method1 (broth or agar) or equivalent with standardized inoculum concentrations and standardized concentrations of cefoxitin powder. The MIC values should be interpreted according to the following criteria:
                              For testing aerobic microorganismsa,b,c other than Neisseria gonorrhoeae:
                              


                              


 
                              
                                 a Staphylococci exhibiting resistance to methicillin/oxacillin should be reported as also resistant to cefoxitin despite apparent in vitro susceptibility.
                              
                                 b For testing Haemophilus influenzae these interpretative criteria applicable only to tests performed by broth microdilution method using Haemophilus Test Medium (HTM)1.
                              
                                 c For testing streptococci these interpretative criteria applicable only to tests performed by broth microdilution method using cation-adjusted Mueller-Hinton broth with 2 to 5% lysed horse blood1. 
                              For testing Neisseria gonorrhoeae
                                 d:
                              


                              


 
                              
                                 d Interpretative criteria applicable only to tests performed by agar dilution method using GC agar base with 1% defined growth supplement and incubated in 5% CO2 1.
                              A report of “Susceptible” indicates that the pathogen is likely to be inhibited if the antimicrobial compound in the blood reaches the concentrations usually achievable. A report of “Intermediate” indicates that the result should be considered equivocal, and, if the microorganism is not fully susceptible to alternative, clinically feasible drugs, the test should be repeated. This category implies possible clinical applicability in body sites where the drug is physiologically concentrated or in situations where high dosage of drug can be used. This category also provides a buffer zone which prevents small uncontrolled technical factors from causing major discrepancies in interpretation. A report of “Resistant” indicates that the pathogen is not likely to be inhibited if the antimicrobial compound in the blood reaches the concentrations usually achievable; other therapy should be selected.
                              Standardized susceptibility test procedures require the use of laboratory control microorganisms to control the technical aspects of the laboratory procedures. Standard cefoxitin powder should provide the following MIC values:
                              


                              


 
                              
                                 a Interpretative criteria applicable only to tests performed by agar dilution method using GC agar base with 1% defined growth supplement and incubated in 5% CO2.1
                              
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Diffusion Techniques:
                           
                              Quantitative methods that require measurement of zone diameters also provide reproducible estimates of the susceptibility of bacteria to antimicrobial compounds. One such standardized procedure2 requires the use of standardized inoculum concentrations. This procedure uses paper disks impregnated with 30 mcg cefoxitin to test the susceptibility of microorganisms to cefoxitin.
                              Reports from the laboratory providing results of the standard single-disk susceptibility test with a 30 mcg cefoxitin disk should be interpreted according to the following criteria:
                              For testing aerobic microorganismsa,b,c other than Neisseria gonorrhoeae:
                              


                              


 
                              
                                 a Staphylococci exhibiting resistance to methicillin/oxacillin should be reported as also resistant to cefoxitin despite apparent in vitro susceptibility.
                              
                                 b For testing Haemophilus influenzae these interpretative criteria applicable only to tests performed by disk diffusion method using Haemophilus Test Medium (HTM)1.
                              
                                 c For testing streptococci these interpretative criteria applicable only to tests performed by disk diffusion method using Mueller-Hinton agar with 5% defibrinated sheep blood and incubated in 5% CO2 2.
                              For testing Neisseria gonorrhoeae
                                 d:
                              


                              


 
                              
                                 d Interpretative criteria applicable only to tests performed by disk diffusion method using GC agar base with 1% defined growth supplement and incubated in 5% CO2 2.
                              Interpretation should be as stated above for results using dilution techniques.
                              Interpretation involves correlation of the diameter obtained in the disk test with the MIC for cefoxitin.
                              As with standardized dilution techniques, diffusion methods require the use of laboratory control microorganisms that are used to control the technical aspects of the laboratory procedures. For the diffusion technique, the 30 mcg cefoxitin disk should provide the following zone diameters in these laboratory test quality control strains:
                              


                              


 
                              
                                 a Interpretative criteria applicable only to tests performed by disk diffusion method using GC agar base with 1% defined growth supplement and incubated in 5% CO2 2.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Anaerobic Techniques:
                           
                              For anaerobic bacteria, the susceptibility to cefoxitin as MIC’s can be determined by standardized test methods3. The MIC values obtained should be interpreted according to the following criteria:
                              


                              


 
                              Interpretation is identical to that stated above for results using dilution techniques.
                              As with other susceptibility techniques, the use of laboratory control microorganisms is required to control the technical aspects of the laboratory standardized procedures. Standard cefoxitin powder should provide the following MIC values:
                              
                                 Using either an Agar Dilution Methoda or Using a Brothb Microdilution Method:
                              


                              


 
                              
                                 a Range applicable only to tests performed using either Brucella blood or Wilkins-Chalgren agar.
                              
                                 b Range applicable only to tests performed in the broth formulation of Wilkins-Chalgren agar3.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         