


 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY






 Mechanism of Action
Photosensitization following application of Metvixia Cream occurs through the metabolic conversion of methyl aminolevulinate (prodrug) to photoactive porphyrins (PAP), which accumulates in the skin lesions to which Metvixia Cream has been applied. When exposed to light of appropriate wavelength and energy, the accumulated photoactive porphyrins produce a photodynamic reaction, resulting in a cytotoxic process dependent upon the simultaneous presence of oxygen. The absorption of light results in an excited state of porphyrin molecules, and subsequent spin transfer from photoactive porphyrins to molecular oxygen generates singlet oxygen, which can further react to form superoxide and hydroxyl radicals. Photosensitization of actinic (solar) keratosis lesions using Metvixia Cream, plus illumination with a CureLight BroadBand Model CureLight 01 (a red light of 570 to 670 nm wavelength) at 75 J/cm2, is the basis for Metvixia photodynamic therapy (PDT). 2, is the basis for Metvixia photodynamic therapy (PDT). 







 Pharmacokinetics 
The time-course of PAPs after application of Metvixia Cream has been monitored by means of fluorescence.  After application of Metvixia Cream to actinic keratosis lesions in 8 patients, fluorescence was measured at several time points over 28 hours.  Three hours after the application of Metvixia Cream the fluorescence in the treated lesions was significantly greater than that seen in both treated and untreated normal skin, and after application of vehicle cream (not containing methyl aminolevulinate) to normal skin. After application of Metvixia Cream for 28 hours and subsequent illumination with red light of 570 to 670 nm wavelength at a total light dose of 75 J/cm2, complete photobleaching (photodegradation) of Protoporphyrin IX occurred with levels of Protoporphyrin IX returning to pre-treatment values within 1 hour after illumination.  However, the fate of other photoactive porphyrins are unknown.2, complete photobleaching (photodegradation) of Protoporphyrin IX occurred with levels of Protoporphyrin IX returning to pre-treatment values within 1 hour after illumination.  However, the fate of other photoactive porphyrins are unknown.The clinical dose of methyl aminolevulinate cream and duration of application were derived from a study in which three different strengths of the cream (16, 80 and 160 mg/g methyl aminolevulinate, as hydrochloride), each applied for 3 hours or 18 hours, were tested in 16 patients.   







 CLINICAL STUDIES 
Metvixia Cream plus illumination with the CureLight BroadBand Model CureLight 01 (a red light of 570 to 670 nm wavelength) at 75 J/cm2 has been studied in 130 patients with non-hyperkeratotic actinic keratoses in two clinical trials. These trials were not identical; however, both were randomized, multicenter, and double-blinded with patients randomized to Metvixia-PDT and Vehicle-PDT study arms that required two treatment sessions (7 days apart). One study was conducted in the  U.S. and patients were randomized 1:1 Metvixia to Vehicle and one study was conducted in  Australia with patients randomized 4:1 Metvixia to Vehicle.  In both studies treatment consisted of a multi-step process that was repeated after 7 days consisting of 1) Lesion preparation (debridement with sharp curette) to roughen the surface of the lesion. 2) Metvixia or Vehicle Cream application to lesions with occlusion with an adhesive, non-absorbent dressing, 3) Waiting at least 2.5 hours, but no more than 4 hours to allow for conversion of the methyl aminolevulinate, 4) Removal of cream with gauze and saline, 5) Red light Dosimetry and Illumination with the CureLight BroadBand Model CureLight 01 (a red light of 570 to 670 nm wavelength).2 has been studied in 130 patients with non-hyperkeratotic actinic keratoses in two clinical trials. These trials were not identical; however, both were randomized, multicenter, and double-blinded with patients randomized to Metvixia-PDT and Vehicle-PDT study arms that required two treatment sessions (7 days apart). One study was conducted in the  U.S. and patients were randomized 1:1 Metvixia to Vehicle and one study was conducted in  Australia with patients randomized 4:1 Metvixia to Vehicle.  In both studies treatment consisted of a multi-step process that was repeated after 7 days consisting of 1) Lesion preparation (debridement with sharp curette) to roughen the surface of the lesion. 2) Metvixia or Vehicle Cream application to lesions with occlusion with an adhesive, non-absorbent dressing, 3) Waiting at least 2.5 hours, but no more than 4 hours to allow for conversion of the methyl aminolevulinate, 4) Removal of cream with gauze and saline, 5) Red light Dosimetry and Illumination with the CureLight BroadBand Model CureLight 01 (a red light of 570 to 670 nm wavelength).Study patients had previously untreated facial and scalp actinic keratoses (AKs) that were slightly palpable (better felt than seen). Hyperkeratotic actinic keratoses were excluded.  In the  U.S. study 100% of patients had 4 to 10 lesions at baseline. However, in the Australian study, 63% (70/111) of patients had less than 4 lesions at baseline, 31% (34/111) of the enrolled patients had 4 to 10 lesions, and 6% (7/111) had more than 10 lesions at baseline (a maximum of 6 treatment fields were allowed in this study).A “Cleared” AK lesion was defined as being not visible and not palpable as assessed 3 months after the second treatment session. Patients with all treated lesions cleared at 3 months were defined as Complete Responders. The percentage of patients in whom 75% or more of the treated lesions were clear and the percent of patients in whom 100% of the treated lesions were clear 3 months after the second Metvixia-PDT treatment session are shown in Table 1 for each of the two studies. 




Patients with 4 or more lesions had lower success rates than those with less than 4 lesions when treated with PDT using Metvixia Cream (see Table 2).




Lesions that were slightly palpable (Grade 1) had a better success rate than lesions that were visible and palpable (Grade 2) – See Table 3.  




Response rate by lesion location is presented in Table 4.




The overall treatment effect as evidenced by the high vehicle response rate may include the contribution of lesion preparation, i.e. curettage.  Adequate lesion preparation is an important component for AK therapy with Metvixia Cream.Information regarding further treatments for residual or new AK lesions performed after 3 months is not available.  




