
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        
                           
                               
                              Clindamycin:
                              [See Microbiology (12.4).]
                           
                           
                               
                              Tretinoin: Although the exact mode of action of tretinoin is unknown, current evidence suggests that topical tretinoin decreases cohesiveness of folliculare epithelial cells with decreased microcomedone formation. Additionally, tretinoin stimulates mitotic activity and increased turnover of follicular epithelial cells causing extrusion of the comedones.
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        In an open-label trial of 17 subjects with moderate-to-severe acne vulgaris, topical administration of approximately 3 grams of VELTIN Gel once daily for 5 days, clindamycin concentrations were quantifiable in all 17 subjects starting from 1 hour post-dose. All plasma clindamycin concentrations were ≤5.56 ng/mL on Day 5, with the exception of 1 subject who had a maximum clindamycin concentration of 8.73 ng/mL at 4 hours post-dose. There was no appreciable increase in systemic exposure to tretinoin, as compared with the baseline value. The average tretinoin concentration across all sampling times on Day 5 ranged from 1.19 to 1.23 ng/mL compared with the corresponding baseline mean tretinoin concentration range of 1.16 to 1.30 ng/mL.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.4 Microbiology
                     
                        No microbiology studies were conducted in the clinical trials with this product.
                        
                           
                               
                              Mechanism of Action: Clindamycin binds to the 50S ribosomal subunit of susceptible bacteria and prevents elongation of peptide chains by interfering with peptidyl transfer, thereby suppressing protein synthesis. Clindamycin has been shown to have in vitro activity against Propionibacterium acnes (P. acnes), an organism that has been associated with acne vulgaris; however, the clinical significance of this activity against P. acnes was not examined in clinical trials with VELTIN Gel. P. acnes resistance to clindamycin has been documented.
                           
                               
                              Inducible Clindamycin Resistance: The treatment of acne with antimicrobials is associated with the development of antimicrobial resistance in P. acnes as well as other bacteria (e.g., Staphylococcus aureus, Streptococcus pyogenes). The use of clindamycin may result in developing inducible resistance in these organisms. This resistance is not detected by routine susceptibility testing. 
                           
                               
                              Cross Resistance: Resistance to clindamycin is often associated with resistance to erythromycin.
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         