
               
               
               7	DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
                  No drug interaction studies have been conducted using TRUVADA tablets. Drug interaction studies have been conducted with emtricitabine and tenofovir disoproxil fumarate, the components of TRUVADA. This section describes clinically relevant drug interactions observed with emtricitabine and tenofovir disoproxil fumarate [See Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
               
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           Didanosine: Tenofovir disoproxil fumarate increases didanosine concentrations. Use with caution and monitor for evidence of didanosine toxicity (e.g., pancreatitis, neuropathy) when coadministered. Consider dose reductions or discontinuations of didanosine if warranted. (7.1)
                           Atazanavir: Coadministration decreases atazanavir concentrations and increases tenofovir concentrations. Use atazanavir with TRUVADA only with ritonavir; monitor for evidence of tenofovir toxicity. (7.2)
                           Lopinavir/ritonavir: Coadministration increases tenofovir concentrations. Monitor for evidence of tenofovir toxicity. (7.2)
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1	Didanosine
                     
                        Coadministration of TRUVADA and didanosine should be undertaken with caution and patients receiving this combination should be monitored closely for didanosine-associated adverse reactions. Didanosine should be discontinued in patients who develop didanosine-associated adverse reactions.
                        When tenofovir disoproxil fumarate was administered with didanosine the Cmax and AUC of didanosine administered as either the buffered or enteric-coated formulation increased significantly [See Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)]. The mechanism of this interaction is unknown. Higher didanosine concentrations could potentiate didanosine-associated adverse reactions, including pancreatitis, and neuropathy. Suppression of CD4+ cell counts has been observed in patients receiving tenofovir DF with didanosine 400 mg daily.
                        In adults weighing >60 kg, the didanosine dose should be reduced to 250 mg when it is coadministered with TRUVADA. Data are not available to recommend a dose adjustment of didanosine for patients weighing <60 kg. When coadministered, TRUVADA and Videx EC may be taken under fasted conditions or with a light meal (<400 kcal, 20% fat). Coadministration of didanosine buffered tablet formulation with TRUVADA should be under fasted conditions.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2	Atazanavir
                     
                        Atazanavir has been shown to increase tenofovir concentrations [See Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)]. The mechanism of this interaction is unknown. Patients receiving atazanavir and TRUVADA should be monitored for TRUVADA-associated adverse reactions. TRUVADA should be discontinued in patients who develop TRUVADA-associated adverse reactions.
                        
                        Tenofovir decreases the AUC and Cmin of atazanavir [See Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)]. When coadministered with TRUVADA, it is recommended that atazanavir 300 mg is given with ritonavir 100 mg. Atazanavir without ritonavir should not be coadministered with TRUVADA.
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3	Lopinavir/Ritonavir
                     
                        Lopinavir/ritonavir has been shown to increase tenofovir concentrations [See Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)]. The mechanism of this interaction is unknown. Patients receiving lopinavir/ritonavir and TRUVADA should be monitored for TRUVADA-associated adverse reactions. TRUVADA should be discontinued in patients who develop TRUVADA-associated adverse reactions.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4	Drugs Affecting Renal Function
                     
                        Emtricitabine and tenofovir are primarily excreted by the kidneys by a combination of glomerular filtration and active tubular secretion [See Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)]. No drug-drug interactions due to competition for renal excretion have been observed; however, coadministration of TRUVADA with drugs that are eliminated by active tubular secretion may increase concentrations of emtricitabine, tenofovir, and/or the coadministered drug. Some examples include, but are not limited to acyclovir, adefovir dipivoxil, cidofovir, ganciclovir, valacyclovir, and valganciclovir. Drugs that decrease renal function may increase concentrations of emtricitabine and/or tenofovir.
                     
                  
               
            
         