
               
               
               
                  12  CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY 

               
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        12.1 Mechanism of Action

                     
                     
                        Emergency contraceptive pills are not effective if a woman is already pregnant. Levonorgestrel Tablet is believed to act as an emergency contraceptive principally by preventing ovulation or fertilization (by altering tubal transport of sperm and/or ova). In addition, it may inhibit implantation (by altering the endometrium). It is not effective once the process of implantation has begun.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        12.3 Pharmacokinetics

                     
                     
                        
                           Absorption 
                        
                        Following a single dose administration of Levonorgestrel Tablet in 30 women under fasting conditions, maximum plasma concentrations of levonorgestrel of 19.1 ng/mL were reached at 1.7 hours. See Table 2.
                        Administration of Levonorgestrel tablet to 30 Healthy Female Volunteers under Fasting Conditions[/TC]
                        


                        


Cmax = maximum concentration
                        AUCt = area under the drug concentration curve from time 0 to time of last determinable concentration
                        AUCinf = area under the drug concentration curve from time 0 to infinity
                        Tmax = time to maximum concentration
                        t1/2= elimination half life
                        * N=29
                        ** median (range)
                        Effect of Food: The effect of food on the rate and the extent of levonorgestrel absorption following single oral administration of Levenorgestrel Tablet has not been evaluated.
                        
                           Distribution 
                        
                        The apparent volume of distribution of levonorgestrel is reported to be approximately 1.8 L/kg. It is about 97.5 to 99% protein-bound, principally to sex hormone binding globulin (SHBG) and, to a lesser extent, serum albumin.
                        
                           Metabolism 
                        
                        Following absorption, levonorgestrel is conjugated at the 17β-OH position to form sulfate conjugates and, to a lesser extent, glucuronide conjugates in plasma. Significant amounts of conjugated and unconjugated 3α, 5β-tetrahydrolevonorgestrel are also present in plasma, along with much smaller amounts of 3α, 5α-tetrahydrolevonorgestrel and 16βhydroxylevonorgestrel. Levonorgestrel and its phase I metabolites are excreted primarily as glucuronide conjugates. Metabolic clearance rates may differ among individuals by several-fold, and this may account in part for the wide variation observed in levonorgestrel concentrations among users.
                        
                           Excretion 
                        
                        About 45% of levonorgestrel and its metabolites are excreted in the urine and about 32% are excreted in feces, mostly as glucuronide conjugates.
                        
                           Specific Populations 
                        
                        
                           Pediatric 
                        
                        This product is not intended for use in the premenarcheal population, and pharmacokinetic data are not available for this population.
                        
                           Geriatric 
                        
                        This product is not intended for use in postmenopausal women, and pharmacokinetic data are not available for this population.
                        
                           Race 
                        
                        No formal studies have evaluated the effect of race. However, clinical trials demonstrated a higher pregnancy rate in Chinese women with both Plan B and the Yuzpe regimen (another form of emergency contraception). There was a non-statistically significant increased rate of pregnancy among Chinese women in the Levonorgestrel Tablet trial. The reason for this apparent increase in the pregnancy rate with emergency contraceptives in Chinese women is unknown [see USE IN SPECIFIC POPULATIONS (8.6)].
                        
                           Hepatic Impairment 
                        
                        No formal studies were conducted to evaluate the effect of hepatic disease on the disposition of Levonorgestrel Tablet.
                        
                           Renal Impairment 
                        
                        No formal studies were conducted to evaluate the effect of renal disease on the disposition of Levonorgestrel Tablet.
                        
                           Drug-Drug Interactions 
                        
                        No formal drug-drug interaction studies were conducted with Levonorgestrel Tablet [see DRUG INTERACTIONS (7)].
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         