
               
               
               12	CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1	Mechanism of Action
                     
                        NATPARA is a parathyroid hormone.  Parathyroid hormone raises serum calcium by increasing renal tubular calcium reabsorption, increasing intestinal calcium absorption (i.e., by converting 25 OH vitamin D to 1,25 OH2 vitamin D) and by increasing bone turnover which releases calcium into the circulation.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2	Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        The pharmacodynamics in subjects with hypoparathyroidism after single subcutaneous administration of 50 and 100 mcg dose of NATPARA in the thigh were evaluated.
                        Treatment with NATPARA increases serum calcium levels (Figure 2).  The increase in serum calcium levels in hypoparathyroidism subjects occurs in a dose-related manner.  Mean peak serum calcium levels are reached between 10 and 12 hours following a single subcutaneous injection and the increase in serum calcium above baseline is sustained for more than 24 hours after administration. The maximum mean increases of serum calcium, which occurred at 12 hours, were approximately 0.5 mg/dL and 0.7 mg/dL from baseline with the 50 mcg and 100 mcg doses, respectively. The mean calcium intake for the 50 and 100 mcg doses was 1700 mg [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)
                           ].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3	Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        Following single subcutaneous injections of NATPARA at 50 mcg and 100 mcg in subjects with hypoparathyroidism, peak plasma concentrations (mean Tmax) of NATPARA occurs within 5 to 30 minutes and a second usually smaller peak at 1 to 2 hours. The plasma AUC increased in a dose proportional manner from 50 mcg to 100 mcg.  The apparent terminal half-life (t1/2) was 3.02 and 2.83 hours for the 50 and 100 mcg dose, respectively. 
                        Mean unadjusted concentration-time profiles of parathyroid hormone in plasma following SC administration of 100 mcg of NATPARA are presented in Figure 2.  One 100 mcg dose of NATPARA provides a 24-hour calcemic response in hypoparathyroidism subjects.
                        
                           Figure 2 Mean (±SE) Unadjusted Plasma Parathyroid Hormone and Albumin-Corrected Serum Calcium Concentration Following 100 mcg SC Administration in Subjects with Hypoparathyroidism
                        
                        
                           
                        
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Absorption:
                              NATPARA administered subcutaneously has an absolute bioavailability of 53%.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Distribution:
                              NATPARA has a volume of distribution of 5.35 L at steady state. 
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Metabolism:
                              In vitro and in vivo studies demonstrated that the clearance of parathyroid hormone is primarily a hepatic process with a lesser role played by the kidneys.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Excretion:
                              In the liver, most of the intact parathyroid hormone is cleaved by cathepsins.  In the kidney, a small amount of parathyroid hormone binds to physiologic PTH-1 receptors, but most is filtered at the glomerulus.  C-terminal fragments are also cleared efficiently by glomerular filtration.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Hepatic Impairment:
                              
                              A pharmacokinetic study was conducted in 6 men and 6 women with moderate hepatic impairment (Child-Pugh Classification of 7-9 [Grade B]) as compared with a matched group of 12 subjects with normal hepatic function.  Following a single 100-mcg subcutaneous dose, the mean Cmax and baseline-corrected Cmax values were 18% to 20% greater in the moderately impaired subjects than in those with normal function.  There were no apparent differences in the serum total calcium concentration-time profiles between the 2 hepatic function groups.  No dose adjustment for NATPARA is recommended in patients with mild to moderate hepatic impairment.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Renal Impairment:
                              
                              Pharmacokinetics following a single NATPARA 100 mcg subcutaneous dose was evaluated in 16 subjects with normal renal function (creatinine clearance (CLcr) > 90 mL/min) and 16 subjects with renal impairment.  The mean maximum concentration (Cmax) of parathyroid hormone following administration of 100 mcg NATPARA in subjects with mild (CLcr 60 to 90 mL/min) and moderate (CLcr 30 to 60 mL/min) renal impairment was approximately 22% higher than that observed in subjects with normal renal function.  Exposure to parathyroid hormone as measured by AUC0-last and baseline-corrected AUC0-last was approximately 3.9% and 2.5%, respectively, higher than that observed for subjects with normal renal function.  No studies were conducted in patients with severe renal impairment or in renal impairment patients on dialysis.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Age, Sex, Race, and Weight:
                              
                              Based on population pharmacokinetic analysis, age, sex, race, and body weight did not significantly affect the NATPARA pharmacokinetics. 
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Figure 2
                                 
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         