
                     
                     
                     Drug Interactions
                     
                        
                           Diuretics
                        
                        
                           Excessive reductions in blood pressure may occur in patients on diuretic therapy when ACE inhibitors are started. The possibility of hypotensive effects with moexipril hydrochloride can be minimized by discontinuing diuretic therapy for several days or cautiously increasing salt intake before initiation of treatment with moexipril hydrochloride. If this is not possible, the starting dose of moexipril should be reduced. (See 
                              WARNINGS
                           and
                              DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION
                           ). 
                        
                           Potassium Supplements and Potassium-Sparing Diuretics
                        
                        
                           Moexipril hydrochloride can increase serum potassium because it decreases aldosterone secretion. Use of potassium-sparing diuretics (spironolactone, triamterene, amiloride) or potassium supplements concomitantly with ACE inhibitors can increase the risk of hyperkalemia. Therefore, if concomitant use of such agents is indicated, they should be given with caution and the patient's serum potassium should be monitored. 
                        
                           Oral Anticoagulants
                        
                        
                            Interaction studies with warfarin failed to identify any clinically important effect on the serum concentrations of the anticoagulant or on its anticoagulant effect. 
                        
                           Lithium
                        
                        
                           Increased serum lithium levels and symptoms of lithium toxicity have been reported in patients receiving ACE inhibitors during therapy with lithium. These drugs should be coadministered with caution, and frequent monitoring of serum lithium levels is recommended. If a diuretic is also used, the risk of lithium toxicity may be increased. 
                        
                           Gold
                        
                        Nitritoid reactions (symptoms include facial flushing, nausea, vomiting and hypotension) have been reported rarely in patients on therapy with injectable gold (sodium aurothiomalate) and concomitant ACE inhibitor therapy including moexipril hydrochloride
                        
                           Non-Steroidal Anti-Inflammatory Agents including Selective Cyclooxygenase-2 Inhibitors (COX-2 Inhibitors)
                        
                        In patients who are elderly, volume-depleted (including those on diuretic therapy), or with compromised renal function, co-administration of NSAIDS, including selective COX-2 inhibitors, with ACE inhibitors, including moexipril, may result in deterioration of renal function, including possible acute renal failure.  These effects are usually reversible.  Monitor renal function periodically in patients receiving moexipril and NSAID therapy.The antihypertensive effect of ACE inhibitors, including moexipril hydrochloride, may be attenuated by NSAIDS.
                        
                           Dual Blockade of the Renin-Angiotensin System (RAS)
                        
                        Dual blockade of the RAS with angiotensin receptor blockers, ACE inhibitors, or aliskiren is associated with increased risks of hypotension, hyperkalemia, and changes in renal function (including acute renal failure) compared to monotherapy. Closely monitor blood pressure, renal function and electrolytes in patients on moexipril hydrochloride and other agents that affect the RAS.
                        Do not co-administer aliskiren with moexipril in patients with diabetes. Avoid use of aliskiren with moexipril hydrochloride in patients with renal impairment (GFR <60 mL/min).
                           
                           
                        
                        
                           Other Agents
                        
                        
                           No clinically important pharmacokinetic interactions occurred when moexipril hydrochloride was administered concomitantly with hydrochlorothiazide, digoxin, or cimetidine. 
                        Moexipril hydrochloride has been used in clinical trials concomitantly with calcium-channel-blocking agents, diuretics, H2 blockers, digoxin, oral hypoglycemic agents, and cholesterol-lowering agents. There was no evidence of clinically important adverse interactions.
                        
                           
                        
                     
                     
                  
               