
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        

                        Stavudine is an antiviral drug [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.4)].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        

                        The pharmacokinetics of stavudine have been evaluated in HIV-1-infected adult and pediatric patients (Tables 7, 8, and 9). Peak plasma concentrations (Cmax) and area under the plasma concentration-time curve (AUC) increased in proportion to dose after both single and multiple doses ranging from 0.03 to 4 mg/kg. There was no significant accumulation of stavudine with repeated administration every 6, 8, or 12 hours.

                           
                              
Absorption
                           

                           
Following oral administration, stavudine is rapidly absorbed, with peak plasma concentrations occurring within 1 hour after dosing. The systemic exposure to stavudine is the same following administration as capsules or solution. Steady-state pharmacokinetic parameters of stavudine in HIV-1-infected adults are shown in Table 7.
                        

                        


                        




                        
                           Distribution
                           

                           
Binding of stavudine to serum proteins was negligible over the concentration range of 0.01 to 11.4 mcg/mL. Stavudine distributes equally between red blood cells and plasma. Volume of distribution is shown in Table 8.
                              

                              
Metabolism
                           

                           
Metabolism plays a limited role in the clearance of stavudine. Unchanged stavudine was the major drug-related component circulating in plasma after an 80 mg dose of 14C-stavudine, while metabolites constituted minor components of the circulating radioactivity. Minor metabolites include oxidized stavudine, glucuronide conjugates of stavudine and its oxidized metabolite, and an N-acetylcysteine conjugate of the ribose after glycosidic cleavage, suggesting that thymine is also a metabolite of stavudine.

                           
                              
Elimination
                           

                           
Following an 80 mg dose of 14C-stavudine to healthy subjects, approximately 95% and 3% of the total radioactivity was recovered in urine and feces, respectively. Radioactivity due to parent drug in urine and feces was 73.7% and 62%, respectively. The mean terminal elimination half-life is approximately 2.3 hours following single oral doses. Mean renal clearance of the parent compound is approximately 272 mL/min, accounting for approximately 67% of the apparent oral clearance.

                           
In HIV-1-infected patients, renal elimination of unchanged drug accounts for about 40% of the overall clearance regardless of the route of administration (Table 8). The mean renal clearance was about twice the average endogenous creatinine clearance, indicating active tubular secretion in addition to glomerular filtration.
                        

                        


                        



                           
                              
Special Populations

                           
                           
                              
Pediatric
                           

                           
Pharmacokinetic parameters of stavudine in pediatric patients are presented in Table 9.
                        

                        


                        




                        
                           Renal Impairment
                           

                           
Data from two studies in adults indicated that the apparent oral clearance of stavudine decreased and the terminal elimination half-life increased as creatinine clearance decreased (see Table 10). Cmax and Tmax were not significantly altered by renal impairment. The mean ± SD hemodialysis clearance value of stavudine was 120 ± 18 mL/min (n=12); the mean ± SD percentage of the stavudine dose recovered in the dialysate, timed to occur between 2 to 6 hours post-dose, was 31 ± 5%. Based on these observations, it is recommended that stavudine dosage be modified in patients with reduced creatinine clearance and in patients receiving maintenance hemodialysis [see Dosage and Administration (2.3)].
                        

                        


                        




                        
                           Hepatic Impairment
                           

                           
Stavudine pharmacokinetics were not altered in five non-HIV-infected patients with hepatic impairment secondary to cirrhosis (Child-Pugh classification B or C) following the administration of a single 40 mg dose.
                              

                              
Geriatric
                           

                           
Stavudine pharmacokinetics have not been studied in patients >65 years of age. [See Use in Specific Populations (8.5).]
                           
                              

                              
Gender
                           

                           
A population pharmacokinetic analysis of data collected during a controlled clinical study in HIV-1-infected patients showed no clinically important differences between males (n=291) and females (n=27).
                              

                              
Race
                           

                           
A population pharmacokinetic analysis of data collected during a controlled clinical study in HIV-1-infected patients showed no clinically important differences between races (n=233 Caucasian, 39 African-American, 41 Hispanic, 1 Asian, and 4 other).

                           
                              
Drug Interaction Studies
                           

                           
Stavudine does not inhibit the major cytochrome P450 isoforms CYP1A2, CYP2C9, CYP2C19, CYP2D6, and CYP3A4; therefore, it is unlikely that clinically significant drug interactions will occur with drugs metabolized through these pathways. Because stavudine is not protein-bound, it is not expected to affect the pharmacokinetics of protein-bound drugs.

                           
Tables 11 and 12 summarize the effects on AUC and Cmax, with a 95% confidence interval (CI) when available, following coadministration of stavudine with didanosine, lamivudine, and nelfinavir. No clinically significant pharmacokinetic interactions were observed.
                        

                        



                     



                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.4 Microbiology
                     
                        

                        
                           Mechanism of Action
                           

                           
Stavudine, a nucleoside analogue of thymidine, is phosphorylated by cellular kinases to the active metabolite stavudine triphosphate. Stavudine triphosphate inhibits the activity of HIV-1 reverse transcriptase (RT) by competing with the natural substrate thymidine triphosphate (Ki=0.0083 to 0.032 μM) and by causing DNA chain termination following its incorporation into viral DNA. Stavudine triphosphate inhibits cellular DNA polymerases β and γ and markedly reduces the synthesis of mitochondrial DNA.
                              

                              
Antiviral Activity in Cell Culture

                            
The cell culture antiviral activity of stavudine was measured in peripheral blood mononuclear cells, monocytic cells, and lymphoblastoid cell lines. The concentration of drug necessary to inhibit HIV-1 replication by 50% (EC50) ranged from 0.009 to 4 μM against laboratory and clinical isolates of HIV-1. In cell culture, stavudine exhibited additive to antagonistic activity in combination with zidovudine. Stavudine in combination with either abacavir, didanosine, tenofovir, or zalcitabine exhibited additive to synergistic anti-HIV-1 activity. Ribavirin, at the 9 to 45 μM concentrations tested, reduced the anti-HIV-1 activity of stavudine by 2.5- to 5-fold. The relationship between cell culture susceptibility of HIV-1 to stavudine and the inhibition of HIV-1 replication in humans has not been established.
                              

                              
Resistance
 

                           HIV-1 isolates with reduced susceptibility to stavudine have been selected in cell culture (strain-specific) and were also obtained from patients treated with stavudine. Phenotypic analysis of HIV-1 isolates from 61 patients receiving prolonged (6 to 29 months) stavudine monotherapy showed that post-therapy isolates from four patients exhibited EC50 values more than 4-fold (range 7- to 16-fold) higher than the average pretreatment susceptibility of baseline isolates. Of these, HIV-1 isolates from one patient contained the zidovudine-resistance-associated substitutions T215Y and K219E, and isolates from another patient contained the multiple-nucleoside-resistance-associated substitution Q151M. Mutations in the RT gene of HIV-1 isolates from the other two patients were not detected. The genetic basis for stavudine susceptibility changes has not been identified.

                           
                              
Cross-resistance
 

                           Cross-resistance among HIV-1 reverse transcriptase inhibitors has been observed. Several studies have demonstrated that prolonged stavudine treatment can select and/or maintain thymidine analogue mutations (TAMs; M41L, D67N, K70R, L210W, T215Y/F, K219Q/E) associated with zidovudine resistance. HIV-1 isolates with one or more TAMs exhibited reduced susceptibility to stavudine in cell culture. These TAMs are seen at a similar frequency with stavudine and zidovudine in virological treatment. The clinical relevance of these findings suggests that stavudine should be avoided in the presence of thymidine analogue mutations.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         