
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Glycopyrrolate is a competitive inhibitor of acetylcholine receptors that are located on certain peripheral tissues, including salivary glands. Glycopyrrolate indirectly reduces the rate of salivation by preventing the stimulation of these receptors.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        Glycopyrrolate inhibits the action of acetylcholine on salivary glands thereby reducing the extent of salivation.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Absorption
                              
                              In a parallel study of children (n=6 per group) aged 7-14 years undergoing intraocular surgery, subjects received either intravenous (IV) or oral glycopyrrolate as a premedication. The mean absolute bioavailability of oral glycopyrrolate tablets was low (approximately 3%) and highly variable among subjects (range 1.3 to 13.3%). A similar pattern of low and variable relative bioavailability is seen in adults.
                              Analysis of population pharmacokinetic data from normal adults and children with cerebral palsy associated chronic moderate to severe drooling failed to demonstrate linear pharmacokinetics across the dose range. In the same analysis, population estimates of the apparent oral clearance (scaled by weight in children and adults) ranged from 5.28 - 38.95 L/hr/kg for healthy adults and 8.07 - 25.65 L/hr/kg for patients with cerebral palsy, a reflection of the low and highly variable oral bioavailability of glycopyrrolate.
                              Absorption of CUVPOSA (fasting) was compared to that of a marketed glycopyrrolate oral tablet. The Cmax after oral solution administration was 23% lower compared to tablet administration and AUC0-inf was 28% lower after oral solution administration. Mean Cmax after oral solution administration in the fasting state was 0.318 ng/mL, and mean AUC0-24 was 1.74 ng.hr/mL. Mean time to maximum plasma concentration for CUVPOSA was 3.1 hours, and mean plasma half-life was 3.0 hours.
                              In healthy adults, a high fat meal was shown to significantly affect the absorption of glycopyrrolate oral solution (10 mL, 1 mg/5 mL). The mean Cmax under fed high fat meal conditions was approximately 74% lower than the Cmax observed under fasting conditions. Similarly, mean AUC0-T was reduced by about 78% by the high fat meal compared with the fasting AUC0-T. A high fat meal markedly reduces the oral bioavailability of CUVPOSA. Therefore, CUVOPSA should be dosed at least one hour before or two hours after meals. Pharmacokinetic results (mean ± SD) are described in Table 3.
                              


                           



                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Distribution
                              
                              After IV administration, glycopyrrolate has a mean volume of distribution in children aged 1 to 14 years of approximately 1.3 to 1.8 L/kg, with a range from 0.7 to 3.9 L/kg. In adults aged 60-75 years, the volume of distribution was lower (0.42 L/kg +/- 0.22).
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Metabolism
                              
                              In adult patients who underwent surgery for cholelithiasis and were given a single IV dose of tritiated glycopyrrolate, approximately 85% of total radioactivity was excreted in urine and <5% was present in T-tube drainage of bile. In both urine and bile, >80% of the radioactivity corresponded to unchanged drug. These data suggest a small proportion of IV glycopyrrolate is excreted as one or more metabolites.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Elimination
                              
                              Approximately 65-80% of an IV glycopyrrolate dose was eliminated unchanged in urine in adults. In two studies, after IV administration to pediatric patients ages 1-14 years, mean clearance values ranged from 1.01- 1.41 L/kg/hr (range 0.32 -2.22 L/kg/hr). In adults, IV clearance values were 0.54 ± 0.14 L/kg/hr.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Pediatrics
                              
                              The estimated apparent clearance of glycopyrrolate from a population pharmacokinetic analysis (scaled by weight in children and adults) of oral and IV data was found to be 13.2 L/hr/kg or 92.7 L/hr for a typical 70 kg subject. In the same population based analysis, gender was not identified as having an effect on either glycopyrrolate clearance or systemic exposure.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Gender
                              
                              Population pharmacokinetic evaluation of adults and children administered IV or oral glycopyrrolate identified no effect of gender on glycopyrrolate clearance or systemic exposure.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Race
                              
                              The pharmacokinetics of glycopyrrolate by race have not been characterized.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Elderly
                              
                              Glycopyrrolate pharmacokinetics have not been characterized in the elderly.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Renal Impairment
                              
                              In one study, glycopyrrolate 4 mcg/kg was administered intravenously in uremic patients undergoing renal transplantation surgery. Mean AUC (10.6 mcg∙h/L), mean plasma clearance (0.43 L/hr/kg) and mean 3-hour urinary excretion (0.7%) for glycopyrrolate were significantly different than those of control patients (3.73 µg∙h/L, 1.14 L/hr/kg, and 50%, respectively). These results suggest that elimination of glycopyrrolate is severely impaired in patients with renal failure.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Hepatic Impairment
                              
                              Glycopyrrolate is largely renally eliminated. The pharmacokinetics of glycopyrrolate have not been evaluated in patients with hepatic impairment.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         