
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                            Digoxin tablets: Use with glycopyrrolate can increase digoxin serum levels. Monitor patients and consider use of alternative dosage forms of digoxin. (7)
                            Amantadine: Effects of glycopyrrolate may be increased with concomitant administration of amantadine. Consider decreasing the dose of glycopyrrolate during concomitant use. (7)
                            Atenolol or metformin: Glycopyrrolate may increase serum levels of atenolol or metformin. Consider dose reduction when used with glycopyrrolate. (7)
                            Haloperidol or levodopa: Glycopyrrolate may decrease serum levels of haloperidol or levodopa. Consider a dose increase when used with glycopyrrolate. (7)
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           Drugs Affected by Reduced GI Transit Time
                        
                        Glycopyrrolate reduces GI transit time, which may result in altered release of certain drugs when formulated in delayed- or controlled-release dosage forms.
                        
                            The passage of potassium chloride tablets through the GI tract may be arrested or delayed with coadministration of glycopyrrolate. Solid dosage forms of potassium chloride are contraindicated [see 
                                 Contraindications (4)
                              ].
                            Digoxin administered as slow dissolution oral tablets may have increased serum levels and enhanced action when administered with glycopyrrolate. Monitor patients receiving slow dissolution digoxin for increased action if glycopyrrolate is coadministered regularly. Consider the use of other oral dosage forms of digoxin (e.g., elixir or capsules).
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           Amantadine
                        
                        The anticholinergic effects of glycopyrrolate may be increased with concomitant administration of amantadine. Consider decreasing the dose of glycopyrrolate during coadministration of amantadine.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           Drugs Whose Plasma Levels May be Increased by Glycopyrrolate
                        
                        Coadministration of glycopyrrolate may result in increased levels of certain drugs.
                        
                            Atenolol's bioavailability may be increased with coadministration of glycopyrrolate. A reduction in the atenolol dose may be needed.
                            Metformin plasma levels may be elevated with coadministration of glycopyrrolate, increasing metformin's pharmacologic and toxic effects. Monitor clinical response to metformin with concomitant glycopyrrolate administration; consider a dose reduction of metformin if warranted.
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           Drugs Whose Plasma Levels May be Decreased by Glycopyrrolate
                        
                        Coadministration of glycopyrrolate may result in decreased levels of certain drugs.
                        
                            Haloperidol's serum level may be decreased when coadministered with glycopyrrolate, resulting in worsening of schizophrenic symptoms, and development of tardive dyskinesia. Closely monitor patients if coadministration cannot be avoided.
                            Levodopa's therapeutic effect may be reduced with glycopyrrolate administration. Consider increasing the dose of levodopa.
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         