
                     
                     
                     Drug Interactions
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Angiotensin Converting Enzyme (ACE)-Inhibitors/Angiotensin Receptor Blockers (ARBs)
                           
                              NSAIDs may diminish the antihypertensive effect of ACE-inhibitors, ARBs, or beta-blockers (including propanolol).
                              Monitor patients taking NSAIDs concomitantly with ACE-inhibitors, ARBs, or beta blockers for changes in blood pressure.
                              In addition, in patients who are elderly, volume-depleted (including those on diuretic therapy), or have compromised renal function, coadministration of NSAIDs with ACE inhibitors or ARBs may result in deterioration of renal function, including possible acute renal failure. Monitor these patients closely for signs of worsening renal function.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Antacids and Sucralfate
                           
                              Concomitant administration of some antacids (magnesium oxide or aluminum hydroxide) and sucralfate can delay the absorption of naproxen.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Aspirin
                           
                              When naproxen delayed-release tablets are administered with aspirin, its protein binding is reduced, although the clearance of free naproxen is not altered. The clinical significance of this interaction is not known; however, as with other NSAIDs, concomitant administration of naproxen delayed-release tablets and aspirin is not generally recommended because of the potential of increased adverse effects.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Cholestyramine
                           
                              As with other NSAIDs, concomitant administration of cholestyramine can delay the absorption of naproxen.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Diuretics
                           
                              Clinical studies, as well as postmarketing observations, have shown that naproxen delayed-release tablets can reduce the natriuretic effect of furosemide and thiazides in some patients. This response has been attributed to inhibition of renal prostaglandin synthesis. During concomitant therapy with NSAIDs, the patient should be observed closely for signs of renal failure (see , ), as well as to assure diuretic efficacy.
                                            WARNINGS
                                 
                                    Renal Effects
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Lithium
                           
                              NSAIDs have produced an elevation of plasma lithium levels and a reduction in renal lithium clearance. The mean minimum lithium concentration increased 15% and the renal clearance was decreased by approximately 20%. These effects have been attributed to inhibition of renal prostaglandin synthesis by the NSAID. Thus, when NSAIDs and lithium are administered concurrently, subjects should be observed carefully for signs of lithium toxicity.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Methotrexate
                           
                              NSAIDs have been reported to competitively inhibit methotrexate accumulation in rabbit kidney slices. Naproxen, naproxen sodium, and other non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs have been reported to reduce the tubular secretion of methotrexate in an animal model. This may indicate that they could enhance the toxicity of methotrexate. Caution should be used when NSAIDs are administered concomitantly with methotrexate.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Warfarin
                           
                              The effects of warfarin and NSAIDs on GI bleeding are synergistic, such that users of both drugs together have a risk of serious GI bleeding higher than users of either drug alone. No significant interactions have been observed in clinical studies with naproxen and coumarin-type anticoagulants. However, caution is advised since interactions have been seen with other non-steroidal agents of this class. The free fraction of warfarin may increase substantially in some subjects and naproxen interferes with platelet function.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Selective Serotonin Reuptake Inhibitors (SSRIs)
                           
                              There is an increased risk of gastrointestinal bleeding when selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) are combined with NSAIDs. Caution should be used when NSAIDs are administered concomitantly with SSRIs.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               