
               
               
               
                  CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  Numerous studies have confirmed Antigen E (AgE) as the major antigen associated with Short Ragweed pollinosis.  In a well controlled study, purified Antigen E was significantly superior to placebo in amelioration of symptoms associated with Short Ragweed pollinosis.1  Therefore, it is essential that the physician be aware of AgE content of allergenic extracts administered for hyposensitization therapy.
                  Some studies have indicated that for most patients a cumulative Antigen E dosage of less than 0.1 unit is not immunizing (sufficient to stimulate specific IgG antibodies).2     This, however, does not suggest that a 0.1 unit is a maximum tolerated dose.  Most moderately sensitive patients may tolerate a dosage ten to fifty times greater.  For exquisitely sensitive patients who cannot tolerate an immunizing dose of this preparation, the physician should consider immunotherapy with alternatives to conventional aqueous allergenic extract.
                  Alum precipitated bacterial and viral vaccines and alum precipitated toxoids have been effectively and routinely used in immunization injections for many years.  The explanation usually given for the effect of such preparations is that the physical chemical absorption of an antigen onto an alum complex results in a slower release of the antigen with a consequent prolongation of the antigenic stimulus.
                  The treatment consists of the subcutaneous injection of gradually increasing doses of the allergens to which the patient is allergic. It has been demonstrated that this method of treatment induces an increased tolerance to the allergens responsible for the symptoms on subsequent exposure.  Although the exact relationships between allergen, skin-sensitizing antibody (IgE) and the blocking antibody (IgG) have not been precisely established, clinically confirmed immunological studies have demonstrated the safety of Center-Al extracts and effectiveness in terms of symptom reduction and IgG response consistent with dose administered.3
                  
                  In a controlled study with Center-Al Ragweed given pre-seasonally, patients were selected and matched by histamine release to Antigen E and assigned to treatment groups:  Aqueous, Center-Al, and Placebo3.  All patients were highly sensitive to Ragweed Antigen E, reacting to <0.001 mcg Antigen E/mL as determined by intradermal skin testing.  These patients received a pre-seasonal course of immunotherapy and achieved a mean cumulative dose of 52 units of Antigen E (27,365 PNU) in 13 to 19 injections.  Starting doses in these patients were 10 PNU or approximately 0.02 units of AgE.  This dosage was found to be significantly superior to Placebo as measured by symptom scores during the ragweed pollen season.
                  Although maximum tolerated doses for Center-Al expressed in AgE content has not specifically been studied, one investigator reported maximum tolerated doses with Center-Al ragweed at 2,000-5,000 PNU (4-10 units of Antigen E) with previously untreated patients.9  At least three investigators using mixed (tall and short) ragweed extracts demonstrated a maximum tolerated peak dose of 2,000 to 10,000 PNU in 10-13 injections in moderately sensitive patients.6,10-12  This was achieved by roughly doubling the dose in each successive injection at low dosages (<1,000 PNU) and if well tolerated, increasing the dosage approximately 50% until maximum tolerated dose for each patient was achieved. 
                  Reaction rates for these patients were significantly lower than patients treated with aqueous extracts with the same or more conservative dosage regimen.3,7,8,11
                  
                  
		     
	
               
               
            
         