
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  It is estimated that grass pollen is responsible for 10 - 30% of all IgE-mediated allergies worldwide1. Temperate grasses, including Dactylis glomerata (Orchard Grass) Lolium perenne (Rye Grass), Phleum pratense (Timothy Grass) and Poa pratensis (Blue Grass), have practically identical allergenic characteristics.  Subtropical grasses, such as Cynodon dactylon (Bermuda Grass), are antigenically distinct from temperate grasses and should be regarded as separate allergenic sources.  For effective testing and treatment with grass pollen extracts, the extracts must be properly selected to represent the allergenic environment of the allergic individual1,2,3,4.
  Grass pollen extract may have as many as 40 components, of which 5 - 10 may be allergenic.  The most important allergens are classified into groups I - VI.  Allergens in these groups account for 90 - 100% of the IgE binding prevalence in the serum of grass pollen allergic patients1,5.
  The pharmacologic action of grass pollen extract used diagnostically is based on the liberation of histamine and other substances when allergens in the extract react with specific IgE antibody attached to mast cells.  The release of pharmacologically active mediators from mast cell results in the wheal-flare reaction associated with a positive skin test 6,7.
   The basis for the clinical improvement of allergic symptoms following immunotherapy with grass pollen extract is not clearly understood.  Several immunologic changes have been demonstrated that might be responsible for the amelioration of allergic symptoms.  These changes include (a) increase in serum IgG antibodies, (b) blunting of the seasonal rise of IgE antibodies, (c) elevation of blocking IgA/IgG antibodies in secretions, (d) reduced basophil reactivity and sensitivity to allergens and (e) reduced in vitro lymphocyte responsiveness to allergens 8.  There is evidence that symptoms are effectively altered only by the administration of the relevant allergen 9,10,11.
  The results shown in Table 1 were observed with 10,000 BAU/mL reference extract administered to 15 highly sensitive grass allergic persons by the puncture method (data on file at FDA).  The intradermal doses (BAU/mL) of grass pollen extracts required to elicit 50 mm sum of erythema are shown in Table 212. 

                     

                  
                  


                  



                     P∑E = Sum of erythema of the longest and orthogonal diameters.
                     

                     P∑W = Sum of edema (wheal) of the longest and orthogonal diameters.
                     

                  
                  


                  


Table 3 includes potency data for two lots each of non-standardized 1:10 w/v glycerinated extracts manufactured and distributed by Allermed.  The data show the following:  Two lots of Bermuda Grass Pollen Extract were more potent than the CBER 10,000 BAU/mL Bermuda Grass Pollen reference extract; two lots of Meadow Fescue Grass Pollen Extract, two lots of Perennial Rye Grass Pollen Extract, one lot of Redtop Grass Pollen Extract and one lot of Timothy Grass Pollen Extract were more potent than the respective 100,000 BAU/mL CBER reference extracts;  and two lots of June Grass Pollen Extract, two lots of Orchard Grass Pollen Extract, two lots of Sweet Vernal Grass Pollen Extract and one lot of Redtop Grass Pollen Extract were equipotent to the CBER 100,000 BAU/mL reference extracts.

                     

                  
                  


                  


Note: Relative potency compared to the U.S. Reference with a potency of 1.0.  The U.S. Reference for Bermuda Grass is 10,000 BAU/mL (range: 6,900 - 14,310 BAU/mL). The U.S. References for other grasses are 100,000 BAU/mL (range: 69,000 - 143,000 BAU/mL).

                  
               
               
            
         