
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  Tetracyclines are readily absorbed and are bound to plasma proteins in varying degree. They are concentrated by the liver in the bile, and excreted in the urine and feces at high concentrations and in a biologically active form. Doxycycline is virtually completely absorbed after oral administration.
                  Following a 200 mg dose, normal adult volunteers averaged peak serum levels of 2.6 mcg/mL of doxycycline at 2 hours, decreasing to 1.45 mcg/mL at 24 hours. Excretion of doxycycline by the kidney is about 40%/72 hours in individuals with normal function (creatinine clearance about 75 mL/min.). This percentage excretion may fall as low as 1 - 5%/72 hours in individuals with severe renal insufficiency (creatinine clearance below 10 mL/min.). Studies have shown no significant difference in serum half-life of doxycycline (range 18-22 hours) in individuals with normal and severely impaired renal function.
                  Hemodialysis does not alter serum half-life.
                  Results of animal studies indicate that tetracyclines cross the placenta and are found in fetal tissues.
               
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Microbiology
                     
                        Doxycycline inhibits bacterial protein synthesis by binding to the 30S ribosomal subunit. Doxycycline has bacteriostatic activity against a broad range of Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria. Cross resistance with other tetracyclines is common.
                        Doxycycline has been shown to be active against most isolates of the following microorganisms, both in vitro and in clinical infections as described in the INDICATIONS AND USAGE section of the package insert for DOXYCYCLINE HYCLATE TABLETS.
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Gram-Negative Bacteria
                              
                              
                                 Acinetobacter species
                              
                                 Bartonella bacilliformis
                              
                              
                                 Brucella species
                              
                                 Klebsiella species
                              
                                 Klebsiella granulomatis
                              
                              
                                 Campylobacter fetus
                              
                              
                                 Enterobacter aerogenes
                              
                              
                                 Escherichia coli
                              
                              
                                 Francisella tularensis
                              
                              
                                 Haemophilus ducreyi
                              
                              
                                 Haemophilus influenzae
                              
                              
                                 Neisseria gonorrhoeae
                              
                              
                                 Shigella species
                              
                                 Vibrio cholerae
                              
                              
                                 Yersinia pestis
                              
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Gram-Positive Bacteria
                              
                              
                                 Bacillus anthracis
                              
                              
                                 Streptococcus pneumoniae
                              
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Anaerobic Bacteria
                              
                              
                                 Clostridium species
                              
                                 Fusobacterium fusiforme
                              
                              
                                 Propionibacterium acnes
                              
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Other Bacteria
                              
                              
                                 Nocardiae and other aerobic Actinomyces species
                              
                                 Borrelia recurrentis
                              
                              
                                 Chlamydophila psittaci
                              
                              
                                 Chlamydia trachomatis
                              
                              
                                 Mycoplasma pneumoniae
                              
                              
                                 Rickettsiae
                              
                              
                                 Treponema pallidum
                              
                              
                                 Treponema pallidum  subspecies pertenue
                              
                              
                                 Ureaplasma urealyticum
                              
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Parasites
                              
                              
                                 Balantidium coli
                              
                              
                                 Entamoeba species
                              
                                 Plasmodium falciparumDoxycycline has been found to be active against the asexual erythrocytic forms of Plasmodium falciparum, but not against the gametocytes of P. falciparum. The precise mechanism of action of the drug is not known.
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Susceptibility Testing Methods
                           
                              When available, the clinical microbiology laboratory should provide the results of in vitro susceptibility test results for antimicrobial drugs used in resident hospitals to the physician as periodic reports that describe the susceptibility profile of nosocomial and community-acquired pathogens. These reports should aid the physician in selecting the most effective antimicrobial.
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Dilution techniques
                                 
                                    Quantitative methods are used to determine antimicrobial minimum inhibitory concentrations (MICs). These MICs provide estimates of the susceptibility of bacteria to antimicrobial compounds. The MICs should be determined using a standardized test method 1,2,4 (broth or agar). The MIC values should be interpreted according to criteria provided in Table 1.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Diffusion techniques
                                 
                                    Quantitative methods that require measurement of zone diameters can also provide reproducible estimates of the susceptibility of bacteria to antimicrobial compounds. The zone size provides an estimate of the susceptibility of bacteria to antimicrobial compounds. The zone size should be determined using a standardized test method 1,3,4. This procedure uses paper disks impregnated with 30-μg doxycycline to test the susceptibility of microorganisms to doxycycline. The disk diffusion interpretive criteria are provided in Table 1.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Anaerobic Techniques
                                 
                                    For anaerobic bacteria, the susceptibility to doxycycline can be determined by a standardized test method5. The MIC values obtained should be interpreted according to the criteria provided in Table 1.
                                    


                                    


A report of Susceptible (S) indicates that the antimicrobial drug is likely to inhibit growth of the microorganism if the antimicrobial drug reaches the concentration usually achievable at the site of infection. A report of Intermediate (I) indicates that the result should be considered equivocal, and, if the bacteria is not fully susceptible to alternative, clinically feasible drugs, the test should be repeated. This category implies possible clinical applicability in body sites where the drug product is physiologically concentrated or in situations where high dosage of drug can be used. This category also provides a buffer zone that prevents small uncontrolled technical factors from causing major discrepancies in interpretation. A report of Resistant (R) indicates that the antimicrobial is not likely to inhibit growth of the pathogen if the antimicrobial drug reaches the concentrations usually achievable at the infection site; other therapy should be selected.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Quality Control
                                 
                                    Standardized susceptibility test procedures require the use of laboratory controls to monitor and ensure the accuracy and precision of the supplies and reagents used in the assay, and the techniques of the individuals performing the test1,2,3,4,5,6,7. Standard doxycycline and tetracycline powders should provide the following range of MIC values noted in Table 2. For the diffusion technique using the 30 mcg doxycycline disk the criteria noted in Table 2 should be achieved.
                                    


