
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               Dyphylline is a xanthine derivative with pharmacological actions similar to theophylline and other 
members of this class of drugs. Its primary action is that of bronchodilation, but it also exhibits 
peripheral vasodilatory and other smooth muscle relaxant activity to a lesser degree. The 
bronchodilatory action of dyphylline, as with other xanthines, is thought to be mediated through 
competitive inhibition of phosphodiesterase with a resulting increase in cyclic AMP producing 
relaxation of bronchial smooth muscle.

                  
Dyphylline was reported to be the least toxic of seven theophylline derivatives, including the piperazine, 
N, N-diethylamino ethyl and the 2-hydroxy ethyl derivatives. The toxicity of dyphylline is only one-fifth 
that of aminophylline as determined intraperitoneally in mice, and only one-half as toxic in rats. Unlike 
the hydrolysable salts of theophylline, dyphylline is not converted to free theophylline in vivo. It is 
absorbed rapidly in therapeutically active form and in healthy volunteers reaches a mean peak plasma 
concentraion of 17.1 mcg/mL in approximately 45 minutes following a single oral dose of 1000 mg of 
dyphylline.

                  
Dyphylline exerts its bronchodilatory effects directly and, unlike theophylline, is excreted unchanged 
by the kidneys without being metabolized by the liver. Because of this, dyphylline pharmacokinetics 
and plasma levels are not influenced by various factors that affect liver function and hepatic enzyme 
activity, such as smoking, age, or concomitant use of drugs which affect liver function.

                  
The elimination half-life of dyphylline is approximately two hours (1.8-2.1 hr) and approximately 88% 
of a single oral dose can be recovered from the urine unchanged. The renal clearance would be 
correspondingly reduced in patients with impaired function. In anuric patients, the half-life may be 
increased 3 to 4 times normal. Dyphylline plasma levels are dose-related and generally predictable. 
The therapeutic range of plasma levels within which dyphylline can be expected to produce effective 
bronchodilation has not been determined.

                  
Dyphylline plasma concentrations can be accurately determined using high pressure liquid 
chromatography (HPLC) or gas-liquid chromatography (GLC). Guaifenesin is an expectorant whose 
action helps increase the output of thin respiratory tract fluid to facilitate mucociliary clearance and 
removal of inspissated mucus. 

                  
Guaifenesin is an expectorant which increases respiratory tract fluid secretions and helps to loosen 
phlegm and bronchial secretions. By reducing the viscosity of secretions, guaifenesin increases the 
efficiency of the cough reflex and of ciliary action in removing accumulated secretions from the trachea 
and bronchi. Guaifenesin is readily absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract and is rapidly metabolized 
and excreted in the urine. Guaifenesin has a plasma half-life of one hour. The major urinary metabolite 
is p-(2-methoxyphenoxy) lactic acid.

               
               
            
         