
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        The primary activity of insulin detemir is the regulation of glucose metabolism. Insulins, including insulin detemir, exert their specific action through binding to insulin receptors.  Receptor-bound insulin lowers blood glucose by facilitating cellular uptake of glucose into skeletal muscle and adipose tissue and by inhibiting the output of glucose from the liver. Insulin inhibits lipolysis in the adipocyte, inhibits proteolysis, and enhances protein synthesis.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        Insulin detemir is a soluble, long-acting basal human insulin analog with up to a 24-hour duration of action.  The pharmacodynamic profile of LEVEMIR is relatively constant with no pronounced peak. 
                        The duration of action of LEVEMIR is mediated by slowed systemic absorption of insulin detemir molecules from the injection site due to self-association of the drug molecules. In addition, the distribution of insulin detemir to peripheral target tissues is slowed because of binding to albumin.
                        Figure 2 shows results from a study in patients with type 1 diabetes conducted for a maximum of 24 hours after the subcutaneous injection of LEVEMIR or NPH insulin. The mean time between injection and the end of pharmacological effect for insulin detemir ranged from 7.6 hours to > 24 hours (24 hours was the end of the observation period).
                        
                           Figure 2: Activity Profiles in Patients with Type 1 Diabetes in a 24-hour Glucose Clamp Study 
                        
                        For doses in the interval of 0.2 to 0.4 Units/kg, insulin detemir exerts more than 50% of its maximum effect from 3 to 4 hours up to approximately 14 hours after dose administration. 
                        Figure 3 shows glucose infusion rate results from a 16-hour glucose clamp study in patients with type 2 diabetes. The clamp study was terminated at 16 hours according to protocol.
                        
                           Figure 3: Activity Profiles in Patients with Type 2 Diabetes in a 16-hour Glucose Clamp Study 
                        
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           Figure 2: Activity Profiles in Patients with Type 1 Diabetes in a 24-hour Glucose Clamp Study
                           
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           Figure 3: Activity Profiles in Patients with Type 2 Diabetes in a 16-hour Glucose Clamp Study
                           
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        
                           Absorption and Bioavailability
                        
                        After subcutaneous injection of LEVEMIR in healthy subjects and in patients with diabetes, insulin detemir serum concentrations had a relatively constant concentration/time profile over 24 hours with the maximum serum concentration (Cmax) reached between 6-8 hours post-dose.  Insulin detemir was more slowly absorbed after subcutaneous administration to the thigh where AUC0-5h was 30-40% lower and AUC0-inf  was 10% lower than the corresponding AUCs with subcutaneous injections to the deltoid and abdominal regions. 
                        The absolute bioavailability of insulin detemir is approximately 60%.
                        
                           Distribution and Elimination
                        
                        More than 98% of insulin detemir in the bloodstream is bound to albumin. The results of in vitro and in vivo protein binding studies demonstrate that there is no clinically relevant interaction between insulin detemir and fatty acids or other protein-bound drugs.
                        Insulin detemir has an apparent volume of distribution of approximately 0.1 L/kg.  After subcutaneous administration in patients with type 1 diabetes, insulin detemir has a terminal half-life of 5 to 7 hours depending on dose. 
                        
                           Specific Populations
                        
                        
                           
                              Children and Adolescents
                           - The pharmacokinetic properties of LEVEMIR  were investigated in children (6-12 years), adolescents (13-17 years), and adults with type 1 diabetes. In children, the insulin detemir plasma area under the curve (AUC) and Cmax were increased by 10% and 24%, respectively, as compared to adults. There was no difference in pharmacokinetics between adolescents and adults.
                        
                           
                              Geriatrics- In a clinical trial investigating differences in pharmacokinetics of a single subcutaneous dose of LEVEMIR in young (20 to 35 years) versus elderly (≥68 years) healthy subjects, the insulin detemir AUC was up to 35% higher among the elderly subjects due to reduced clearance.  As with other insulin preparations, LEVEMIR  should always be titrated according to individual requirements.
                        
                           
                              Gender
                           - No clinically relevant differences in pharmacokinetic parameters of LEVEMIR are observed between males and females.
                        
                           
                              Race- In two clinical pharmacology studies conducted in healthy Japanese and Caucasian subjects, there were no clinically relevant differences seen in pharmacokinetic parameters. The pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of LEVEMIR were investigated in a clamp study comparing patients with type 2 diabetes of Caucasian, African-American, and Latino origin. Dose-response relationships for LEVEMIR were comparable in these three populations.
                        
                           
                              Renal impairment- A single subcutaneous dose of 0.2 Units/kg (1.2 nmol/kg) of LEVEMIR was administered to healthy subjects and those with varying degrees of renal impairment (mild, moderate, severe, and hemodialysis-dependent).  In this study, there were no differences in the pharmacokinetics of LEVEMIR between healthy subjects and those with renal impairment.  However, some studies with human insulin have shown increased circulating levels of insulin in patients with renal impairment. Careful glucose monitoring and dose adjustments of insulin, including LEVEMIR, may be necessary in patients with renal impairment 
                              [see Warnings and Precautions (5.6)]
                           .
                        
                           
                              Hepatic impairment
                           - A single subcutaneous dose of 0.2 Units/kg (1.2 nmol/kg) of LEVEMIR was administered to healthy subjects and those with varying degrees of hepatic impairment (mild, moderate and severe).  LEVEMIR exposure as estimated by AUC decreased with increasing degrees of hepatic impairment with a corresponding increase in apparent clearance.  However, some studies with human insulin have shown increased circulating levels of insulin in patients with liver impairment.  Careful glucose monitoring and dose adjustments of insulin, including LEVEMIR, may be necessary in patients with hepatic impairment 
                              [see Warnings and Precautions (5.7)]
                           .
                        
                           
                              Pregnancy- The effect of pregnancy on the pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of LEVEMIR has not been studied 
                              [see Use in Specific Populations (8.1)]
                           .
                        
                           
                              Smoking- The effect of smoking on the pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of LEVEMIR has not been studied.
                        
                           
                              Liraglutide 
                           -No pharmacokinetic interaction was observed between liraglutide and LEVEMIR when separate subcutaneous injections of LEVEMIR 0.5 Unit/kg (single-dose) and liraglutide 1.8 mg (steady state) were administered in patients with type 2 diabetes.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         