
               
               
               7.	DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
                  During clinical trials, iloprost was used concurrently with anticoagulants, diuretics, cardiac glycosides, calcium channel blockers, analgesics, antipyretics, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, corticosteroids, and other medications. Intravenous infusion of iloprost had no effect on the pharmacokinetics of digoxin. Acetylsalicylic acid did not alter the clearance (pharmacokinetics) of iloprost.
               
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                            Ventavis has the potential to increase the hypotensive effect of vasodilators and antihypertensive agents (7.2).
                            There is a potential for increased risk of bleeding, particularly in patients maintained on anticoagulants (7.3).
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1		Cytochrome P450
                     
                        Although clinical studies have not been conducted with Ventavis (inhaled iloprost), in vitro studies of iloprost indicate that no relevant inhibition of cytochrome P450 drug metabolism would be expected.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2		Antihypertensives and Vasodilators
                     
                        In studies in normal subjects, there was no pharmacodynamic interaction between intravenous iloprost and either nifedipine, diltiazem, or captopril. However, Ventavis has the potential to increase the hypotensive effect of vasodilators and antihypertensive agents.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3		Anticoagulants and Platelet Inhibitors
                     
                        Since Ventavis inhibits platelet function, there is a potential for increased risk of bleeding, particularly in patients maintained on anticoagulants or platelet inhibitors.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         