
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        The principal pharmacologic action of pamidronate disodium is inhibition of bone resorption. Although the mechanism of antiresorptive action is not completely understood, several factors are thought to contribute to this action. Pamidronate disodium adsorbs to calcium phosphate (hydroxyapatite) crystals in bone and may block dissolution of this mineral component of bone. In vitro, pamidronate disodium inhibited osteoclast activity. In animal studies, pamidronate disodium inhibited bone resorption, but did not inhibit bone formation and mineralization. In animal tumor models, pamidronate disodium inhibited the increased osteoclast activity induced by tumors.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        Serum phosphate levels have been noted to decrease after administration of pamidronate disodium, presumably because of decreased release of phosphate from bone and increased renal excretion as parathyroid hormone levels, which are usually suppressed in hypercalcemia associated with malignancy, return toward normal. Phosphate therapy was administered in 30% of the patients in response to a decrease in serum phosphate levels. Phosphate levels usually returned toward normal within 7 to 10 days. 
                        Urinary calcium/creatinine and urinary hydroxyproline/creatinine ratios decrease and usually return to within or below normal after treatment with pamidronate disodium. These changes occur within the first week after treatment, as do decreases in serum calcium levels, and are consistent with an antiresorptive pharmacologic action.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        Table 3 shows maximum concentration, percent of dose excreted in urine, total clearance, and renal clearance of pamidronate after an intravenous infusion of 30, 60, or 90 mg of pamidronate disodium over 4 hours and 90 mg of pamidronate disodium over 24 hours in cancer patients (n=24) who had minimal or no bony involvement. 
                        
                           Table 3 Mean (Standard Deviation, CV%) Pamidronate Pharmacokinetic Parameters in Cancer Patients (n=6 for each group)
                        
                        


                        



                           Distribution 
                        
                        The body retention of pamidronate was 54 ± 16% (mean ± standard deviation) of the dose over 120 hours. 
                        
                           Metabolism 
                        
                        Pamidronate is not metabolized. 
                        
                           Elimination 
                        
                        The elimination half-life is 28 ± 7 hours (mean ± standard deviation). Total and renal clearances of pamidronate were 107 ± 50 mL/min and 49 ± 28 mL/min, respectively. The rate of elimination from bone has not been determined. 
                        After administration of 30, 60, and 90 mg of pamidronate disodium over 4 hours, and 90 mg of pamidronate disodium over 24 hours, 46 ± 16% (mean ± standard deviation) of the drug was excreted unchanged in the urine within 120 hours. Cumulative urinary excretion was linearly related to dose. 
                        
                           Specific Populations 
                        
                        
                           Renal Impairment 
                        
                        The pharmacokinetics of pamidronate were studied in cancer patients (n=19) with normal and varying degrees of renal impairment. Each patient received a single 90 mg dose of pamidronate disodium infused over 4 hours. Renal clearance correlated with creatinine clearance (see Figure 1). Because pamidronate disodium is administered on a monthly basis, drug accumulation is not expected. 
                        
                           Figure 1: Pamidronate renal clearance as a function of creatinine clearance in patients with normal and impaired renal function. The lines are the mean prediction line and 95% confidence intervals.
                        
                        
                        
                           Hepatic Impairment
                        
                        The pharmacokinetics of pamidronate were studied in male cancer patients at risk for bone metastases with normal hepatic function (n=6) and mild to moderate hepatic dysfunction (n=7). Each patient received a single 90 mg dose of pamidronate disodium infused over 4 hours. Although there was a difference in the pharmacokinetics between patients with normal and impaired hepatic function, the difference was not considered clinically relevant. Patients with hepatic impairment exhibited higher mean AUC (53% increase) and Cmax (29% increase), and decreased plasma clearance (33% decrease) values. Because pamidronate disodium is administered on a monthly basis, drug accumulation is not expected.
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           Figure 1
                           
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         