
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY

               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action

                     
                        Cefazolin is an antibacterial drug [see Microbiology (12.4)].
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics

                     
                        The pharmacokinetic/pharmacodynamic relationship for cefazolin has not been evaluated in patients.

                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics

                     
                        Studies have shown that following intravenous administration of cefazolin to normal volunteers, mean serum concentrations peaked at approximately 185 mcg/mL and were approximately 4 mcg/mL at 8 hours for a 1 gram dose.

                        The serum half-life for cefazolin is approximately 1.8 hours following IV administration.

                        In a study, using normal volunteers, of constant intravenous infusion with dosages of 3.5 mg/kg for 1 hour (approximately 250 mg) and 1.5 mg/kg the next 2 hours (approximately 100 mg), cefazolin produced a steady serum concentration at the third hour of approximately 28 mcg/mL.

                        Studies in patients hospitalized with infections indicate that cefazolin produces mean peak serum concentrations approximately equivalent to those seen in normal volunteers.

                        Bile concentrations in patients without obstructive biliary disease can reach or exceed serum concentrations by up to five times; however, in patients with obstructive biliary disease, bile concentrations of cefazolin are considerably lower than serum concentrations (less than 1 mcg/mL).

                        In synovial fluid, the cefazolin concentration becomes comparable to that reached in serum at about 4 hours after drug administration.

                        Studies of cord blood show prompt transfer of cefazolin across the placenta. Cefazolin is present in very low concentrations in the milk of nursing mothers.

                        Cefazolin is excreted unchanged in the urine. In the first 6 hours approximately 60% of the drug is excreted in the urine and this increases to 70% to 80% within 24 hours.

                        In patients undergoing peritoneal dialysis (2 L/hr.), cefazolin produced mean serum levels of approximately 10 and 30 mcg/mL after 24 hours' instillation of a dialyzing solution containing 50 mg/L and 150 mg/L, respectively. Mean peak levels were 29 mcg/mL (range 13 to 44 mcg/mL) with 50 mg/L (3 patients), and 72 mcg/mL (range 26 to142 mcg/mL) with 150 mg/L (6 patients). Intraperitoneal administration of cefazolin is usually well tolerated.

                        Controlled studies on adult normal volunteers, receiving 1 gram 4 times a day for 10 days, monitoring CBC, SGOT, SGPT, bilirubin, alkaline phosphatase, BUN, creatinine, and urinalysis, indicated no clinically significant changes attributed to cefazolin.

                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.4 Microbiology

                     
                     
                        
                           
                              To reduce the development of drug-resistant bacteria and maintain the effectiveness of Cefazolin for Injection, USP and other antibacterial drugs, Cefazolin for Injection, USP should be used only to treat or prevent infections that are proven or strongly suspected to be caused by bacteria. (12.4)

                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Mechanism of Action
                              
                              Cefazolin is a bactericidal agent that acts by inhibition of bacterial cell wall synthesis.

                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Mechanism of Resistance
                              
                              Predominant mechanisms of bacterial resistance to cephalosporins include the presence of extended-spectrum beta-lactamases and enzymatic hydrolysis.

                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Lists of Microorganisms
                              
                              Cefazolin has been shown to be active against most isolates of the following microorganisms, both in vitro and in clinical infections as described in the INDICATIONS AND USAGE (1) section.

                              
                                 Gram-Positive Bacteria
                                       
                                           

                                          Staphylococcus aureus
                                       
                                       
                                           

                                          Staphylococcus epidermidis
                                       
                                       
                                           

                                          Streptococcus pyogenes, and Streptococcus agalactiae
                                       
                                       
                                           

                                          Streptococcus pneumoniae
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                              Methicillin-resistant staphylococci are uniformly resistant to cefazolin.

                              
                                 Gram-Negative Bacteria
                                       
                                           

                                          Escherichia coli
                                       
                                       
                                           

                                          Proteus mirabilis
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                              Most isolates of indole positive Proteus (Proteus vulgaris), Enterobacter spp., Morganella morganii, Providencia rettgeri, Serratia spp., and Pseudomonas spp. are resistant to cefazolin.

                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Susceptibility Test Methods
                              
                              When available, the clinical microbiology laboratory should provide the results of in vitro susceptibility test results for antimicrobial drug products used in resident hospitals to the physician as periodic reports that describe the susceptibility profile of nosocomial and community-acquired pathogens. These reports should aid the physician in selecting an antibacterial drug product for treatment.

                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Dilution Techniques
                                    
                                    Quantitative methods are used to determine minimum inhibitory concentrations (MICs). These MICs provide estimates of the susceptibility of bacteria to antimicrobial compounds. The MICs should be determined using a standard test1, 2 (broth and/or agar). The MIC values obtained should be interpreted according to criteria as provided in Table 3.

                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Diffusion Techniques
                                    
                                    Quantitative methods that require measurement of zone diameters provide reproducible estimates of the susceptibility of bacteria to antimicrobial compounds. The zone size provides an estimate of the susceptibility of bacteria to antimicrobial compounds. The zone size should be interpreted using a standard test method2, 3. This procedure uses paper disks impregnated with 30 mcg cefazolin to test the susceptibility of microorganisms to cefazolin. The disk diffusion interpretive criteria are provided in Table 3.

                                    


                                    


NOTE:

                                    
                                       S. pyogenes and S. agalactiae that have a penicillin MIC of ≤ 0.12 mcg/mL, or disk diffusion zone diameters of ≥ 24 mm with a 10 mcg penicillin disk, may be interpreted as susceptible to cefazolin. Non-meningitis isolates of S. pneumoniae that have a penicillin MIC of ≤ 0.06 mcg/mL, may be interpreted as susceptible to cefazolin.

                                    A report of Susceptible indicates that the antimicrobial is likely to inhibit growth of the pathogen if the antimicrobial compound reaches the concentrations at the infection site necessary to inhibit growth of the pathogen. A report of Intermediate indicates that the result should be considered equivocal, and, if the microorganism is not fully susceptible to alternative, clinically feasible drugs, the test should be repeated. This category implies possible clinical applicability in body sites where the drug product is physiologically concentrated or in situations where a high dosage of the drug product can be used. This category also provides a buffer zone that prevents small uncontrolled technical factors from causing major discrepancies in interpretation. A report of Resistant indicates that the antimicrobial is not likely to inhibit growth of the pathogen if the antimicrobial compound reaches the concentrations usually achievable at the infection site; other therapy should be selected.

                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Quality Control
                              
                              Standardized susceptibility test procedures require the use of laboratory controls to monitor and ensure the accuracy and precision of supplies and reagents used in the assay, and the techniques of the individual performing the test1, 2, 3. Standard cefazolin powder should provide the following MIC values noted in Table 4. For the diffusion technique using the 30 mcg disk, the criteria in Table 4 should be achieved.

                              


