
                     
                     
                     Drug Interactions
                     
                        Bisoprolol fumarate and hydrochlorothiazide may potentiate the action of other antihypertensive agents used concomitantly. Bisoprolol fumarate and hydrochlorothiazide should not be combined with other beta-blocking agents. Patients receiving catecholamine-depleting drugs, such as reserpine or guanethidine, should be closely monitored because the added beta-adrenergic blocking action of bisoprolol may produce excessive reduction of sympathetic activity. In patients receiving concurrent therapy with clonidine, if therapy is to be discontinued, it is suggested that bisoprolol fumarate and hydrochlorothiazide be discontinued for several days before the withdrawal of clonidine.
                        Bisoprolol fumarate and hydrochlorothiazide should be used with caution when myocardial depressants or inhibitors of AV conduction, such as certain calcium antagonists [particularly of the phenylalkylamine (verapamil) and benzothiazepine (diltiazem) classes], or antiarrhythmic agents, such as disopyramide, are used concurrently.
                        Both digitalis glycosides and beta-blockers slow atrioventricular conduction and decrease heart rate. Concomitant use can increase the risk of bradycardia.
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Bisoprolol
                           
                           
                              Concurrent use of rifampin increases the metabolic clearance of bisoprolol, shortening its elimination half-life. However, initial dose modification is generally not necessary. 
                              Pharmacokinetic studies document no clinically relevant interactions with other agents given concomitantly, including thiazide diuretics and cimetidine. There was no effect of bisoprolol on prothrombin times in patients on stable doses of warfarin.
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    Risk of Anaphylactic Reaction
                                 
                                 
                                    While taking beta-blockers, patients with a history of severe anaphylactic reaction to a variety of allergens may be more reactive to repeated challenge, either accidental, diagnostic, or therapeutic. Such patients may be unresponsive to the usual doses of epinephrine used to treat allergic reactions.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Hydrochlorothiazide
                           
                           
                              When given concurrently the following drugs may interact with thiazide diuretics.
                              
                                 Alcohol, Barbiturates, or Narcotics: Potentiation of orthostatic hypotension may occur.
                              
                                 Antidiabetic Drugs (Oral Agents and Insulin): Dosage adjustment of the antidiabetic drug may be required.
                              
                                 Other Antihypertensive Drugs: Additive effect or potentiation.
                              
                                 Cholestyramine and Colestipol Resins: Absorption of hydrochlorothiazide is impaired in the presence of anionic exchange resins. Single doses of cholestyramine and colestipol resins bind the hydrochlorothiazide and reduce its absorption in the gastrointestinal tract by up to 85% and 43%, respectively.
                              
                                 Corticosteroids, ACTH: Intensified electrolyte depletion, particularly hypokalemia.
                              
                                 Pressor Amines (e.g., Norepinephrine): Possible decreased response to pressor amines but not sufficient to preclude their use.
                              
                                 Skeletal Muscle Relaxants, Nondepolarizing (e.g., Tubocurarine): Possible increased responsiveness to the muscle relaxant.
                              
                                 Lithium: Generally should not be given with diuretics. Diuretic agents reduce the renal clearance of lithium and add a high risk of lithium toxicity. Refer to the package insert for lithium preparations before use of such preparations with bisoprolol fumarate and hydrochlorothiazide.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Non-Steroidal Anti-Inflammatory Drugs:
                           
                           
                              In some patients, the administration of a non-steroidal anti-inflammatory agent can reduce the diuretic, natriuretic, and antihypertensive effects of loop, potassium sparing and thiazide diuretics. Therefore, when bisoprolol fumarate and hydrochlorothiazide and non-steroidal anti-inflammatory agents are used concomitantly, the patient should be observed closely to determine if the desired effect of the diuretic is obtained.
                              In patients receiving thiazides, sensitivity reactions may occur with or without a history of allergy or bronchial asthma. Photosensitivity reactions and possible exacerbation or activation of systemic lupus erythematosus have been reported in patients receiving thiazides. The antihypertensive effects of thiazides may be enhanced in the post-sympathectomy patient.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               