
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Didanosine is an antiviral agent [see 
                           
                              Microbiology (12.4)
                           ].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        The pharmacokinetic parameters of didanosine are summarized in Table 10. Didanosine is rapidly absorbed, with peak plasma concentrations generally observed from 0.25 to 1.50 hours following oral dosing. Increases in plasma didanosine concentrations were dose proportional over the range of 50 to 400 mg. Steady-state pharmacokinetic parameters did not differ significantly from values obtained after a single dose. Binding of didanosine to plasma proteins in vitro was low (less than 5%). Based on data from in vitro and animal studies, it is presumed that the metabolism of didanosine in man occurs by the same pathways responsible for the elimination of endogenous purines. 
                        


                     



                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Effect of Food
                           
                           
                              Didanosine peak plasma concentrations (Cmax) and area under the plasma concentration time curve (AUC) were decreased by approximately 55% when VIDEX tablets were administered up to 2 hours after a meal. Administration of VIDEX tablets up to 30 minutes before a meal did not result in any significant changes in bioavailability [see Dosage and Administration (2)
                                 ]. VIDEX should be taken on an empty stomach.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Special Populations
                           
                           
                              
                                 Renal Insufficiency: Data from two studies in adults indicated that the apparent oral clearance of didanosine decreased and the terminal elimination half-life increased as creatinine clearance decreased (see Table 11). Following oral administration, didanosine was not detectable in peritoneal dialysate fluid (n=6); recovery in hemodialysate (n=5) ranged from 0.6% to 7.4% of the dose over a 3-4 hour dialysis period. The absolute bioavailability of didanosine was not affected in patients requiring dialysis. [See Dosage and Administration (2.2)
                                 .]
                              


                              



                                 Hepatic Impairment: The pharmacokinetics of didanosine have been studied in 12 non-HIV-infected subjects with moderate (n=8) to severe (n=4) hepatic impairment (Child-Pugh Class B or C). Mean AUC and Cmax values following a single 400 mg dose of didanosine were approximately 13% and 19% higher, respectively, in patients with hepatic impairment compared to matched healthy subjects. No dose adjustment is needed, because a similar range and distribution of AUC and Cmax values was observed for subjects with hepatic impairment and matched healthy controls. [See Dosage and Administration (2.3)
                                 .]
                              
                                 Pediatric Patients: The pharmacokinetics of didanosine have been evaluated in HIV-exposed and HIV-infected pediatric patients from birth to adulthood. Overall, the pharmacokinetics of didanosine in pediatric patients are similar to those of didanosine in adults. Didanosine plasma concentrations appear to increase in proportion to oral doses ranging from 25 to 120 mg per m2 in pediatric patients less than 5 months old and from 80 to 180 mg per m2 in children above 8 months old. For information on controlled clinical studies in pediatric patients, see Clinical Studies (14.2)
                                  and 
                                    Use in Specific Populations (8.4)
                                 .
                              
                                 Geriatric Patients: Didanosine pharmacokinetics have not been studied in patients over 65 years of age [see Use in Specific Populations (8.5)
                                 ].
                              
                                 Gender: The effects of gender on didanosine pharmacokinetics have not been studied.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Drug Interactions
                           
                           
                              Tables 12 and 13 summarize the effects on AUC and Cmax, with a 95% confidence interval (CI) when available, following coadministration of VIDEX (didanosine) with a variety of drugs. Drug-drug interactions for VIDEX buffered tablets are applicable to the VIDEX pediatric powder formulation and are noted in Tables 12 and 13. For clinical recommendations based on drug interaction studies for drugs in bold font, see 
                                    Dosage and Administration (2.3
                                 
                                  for Concomitant Therapy with Tenofovir Disoproxil Fumarate), Contraindications (4), and 
                                    Drug Interactions (7.1 and 7.2)
                                 .
                              



                           



                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.4 Microbiology
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Mechanism of Action
                           
                           
                              Didanosine is a synthetic nucleoside analogue of the naturally occurring nucleoside deoxyadenosine in which the 3′-hydroxyl group is replaced by hydrogen. Intracellularly, didanosine is converted by cellular enzymes to the active metabolite, dideoxyadenosine 5′-triphosphate. Dideoxyadenosine 5′-triphosphate inhibits the activity of HIV-1 reverse transcriptase both by competing with the natural substrate, deoxyadenosine 5′-triphosphate, and by its incorporation into viral DNA causing termination of viral DNA chain elongation.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Antiviral Activity in Cell Culture
                           
                           
                              The anti-HIV-1 activity of didanosine was evaluated in a variety of HIV-1 infected lymphoblastic cell lines and monocyte/macrophage cell cultures. The concentration of drug necessary to inhibit viral replication by 50% (EC50) ranged from 2.5 to 10 µM (1 µM = 0.24 µg/mL) in lymphoblastic cell lines and 0.01 to 0.1 µM in monocyte/macrophage cell cultures. 
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Resistance
                           
                           
                              HIV-1 isolates with reduced sensitivity to didanosine have been selected in cell culture and were also obtained from patients treated with didanosine. Genetic analysis of isolates from didanosine-treated patients showed mutations in the reverse transcriptase gene that resulted in the amino acid substitutions K65R, L74V, and M184V. The L74V substitution was most frequently observed in clinical isolates. Phenotypic analysis of HIV-1 isolates from 60 patients (some with prior zidovudine treatment) receiving 6 to 24 months of didanosine monotherapy showed that isolates from 10 of 60 patients exhibited an average of a 10-fold decrease in susceptibility to didanosine in cell culture compared to baseline isolates. Clinical isolates that exhibited a decrease in didanosine susceptibility harbored one or more didanosine resistance-associated substitutions. 
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Cross-resistance
                           
                           
                              HIV-1 isolates from 2 of 39 patients receiving combination therapy for up to 2 years with didanosine and zidovudine exhibited decreased susceptibility to didanosine, lamivudine, stavudine, zalcitabine, and zidovudine in cell culture. These isolates harbored five substitutions (A62V, V75I, F77L, F116Y, and Q151M) in the reverse transcriptase gene. In data from clinical studies, the presence of thymidine analogue mutations (M41L, D67N, L210W, T215Y, K219Q) has been shown to decrease the response to didanosine.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         