
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  
                     
                        Coadministration of VIDEX can alter the concentration of other drugs and other drugs may alter the concentration of didanosine. The potential drug-drug interactions must be considered prior to and during therapy. (4, 7, 12.3)
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 Established Drug Interactions
                     
                        Clinical recommendations based on the results of drug interaction studies are listed in Table 8. Pharmacokinetic results of drug interaction studies are shown in Tables 12 and 13 [see Contraindications (4), Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)
                           ].
                        


                        


Exposure to didanosine is increased when coadministered with tenofovir disoproxil fumarate [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)
                           ]. Increased exposure may cause or worsen didanosine-related clinical toxicities, including pancreatitis, symptomatic hyperlactatemia/lactic acidosis, and peripheral neuropathy. Coadministration of tenofovir disoproxil fumarate with VIDEX should be undertaken with caution, and patients should be monitored closely for didanosine-related toxicities and clinical response. VIDEX should be suspended if signs or symptoms of pancreatitis, symptomatic hyperlactatemia, or lactic acidosis develop [see Dosage and Administration (2.3), Warnings and Precautions (5)
                           ]. Suppression of CD4 cell counts has been observed in patients receiving tenofovir disoproxil fumarate with didanosine at a dose of 400 mg daily.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 Predicted Drug Interactions
                     
                        Predicted drug interactions with VIDEX are listed in Table 9.
                        


