
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Increased concentrations of the incretin
hormones such as glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1) and glucose-dependent insulinotropic
polypeptide (GIP) are released into the bloodstream from the small intestine
in response to meals. These hormones cause insulin release from the pancreatic
beta cells in a glucose-dependent manner but are inactivated by the DPP4 enzyme within minutes. GLP-1 also lowers glucagon secretion
from pancreatic alpha cells, reducing hepatic glucose production. In patients
with type 2 diabetes, concentrations of GLP-1 are reduced but the insulin
response to GLP-1 is preserved. Saxagliptin is a competitive DPP4 inhibitor
that slows the inactivation of the incretin hormones, thereby increasing their
bloodstream concentrations and reducing fasting and postprandial glucose concentrations
in a glucose-dependent manner in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        In patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus,
administration of ONGLYZA inhibits DPP4 enzyme activity for a 24-hour period.
After an oral glucose load or a meal, this DPP4 inhibition resulted in a 2-
to 3-fold increase in circulating levels of active GLP-1 and GIP, decreased
glucagon concentrations, and increased glucose-dependent insulin secretion
from pancreatic beta cells. The rise in insulin and decrease in glucagon were
associated with lower fasting glucose concentrations and reduced glucose excursion
following an oral glucose load or a meal.
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Cardiac Electrophysiology
                           
                              In a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled,
4-way crossover, active comparator study using moxifloxacin in 40 healthy
subjects, ONGLYZA was not associated with clinically meaningful prolongation
of the QTc interval or heart rate at daily doses up to 40 mg (8 times the
MRHD).
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        The pharmacokinetics of saxagliptin
and its active metabolite, 5-hydroxy saxagliptin were similar in healthy subjects
and in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus. The Cmax and
AUC values of saxagliptin and its active metabolite increased proportionally
in the 2.5 to 400 mg dose range. Following a 5 mg single oral dose of saxagliptin
to healthy subjects, the mean plasma AUC values for saxagliptin and its active
metabolite were 78 ng•h/mL and 214 ng•h/mL, respectively. The corresponding
plasma Cmax values were 24 ng/mL and 47 ng/mL, respectively.
The average variability (%CV) for AUC and Cmax  for
both saxagliptin and its active metabolite was less than 25%.
                        No
appreciable accumulation of either saxagliptin or its active metabolite was
observed with repeated once-daily dosing at any dose level. No dose- and time-dependence
were observed in the clearance of saxagliptin and its active metabolite over
14 days of once-daily dosing with saxagliptin at doses ranging from 2.5 to
400 mg.
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Absorption
                           
                              The median time to maximum concentration
(Tmax) following the 5 mg once daily dose was 2 hours
for saxagliptin and 4 hours for its active metabolite. Administration with
a high-fat meal resulted in an increase in Tmax of
saxagliptin by approximately 20 minutes as compared to fasted conditions.
There was a 27% increase in the AUC of saxagliptin when given with a meal
as compared to fasted conditions. ONGLYZA may be administered with or without
food.
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Distribution
                           
                              The in vitro protein
binding of saxagliptin and its active metabolite in human serum is negligible.
Therefore, changes in blood protein levels in various disease states (e.g.,
renal or hepatic impairment) are not expected to alter the disposition of
saxagliptin.
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Metabolism
                           
                              The metabolism of saxagliptin is
primarily mediated by cytochrome P450 3A4/5 (CYP3A4/5). The major metabolite
of saxagliptin is also a DPP4 inhibitor, which is one-half as potent as saxagliptin.
Therefore, strong CYP3A4/5 inhibitors and inducers will alter the pharmacokinetics
of saxagliptin and its active metabolite. [See 
                                    Drug
Interactions (7)
                                 .]
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Excretion
                           
                              Saxagliptin is eliminated by both
renal and hepatic pathways. Following a single 50 mg dose of 14C-saxagliptin,
24%, 36%, and 75% of the dose was excreted in the urine as saxagliptin, its
active metabolite, and total radioactivity, respectively. The average renal
clearance of saxagliptin (~230 mL/min) was greater than the average estimated
glomerular filtration rate (~120 mL/min), suggesting some active renal excretion.
A total of 22% of the administered radioactivity was recovered in feces representing
the fraction of the saxagliptin dose excreted in bile and/or unabsorbed drug
from the gastrointestinal tract. Following a single oral dose of ONGLYZA 5
mg to healthy subjects, the mean plasma terminal half-life (t1/2)
for saxagliptin and its active metabolite was 2.5 and 3.1 hours, respectively.
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Specific Populations
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Renal Impairment
                                 
                                    A single-dose, open-label study was
conducted to evaluate the pharmacokinetics of saxagliptin (10 mg dose) in
subjects with varying degrees of chronic renal impairment (N=8 per group)
compared to subjects with normal renal function. The study included patients
with renal impairment classified on the basis of creatinine clearance as mild
(>50 to ≤80 mL/min), moderate (30 to ≤50 mL/min), and severe (<30 mL/min),
as well as patients with end-stage renal disease on hemodialysis. Creatinine
clearance was estimated from serum creatinine based on the Cockcroft-Gault
formula:
                                    


                                    


The degree of renal impairment did not affect the Cmax of
saxagliptin or its active metabolite. In subjects with mild renal impairment,
the AUC values of saxagliptin and its active metabolite were  20% and 70%
higher, respectively, than AUC values in subjects with normal renal function.
Because increases of this magnitude are not considered to be clinically relevant,
dosage adjustment in patients with mild renal impairment is not recommended.
In subjects with moderate or severe renal impairment, the AUC values of saxagliptin
and its active metabolite were up to 2.1- and 4.5-fold higher, respectively,
than AUC values in subjects with normal renal function. To achieve plasma
exposures of saxagliptin and its active metabolite similar to those in patients
with normal renal function, the recommended dose is 2.5 mg once daily in patients
with moderate and severe renal impairment, as well as in patients with end-stage
renal disease requiring hemodialysis. Saxagliptin is removed by hemodialysis.
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Hepatic Impairment
                                 
                                    In subjects with hepatic impairment
(Child-Pugh classes A, B, and C), mean Cmax and AUC
of saxagliptin were up to 8% and 77% higher, respectively, compared to healthy
matched controls following administration of a single 10 mg dose of saxagliptin.
The corresponding Cmax and AUC of the active metabolite
were up to 59% and 33% lower, respectively, compared to healthy matched controls.
These differences are not considered to be clinically meaningful. No dosage
adjustment is recommended for patients with hepatic impairment. 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Body Mass Index
                                 
                                    No dosage adjustment is recommended
based on body mass index (BMI) which was not identified as a significant covariate
on the apparent clearance of saxagliptin or its active metabolite in the population
pharmacokinetic analysis.
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Gender
                                 
                                    No
dosage adjustment is recommended based on gender. There were no differences
observed in saxagliptin pharmacokinetics between males and females. Compared
to males, females had approximately 25% higher exposure values for the active
metabolite than males, but this difference is unlikely to be of clinical relevance.
Gender was not identified as a significant covariate on the apparent clearance
of saxagliptin and its active metabolite in the population pharmacokinetic
analysis.
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Geriatric
                                 
                                    No dosage adjustment is recommended
based on age alone. Elderly subjects (65-80 years) had 23% and 59% higher
geometric mean Cmax and geometric mean AUC values,
respectively, for saxagliptin than young subjects (18-40 years). Differences
in active metabolite pharmacokinetics between elderly and young subjects generally
reflected the differences observed in saxagliptin pharmacokinetics. The difference
between the pharmacokinetics of saxagliptin and the active metabolite in young
and elderly subjects is likely due to multiple factors including declining
renal function and metabolic capacity with increasing age. Age was not identified
as a significant covariate on the apparent clearance of saxagliptin and its
active metabolite in the population pharmacokinetic analysis.
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Pediatric
                                 
                                    Studies characterizing the pharmacokinetics
of saxagliptin in pediatric patients have not been performed.
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Race and Ethnicity
                                 
                                    No dosage adjustment is recommended
based on race. The population pharmacokinetic analysis compared the pharmacokinetics
of saxagliptin and its active metabolite in 309 Caucasian subjects with 105
non-Caucasian subjects (consisting of six racial groups). No significant difference
in the pharmacokinetics of saxagliptin and its active metabolite were detected
between these two populations.
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Drug-Drug Interactions
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 In Vitro Assessment of Drug Interactions
                                 
                                    The metabolism of saxagliptin is primarily
mediated by CYP3A4/5.
                                    In in vitro studies,
saxagliptin and its active metabolite did not inhibit CYP1A2, 2A6, 2B6, 2C9,
2C19, 2D6, 2E1, or 3A4, or induce CYP1A2, 2B6, 2C9, or 3A4. Therefore, saxagliptin
is not expected to alter the metabolic clearance of coadministered drugs that
are metabolized by these enzymes. Saxagliptin is a P-glycoprotein (P-gp) substrate
but is not a significant inhibitor or inducer of P-gp.
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 In Vivo Assessment of Drug Interactions
                                 
                                    



