
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS 
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           Androgens may decrease blood glucose, and therefore insulin requirement in diabetic patients (7.1). 
                           Use of testosterone with ACTH or corticosteroids may result in increased fluid retention. Use with caution, particularly in patients with cardiac, renal, or hepatic disease (7.2). 
                           Changes in anticoagulant activity may be seen with androgens. More frequent monitoring of INR and prothrombin time is recommended (7.3). 
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 Insulin 
                     
                        Changes in insulin sensitivity or glycemic control may occur in patients treated with androgens. In diabetic patients, the metabolic effects of androgens may decrease blood glucose and, therefore, insulin requirements. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 Corticosteroids 
                     
                        The concurrent use of testosterone with ACTH or corticosteroids may result in increased fluid retention and should be monitored cautiously, particularly in patients with cardiac, renal or hepatic disease. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3 Oral Anticoagulants 
                     
                        Changes in anticoagulant activity may be seen with androgens. More frequent monitoring of INR and prothrombin time are recommended in patients taking anticoagulants, especially at the initiation and termination of androgen therapy. 
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         