
               
               
               
                  
                  CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
                  

                  
                  Pharmacodynamics
                  

                  
                     Ondansetron is a selective 5-HT3 receptor antagonist. While its mechanism of action has not 
been fully characterized, ondansetron is not a dopamine-receptor antagonist. 
Serotonin receptors of the 5-HT3 type are present both 
peripherally on vagal nerve terminals and centrally in the chemoreceptor trigger 
zone of the area postrema. It is not certain whether ondansetron’s antiemetic 
action is mediated centrally, peripherally, or in both sites. However, cytotoxic 
chemotherapy appears to be associated with release of serotonin from the 
enterochromaffin cells of the small intestine. In humans, urinary 5-HIAA 
(5-hydroxyindoleacetic acid) excretion increases after cisplatin administration 
in parallel with the onset of emesis. The released serotonin may stimulate the 
vagal afferents through the 5-HT3 receptors and initiate 
the vomiting reflex.
                  
                  

                  In animals, the emetic response to cisplatin can be prevented by pretreatment 
with an inhibitor of serotonin synthesis, bilateral abdominal vagotomy and 
greater splanchnic nerve section, or pretreatment with a serotonin 5-HT3 receptor antagonist.
                  In normal volunteers, single intravenous doses of 0.15 mg/kg of ondansetron 
had no effect on esophageal motility, gastric motility, lower esophageal 
sphincter pressure, or small intestinal transit time. Multiday administration of 
ondansetron has been shown to slow colonic transit in normal volunteers. 
Ondansetron has no effect on plasma prolactin concentrations.
                  Ondansetron does not alter the respiratory depressant effects produced by 
alfentanil or the degree of neuromuscular blockade produced by atracurium. 
Interactions with general or local anesthetics have not been studied.
                  
                  Pharmacokinetics
                  

                  
                     
                        Ondansetron is well absorbed from 
the gastrointestinal tract and undergoes some first-pass metabolism. Mean 
bioavailability in healthy subjects, following administration of a single 8 mg 
tablet, is approximately 56%.
                     
                  
                  

                  Ondansetron systemic exposure does not increase proportionately to dose. AUC 
from a 16 mg tablet was 24% greater than predicted from an 8 mg tablet dose. 
This may reflect some reduction of first-pass metabolism at higher oral doses. 
Bioavailability is also slightly enhanced by the presence of food but unaffected 
by antacids.
                  Ondansetron is extensively metabolized in humans, with approximately 5% of a 
radiolabeled dose recovered as the parent compound from the urine. The primary 
metabolic pathway is hydroxylation on the indole ring followed by subsequent 
glucuronide or sulfate conjugation. Although some nonconjugated metabolites have 
pharmacologic activity, these are not found in plasma at concentrations likely 
to significantly contribute to the biological activity of ondansetron.
                  In vitro metabolism studies have shown that ondansetron is a substrate for 
human hepatic cytochrome P-450 enzymes, including CYP1A2, CYP2D6, and CYP3A4. In 
terms of overall ondansetron turnover, CYP3A4 played the predominant role. 
Because of the multiplicity of metabolic enzymes capable of metabolizing 
ondansetron, it is likely that inhibition or loss of one enzyme (e.g., CYP2D6 
genetic deficiency) will be compensated by others and may result in little 
change in overall rates of ondansetron elimination. Ondansetron elimination may 
be affected by cytochrome P-450 inducers. In a pharmacokinetic study of 16 
epileptic patients maintained chronically on CYP3A4 inducers, carbamazepine, or 
phenytoin, reduction in AUC, Cmax, and T½ of ondansetron was observed.1 This 
resulted in a significant increase in clearance. However, on the basis of 
available data, no dosage adjustment for ondansetron is recommended 
(see PRECAUTIONS: Drug Interactions).
                  In humans, carmustine, etoposide, and cisplatin do not affect the 
pharmacokinetics of ondansetron.
                  Gender differences were shown in the disposition of ondansetron given as a 
single dose. The extent and rate of ondansetron's absorption is greater in women 
than men. Slower clearance in women, a smaller apparent volume of distribution 
(adjusted for weight), and higher absolute bioavailability resulted in higher 
plasma ondansetron levels. These higher plasma levels may in part be explained 
by differences in body weight between men and women. It is not known whether 
these gender-related differences were clinically important. More detailed 
pharmacokinetic information is contained in Tables 1 and 2 taken from 
2 studies.
                  

                  
                     

                  
               
               
            
         