
               
               
               
                  12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
                  
                  12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     VYTORIN
                  
                  Plasma cholesterol is derived from intestinal absorption and endogenous 
synthesis. VYTORIN contains ezetimibe and simvastatin, two lipid-lowering 
compounds with complementary mechanisms of action. VYTORIN reduces elevated 
total-C, LDL-C, Apo B, TG, and non-HDL-C, and increases HDL-C through dual 
inhibition of cholesterol absorption and synthesis.
                  
                     

                     Ezetimibe
                  
                  Ezetimibe reduces blood cholesterol by inhibiting the absorption of 
cholesterol by the small intestine. The molecular target of ezetimibe has been 
shown to be the sterol transporter, Niemann-Pick C1-Like 1 (NPC1L1), which is 
involved in the intestinal uptake of cholesterol and phytosterols. In a 2-week 
clinical study in 18 hypercholesterolemic patients, ezetimibe inhibited 
intestinal cholesterol absorption by 54%, compared with placebo. Ezetimibe had 
no clinically meaningful effect on the plasma concentrations of the fat-soluble 
vitamins A, D, and E and did not impair adrenocortical steroid hormone 
production.
                  Ezetimibe localizes at the brush border of the small intestine and inhibits 
the absorption of cholesterol, leading to a decrease in the delivery of 
intestinal cholesterol to the liver. This causes a reduction of hepatic 
cholesterol stores and an increase in clearance of cholesterol from the blood; 
this distinct mechanism is complementary to that of statins [see Clinical 
Studies (14)].
                  
                     

                     Simvastatin
                  
                  Simvastatin is a prodrug and is hydrolyzed to its active β-hydroxyacid form, 
simvastatin acid, after administration. Simvastatin is a specific inhibitor of 
3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-coenzyme A (HMG-CoA) reductase, the enzyme that 
catalyzes the conversion of HMG-CoA to mevalonate, an early and rate limiting 
step in the biosynthetic pathway for cholesterol. In addition, simvastatin 
reduces very-low-density lipoproteins (VLDL) and TG and increases HDL-C.
                  
                  
                  
                  

               
               
            
         