
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           Tamoxifen: Do not use in combination with anastrozole. No additional benefit seen over tamoxifen monotherapy (7.1, 14.1).
                           Estrogen-containing products: Combination use may diminish activity of anastrozole (7.2).
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 Tamoxifen
                     
                        Co-administration of anastrozole and tamoxifen in breast cancer patients reduced anastrozole plasma concentration by 27%. However, the coadministration did not affect the pharmacokinetics of tamoxifen or N-desmethyltamoxifen. At a median follow-up of 33 months, the combination of anastrozole and tamoxifen did not demonstrate any efficacy benefit when compared with tamoxifen in all patients as well as in the hormone receptor-positive subpopulation. This treatment arm was discontinued from the trial.  [see Clinical Studies (14.1)]. Based on clinical and pharmacokinetic results from the ATAC trial, tamoxifen should not be administered with anastrozole. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 Estrogen
                     
                        Estrogen-containing therapies should not be used with anastrozole as they may diminish its pharmacological action.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3 Warfarin
                     
                        In a study conducted in 16 male volunteers, anastrozole did not alter the exposure (as measured by Cmax and AUC), and anticoagulant activity (as measured by prothrombin time, activated partial thromboplastin time, and thrombin time) of both R- and S-warfarin. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4 Cytochrome P450
                     
                        Based on these in vitro and in vivo results, it is unlikely that co-administration of anastrozole 1 mg will affect other drugs as a result inhibition of cytochrome P450  [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         