
                     
                     
                     Drug Interactions
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Antacids:
                           
                              The simultaneous oral administration of Kionex速with nonabsorbable cation-donating antacids and laxatives may reduce the resin's potassium exchange capability.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Non-absorbable cation-donating antacids and laxatives:
                           
                              Systemic alkalosis has been reported after cation-exchange resins were administered orally in combination with nonabsorbable cation-donating antacids and laxatives such as magnesium hydroxide and aluminum carbonate. Magnesium hydroxide should not be administered with Kionex速. One case of grand mal seizure has been reported in a patient with chronic hypocalcemia of renal failure who was given sodium polystyrene sulfonate with magnesium hydroxide as a laxative.
                              Intestinal obstruction due to concretions of aluminum hydroxide when used in combination with sodium polystyrene sulfonate has been reported.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Digitalis:
                           
                              The toxic effects of digitalis on the heart, especially various ventricular arrhythmias and A-V nodal dissociation, are likely to be exaggerated by hypokalemia, even in the face of serum digoxin concentrations in the "normal range". (SeeWARNINGS.)
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Sorbitol:
                           
                              Concomitant use of sorbitol with sodium polystyrene sulfonate has been implicated in cases of colonic necrosis. Therefore, concomitant administration is not recommended. (SeeWARNINGS.)
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Lithium:
                           
                              Kionex速may decrease absorption of lithium.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Thyroxine:
                           
                              Kionex速may decrease absorption of thyroxine.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               