
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Urea cycle disorders can result from decreased activity of any of the following enzymes:  N-acetylglutamate synthetase (NAGS), carbamyl phosphate synthetase (CPS), argininosuccinate synthetase (ASS), ornithine transcarbamylase (OTC), argininosuccinate lyase (ASL), or arginase (ARG).
                        Sodium phenylacetate and sodium benzoate are metabolically active compounds that can serve as alternatives to urea for the excretion of waste nitrogen.  Figure 2 is a schematic illustrating how the components of AMMONUL, phenylacetate and benzoate, provide an alternative pathway for nitrogen disposal in patients without a fully functioning urea cycle. Phenylacetate conjugates with glutamine in the liver and kidneys to form phenylacetylglutamine, via acetylation.  Phenylacetylglutamine is excreted by the kidneys via glomerular filtration and tubular secretion.  The nitrogen content of phenylacetylglutamine per mole is identical to that of urea (both contain two moles of nitrogen). Two moles of nitrogen are removed per mole of phenylacetate when it is conjugated with glutamine. Similarly, preceded by acylation, benzoate conjugates with glycine to form hippuric acid, which is rapidly excreted by the kidneys by glomerular filtration and tubular secretion. One mole of hippuric acid contains one mole of waste nitrogen.  Thus, one mole of nitrogen is removed per mole of benzoate when it is conjugated with glycine 
                        
                           Figure 2
                        
                        
                           
                        
                        CPS = carbamyl phosphate synthetase;
OTC = ornithine transcarbamylase;
ASS = argininosuccinate synthetase;
ASL = argininosuccinate lyase;
ARG = arginase;
NAGS = N-acetylglutamate synthetase
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           Figure 2
                           
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        In patients with hyperammonemia due to deficiencies in enzymes of the urea cycle, AMMONUL has been shown to decrease elevated plasma ammonia levels.  These effects are considered to be the result of reduction in nitrogen overload through glutamine and glycine scavenging by AMMONUL in combination with appropriate dietary and other supportive measures.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics 
                     
                        The pharmacokinetics of intravenously administered AMMONUL was characterized in healthy adult volunteers.  Both benzoate and phenylacetate exhibited nonlinear kinetics. Following 90 minute intravenous infusion mean AUClast for benzoate was 20.3, 114.9, 564.6, 562.8, and 1599.1 mcg/mL following doses of 1, 2, 3.75, 4, and 5.5 g/m2, respectively. The total clearance decreased from 5.19 to 3.62 L/h/m2 at the 3.75 and 5.5 g/m2 doses, respectively.
                        Similarly, phenylacetate exhibited nonlinear kinetics following the priming dose regimens.  AUClast was 175.6, 713.8, 2040.6, 2181.6, and 3829.2 mcg∙h/mL following doses of 1, 2, 3.75, 4, and 5.5 g/m2, respectively.  The total clearance decreased from 1.82 to 0.89 mcg∙h/mL with increasing dose (3.75 and 4 g/m2, respectively). 
                        During the sequence of 90 minute priming infusion followed by a 24 hour maintenance infusion, phenylacetate was detected in the plasma at the end of infusion (Tmax of 2 hr at 3.75 g/m2) whereas, benzoate concentrations declined rapidly (Tmax of 1.5 hr at 3.75 g/m2) and were undetectable at 14 and 26 hours following the 3.75 and 4 g/m2 dose, respectively.
                        A difference in the metabolic rates for phenylacetate and benzoate was noted.  The formation of hippurate from benzoate occurred more rapidly than that of phenylacetylglutamine from phenylacetate, and the rate of elimination for hippurate appeared to be more rapid than that for phenylacetylglutamine.
                        Pharmacokinetic observations have also been reported from twelve episodes of hyperammonemic encephalopathy in seven children diagnosed (age 3 to 26 months) with urea cycle disorders who had been administered AMMONUL intravenously.  These data showed peak plasma levels of phenylacetate and benzoate at approximately the same times as were observed in healthy adults.  As in healthy adults, the plasma levels of phenylacetate were higher than benzoate and were present for a longer time.
                        The pharmacokinetics of intravenous phenylacetate have been reported following administration to adult patients with advanced solid tumors.  The decline in serum phenylacetate concentrations following a loading infusion of 150 mg/kg was consistent with saturable enzyme kinetics.  Ninety-nine percent of administered phenylacetate was excreted as phenylacetylglutamine [2,3].
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         