
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           CYP3A Inhibitors and Inducers: Avoid concurrent use of BOSULIF with strong or moderate CYP3A inhibitors and inducers. (2.5, 2.6, 7.1, 7.2)
                           Proton Pump Inhibitors: May decrease bosutinib drug levels. Consider short-acting antacids in place of proton pump inhibitors. (7.2)
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 Drugs That May Increase Bosutinib Plasma Concentrations
                     
                        CYP3A or P-glycoprotein (P-gp) inhibitors: Avoid the concomitant use of strong or moderate CYP3A and/or P-gp inhibitors with BOSULIF as an increase in bosutinib plasma concentration is expected [see Dosage and Administration (2.5)]. In a dedicated cross-over drug-interaction trial in healthy volunteers (N=24), concomitant ketoconazole (strong CYP3A inhibitor) increased bosutinib Cmax 5.2-fold and AUC 8.6-fold compared to BOSULIF alone [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 Drugs That May Decrease Bosutinib Plasma Concentrations
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 CYP3A Inducers: Avoid the concomitant use of strong or moderate CYP3A inducers with BOSULIF as a large reduction in exposure is expected [see Dosage and Administration (2.6)]. In a dedicated cross-over drug-interaction trial in healthy volunteers (N=24), concomitant rifampin (strong CYP3A inducer) decreased bosutinib Cmax by 86% and AUC by 94% compared to BOSULIF alone [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Proton Pump Inhibitors: In a dedicated cross-over drug-interaction trial in healthy volunteers (N=24), concomitant lansoprazole (PPI) decreased bosutinib Cmax by 46% and AUC by 26% compared to BOSULIF alone [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)]. 
                              Consider using short-acting antacids or H2 blockers instead of PPIs to avoid a reduction in bosutinib exposure. Separate antacid or H2 blocker dosing and BOSULIF dosing by more than 2 hours.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3 Drugs That May Have Their Plasma Concentrations Altered By Bosutinib
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Substrates of P-glycoprotein: An in vitro study suggests that BOSULIF may have the potential to increase the plasma concentrations of drugs that are P-gp substrates, such as digoxin [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         