
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        EXTRANEAL is an isosmotic peritoneal dialysis solution containing glucose polymers (icodextrin) as the primary osmotic agent. Icodextrin functions as a colloid osmotic agent to achieve ultrafiltration during long peritoneal dialysis dwells. Icodextrin acts in the peritoneal cavity by exerting osmotic pressure across small intercellular pores resulting in transcapillary ultrafiltration throughout the dwell. Like other peritoneal dialysis solutions, EXTRANEAL also contains electrolytes to help normalize electrolyte balance and lactate to help normalize acid-base status.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        EXTRANEAL results in a reduction in the absorbed caloric (carbohydrate) load compared to 4.25% hyperosmolar glucose solutions. Additionally, EXTRANEAL results in an increased ultrafiltration volume per gram of absorbed carbohydrate compared to hyperosmolar glucose solutions.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Absorption
                              
                           
                           
                              Absorption of icodextrin from the peritoneal cavity follows zero-order kinetics consistent with convective transport via peritoneal lymphatic pathways. In a single-dose pharmacokinetic study using EXTRANEAL, a median of 40% (60 g) of the instilled icodextrin was absorbed from the peritoneal solution during a 12-hour dwell. Plasma levels of icodextrin rose during the dwell and declined after the dwell was drained. Peak plasma levels of icodextrin plus its metabolites (median Cpeak 2.2 g/L) were observed at the end of the long dwell exchange (median Tmax = 13 hours). 
                              At steady-state, the mean plasma level of icodextrin plus its metabolites was about 5 g/L. In multi-dose studies, steady-state levels of icodextrin were achieved within one week. Plasma levels of icodextrin and metabolites return to baseline values within approximately two weeks following cessation of icodextrin administration.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Metabolism
                              
                           
                           
                              Icodextrin is metabolized by alpha-amylase into oligosaccharides with a lower degree of polymerization (DP), including maltose (DP2), maltotriose (DP3), maltotetraose (DP4), and higher molecular weight species. In a single dose study, DP2, DP3 and DP4 showed a progressive rise in plasma concentrations with a profile similar to that for total icodextrin, with peak values reached by the end of the dwell and declining thereafter. Only very small increases in blood levels of larger polymers were observed. Steady-state plasma levels of icodextrin metabolites were achieved within one week and stable plasma levels were observed during long-term administration.
                              Some degree of metabolism of icodextrin occurs intraperitoneally with a progressive rise in the concentration of the smaller polymers in the dialysate during the 12-hour dwell.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Elimination
                              
                           
                           
                              Icodextrin undergoes renal elimination in direct proportion to the level of residual renal function. Diffusion of the smaller icodextrin metabolites from plasma into the peritoneal cavity is also possible after systemic absorption and metabolism of icodextrin.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Special Populations
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 Geriatrics
                              
                              The influence of age on the pharmacokinetics of icodextrin and its metabolites was not assessed.
                              
                                 Gender and Race
                              
                              The influence of gender and race on the pharmacokinetics of icodextrin and its metabolites was not assessed.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Drug Interactions 
                           
                           
                              
                                 Insulin
                              
                              A clinical study in 6 insulin-dependent diabetic patients demonstrated no effect of EXTRANEAL on insulin absorption from the peritoneal cavity or on insulin’s ability to control blood glucose when insulin was administered intraperitoneally with EXTRANEAL. However, appropriate monitoring of blood glucose should be performed when initiating EXTRANEAL in diabetic patients and insulin dosage should be adjusted if needed [see Drug Interactions (7)].
                              
                                 Heparin
                              
                              
                                 In vitro studies demonstrated no evidence of incompatibility of heparin with EXTRANEAL.
                              
                                 Antibiotics
                              
                              
                                 In vitro compatibility studies with EXTRANEAL and the following antibiotics have demonstrated no effects with regard to minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC): vancomycin, cefazolin, ampicillin, ampicillin/flucoxacillin, ceftazidime, gentamicin, and amphotericin. However, aminoglycosides should not be mixed with penicillins due to chemical incompatibility.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         