
                     
                     
                     Drug Interactions
                     
                        
                           In vitro results suggest that methadone undergoes hepatic N-demethylation by cytochrome P450 enzymes, principally CYP3A4, CYP2B6, CYP2C19 and to a lesser extent by CYP2C9 and CYP2D6. Coadministration of methadone with inducers of these enzymes may result in a more rapid metabolism and potential for decreased effects of methadone, whereas administration with CYP inhibitors may reduce metabolism and potentiate methadone's effects. Although antiretroviral drugs such as efavirenz, nelfinavir, nevirapine, ritonavir, and lopinavir+ritonavir combination are known to inhibit CYPs, they are shown to reduce the plasma levels of methadone, possibly due to their CYP induction activity. Therefore, drugs administered concomitantly with methadone should be evaluated for interaction potential; clinicians are advised to evaluate individual response to drug therapy.
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Opioid Antagonists, Mixed Agonist/Antagonists, and Partial Agonists
                           
                              As with other µ-agonists, patients maintained on methadone may experience withdrawal symptoms when given these agents. Examples of such agents are naloxone, naltrexone, pentazocine, nalbuphine, butorphanol, and buprenorphine.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Anti-retroviral Agents
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Abacavir, amprenavir, efavirenz, nelfinavir, nevirapine, ritonavir, lopinavir+ritonavir combination
                                 
                                    Coadministration of these anti-retroviral agents resulted in increased clearance or decrease plasma levels of methadone. Methadone-maintained patients beginning treatment with above antiretroviral drugs should be monitored for evidence of withdrawal effects and methadone dose should be adjusted accordingly.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Didanosine and Stavudine
                                 
                                    Experimental evidence demonstrated that methadone decreased the area under the concentration-time curve (AUC) and peak levels for didanosine and stavudine, with a more significant decrease for didanosine. Methadone disposition was not substantially altered.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Zidovudine
                                 
                                    Experimental evidence demonstrated that methadone increased the AUC of zidovudine which could result in toxic effects.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Cytochrome P450 Inducers
                           
                              Methadone-maintained patients beginning treatment with CYP3A4 inducers should be monitored for evidence of withdrawal effects and methadone dose should be adjusted accordingly. The following drug interactions were reported following coadministration of methadone with inducers of cytochrome P450 enzymes:
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Rifampin
                                 
                                    In patients well-stabilized on methadone, concomitant administration of rifampin resulted in a marked reduction in serum methadone levels and a concurrent appearance of withdrawal symptoms.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Phenytoin
                                 
                                    In a pharmacokinetic study with patients on methadone maintenance therapy, phenytoin administration (250 mg b.i.d. initially for 1 day followed by 300 mg QD for 3 to 4 days) resulted in an approximately 50% reduction in methadone exposure and withdrawal symptoms occurred concurrently. Upon discontinuation of phenytoin, the incidence of withdrawal symptoms decreased and methadone exposure increased to a level comparable to that prior to phenytoin administration.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           St. John's Wort, Phenobarbital, Carbamazepine
                           
                              Administration of methadone along with other CYP3A4 inducers may result in withdrawal symptoms.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Cytochrome P450 Inhibitors
                           
                              Since the metabolism of methadone is mediated primarily by CYP3A4 isozyme, coadministration of drugs that inhibit CYP3A4 activity may cause decreased clearance of methadone. The expected clinical results would be increased or prolonged opioid effects. Thus, methadone-treated patients coadministered strong inhibitors of CYP3A4 such as azole antifungal agents (e.g., ketoconazole) and macrolide antibiotics (e.g., erythromycin), should be carefully monitored and dosage adjustment should be undertaken if warranted. Some selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) (e.g., sertraline, fluvoxamine) may increase methadone plasma levels upon coadministration with methadone and result in increased opiate effects and/or toxicity.
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Voriconazole
                                 
                                    Repeat dose administration of oral voriconazole (400 mg Q12h for 1 day, then 200 mg Q12h for 4 days) increased the Cmax and AUC of (R)-methadone by 31% and 47%, respectively, in subjects receiving a methadone maintenance dose (30 to 100 mg QD). The Cmax and AUC of (S)-methadone increased by 65% and 103%, respectively. Increased plasma concentrations of methadone have been associated with toxicity including QT prolongation. Frequent monitoring for adverse events and toxicity related to methadone is recommended during coadministration. Dose reduction of methadone may be needed.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Others
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Monoamine Oxidase (MAO) Inhibitors
                                 
                                    Therapeutic doses of meperidine have precipitated severe reactions in patients concurrently receiving monoamine oxidase inhibitors or those who have received such agents within 14 days. Similar reactions thus far have not been reported with methadone. However, if the use of methadone is necessary in such patients, a sensitivity test should be performed in which incremental doses of methadone are administered over the course of several hours while the patient's condition and vital signs are under careful observation.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Desipramine
                                 
                                    Plasma levels of desipramine have increased with concurrent methadone administration.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Potentially Arrhythmogenic Agents
                           
                              Extreme caution is necessary when any drug known to have the potential to prolong the QT interval is prescribed in conjunction with methadone. Pharmacodynamic interactions may occur with concomitant use of methadone and potentially arrhythmogenic agents such as class I and III antiarrhythmics, some neuroleptics and tricyclic antidepressants, and calcium channel blockers.
                              Caution should also be exercised when prescribing Methadone Hydrochloride Oral Concentrate, USP concomitantly with drugs capable of inducing electrolyte disturbances (hypomagnesemia, hypokalemia) that may prolong the QT interval. These drugs include diuretics, laxatives, and, in rare cases, mineralocorticoid hormones.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               