
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  Congenital sucrase-isomaltase deficiency (CSID) is a chronic, 
autosomal recessive, inherited, phenotypically heterogeneous disease with very 
variable enzyme activity. CSID is usually characterized by a complete or almost 
complete lack of endogenous sucrase activity, a very marked reduction in 
isomaltase activity, a moderate decrease in maltase activity and normal lactase 
levels.
                  Sucrase is naturally produced in the brush border of the small intestine, 
primarily the distal duodenum and jejunum. Sucrase hydrolyzes the disaccharide 
sucrose into its component monosaccharides, glucose and fructose. Isomaltase 
breaks down disaccharides from starch into simple sugars. Sucraid does not 
contain isomaltase.
                  In the absence of endogenous human sucrase, as in CSID, sucrose is not 
metabolized. Unhydrolyzed sucrose and starch are not absorbed from the intestine 
and their presence in the intestinal lumen may lead to osmotic retention of 
water. This may result in loose stools.
                  Unabsorbed sucrose in the colon is fermented by bacterial flora to produce 
increased amounts of hydrogen, methane and water. As a consequence, excessive 
gas, bloating, abdominal cramps, nausea, and vomiting may occur.
                  Chronic malabsorption of disaccharides may result in malnutrition. 
Undiagnosed/untreated CSID patients often fail to thrive and fall behind in 
their expected growth and development curves. Previously, the treatment of CSID 
has required the continual use of a strict sucrose-free diet.
                  CSID is often difficult to diagnose. Approximately 4% to 10% of pediatric 
patients with chronic diarrhea of unknown origin have CSID. Measurement of 
expired breath hydrogen under controlled conditions following a sucrose 
challenge (a measurement of excess hydrogen excreted in exhalation) in CSID 
patients has shown levels as great as 6 times that in normal subjects.
                  A generally accepted clinical definition of CSID is a condition characterized 
by the following: stool pH <6, an increase in breath hydrogen of > 10ppm 
when challenged with sucrose after fasting and a negative lactose breath test. 
However, because of the difficulties in diagnosing CSID, it may be warranted to 
conduct a short therapeutic trial (e.g., one week) to assess response in patients 
suspected of having CSID.
               
               
            
         