
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Dexlansoprazole is a PPI that suppresses gastric acid secretion by specific inhibition of the (H+,K+)-ATPase in the gastric parietal cell. By acting specifically on the proton pump, dexlansoprazole blocks the final step of acid production.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Antisecretory Activity
                              
                              The effects of DEXILANT 60 mg (n=20) or lansoprazole 30 mg (n=23) once daily for five days on 24-hour intragastric pH were assessed in healthy subjects in a multiple-dose crossover study. The results are summarized in Table 3.
                              


                           



                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Serum Gastrin Effects
                              
                              The effect of DEXILANT on serum gastrin concentrations was evaluated in approximately 3460 patients in clinical trials up to 8 weeks and in 1023 patients for up to 6 to 12 months. The mean fasting gastrin concentrations increased from baseline during treatment with DEXILANT 30 mg and 60 mg doses. In patients treated for more than 6 months, mean serum gastrin levels increased during approximately the first 3 months of treatment and were stable for the remainder of treatment. Mean serum gastrin levels returned to pre-treatment levels within one month of discontinuation of treatment.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Enterochromaffin-Like Cell (ECL) Effects
                              
                              There were no reports of ECL cell hyperplasia in gastric biopsy specimens obtained from 653 patients treated with DEXILANT 30 mg, 60 mg or 90 mg for up to 12 months. 
                              During lifetime exposure of rats dosed daily with up to 150 mg per kg per day of lansoprazole, marked hypergastrinemia was observed followed by ECL cell proliferation and formation of carcinoid tumors, especially in female rats [see Nonclinical Toxicology (13.1)].
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Effect on Cardiac Repolarization
                              
                              A study was conducted to assess the potential of DEXILANT to prolong the QT/QTc interval in healthy adult subjects. DEXILANT doses of 90 mg or 300 mg did not delay cardiac repolarization compared to placebo. The positive control (moxifloxacin) produced statistically significantly greater mean maximum and time-averaged QT/QTc intervals compared to placebo. 
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        The dual delayed release formulation of DEXILANT results in a dexlansoprazole plasma concentration-time profile with two distinct peaks; the first peak occurs 1 to 2 hours after administration, followed by a second peak within 4 to 5 hours (see Figure 1). Dexlansoprazole is eliminated with a half-life of approximately 1 to 2 hours in healthy subjects and in patients with symptomatic GERD. No accumulation of dexlansoprazole occurs after multiple, once daily doses of DEXILANT 30 mg or 60 mg, although mean AUCt and Cmax values of dexlansoprazole were slightly higher (less than 10%) on day 5 than on day 1.
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Figure 1: Mean Plasma Dexlansoprazole Concentration – 
Time Profile Following Oral Administration of 30 or 60 mg DEXILANT
 Once Daily for 5 Days in Healthy Subjects
                              
                              
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              The pharmacokinetics of dexlansoprazole are highly variable, with percent coefficient of variation (CV%) values for Cmax, AUC, and CL/F of greater than 30% (see Table 4).
                              


                           



                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Absorption
                              
                              After oral administration of DEXILANT 30 mg or 60 mg to healthy subjects and symptomatic GERD patients, mean Cmax and AUC values of dexlansoprazole increased approximately dose proportionally (see Figure 1). 
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Distribution
                              
                              Plasma protein binding of dexlansoprazole ranged from 96.1% to 98.8% in healthy subjects and was independent of concentration from 0.01 to 20 mcg per mL. The apparent volume of distribution (Vz/F) after multiple doses in symptomatic GERD patients was 40.3 L.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Metabolism
                              
                              Dexlansoprazole is extensively metabolized in the liver by oxidation, reduction, and subsequent formation of sulfate, glucuronide and glutathione conjugates to inactive metabolites. Oxidative metabolites are formed by the cytochrome P450 (CYP) enzyme system including hydroxylation mainly by CYP2C19, and oxidation to the sulfone by CYP3A4. 
                              CYP2C19 is a polymorphic liver enzyme which exhibits three phenotypes in the metabolism of CYP2C19 substrates; extensive metabolizers (*1/*1), intermediate metabolizers (*1/mutant) and poor metabolizers (mutant/mutant). Dexlansoprazole is the major circulating component in plasma regardless of CYP2C19 metabolizer status. In CYP2C19 intermediate and extensive metabolizers, the major plasma metabolites are 5-hydroxy dexlansoprazole and its glucuronide conjugate, while in CYP2C19 poor metabolizers dexlansoprazole sulfone is the major plasma metabolite.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Elimination
                              
                              Following the administration of DEXILANT, no unchanged dexlansoprazole is excreted in urine. Following the administration of [14C]dexlansoprazole to 6 healthy male subjects, approximately 50.7% (standard deviation (SD): 9.0%) of the administered radioactivity was excreted in urine and 47.6% (SD: 7.3%) in the feces. Apparent clearance (CL/F) in healthy subjects was 11.4 to 11.6 L/h, respectively, after 5-days of 30 or 60 mg once daily administration.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Effect of CYP2C19 Polymorphism on Systemic Exposure of Dexlansoprazole
                              
                              Systemic exposure of dexlansoprazole is generally higher in intermediate and poor metabolizers. In male Japanese subjects who received a single dose of DEXILANT 30 mg or 60 mg (N=2 to 6 subjects/group), mean dexlansoprazole Cmax and AUC values were up to 2 times higher in intermediate compared to extensive metabolizers; in poor metabolizers, mean Cmax was up to 4 times higher and mean AUC was up to 12 times higher compared to extensive metabolizers. Though such study was not conducted in Caucasians and African Americans, it is expected dexlansoprazole exposure in these races will be affected by CYP2C19 phenotypes as well.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           Effect of Food on Pharmacokinetics and Pharmacodynamics
                        
                        In food-effect studies in healthy subjects receiving DEXILANT under various fed conditions compared to fasting, increases in Cmax ranged from 12% to 55%, increases in AUC ranged from 9% to 37%, and tmax varied (ranging from a decrease of 0.7 hours to an increase of 3 hours). No significant differences in mean intragastric pH were observed between fasted and various fed conditions. However, the percentage of time intragastric pH exceeded 4 over the 24-hour dosing interval decreased slightly when DEXILANT was administered after a meal (57%) relative to fasting (64%), primarily due to a decreased response in intragastric pH during the first 4 hours after dosing. Because of this, while DEXILANT can be taken without regard to food, some patients may benefit from administering the dose prior to a meal if post-meal symptoms do not resolve under post-fed conditions.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                              Special Populations
                           
                        
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Pediatric Use
                              
                              The pharmacokinetics of dexlansoprazole in patients under the age of 18 years have not been studied. 
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Geriatric Use
                              
                              The terminal elimination half-life of dexlansoprazole is significantly increased in geriatric subjects compared to younger subjects (2.23 and 1.5 hours, respectively); this difference is not clinically relevant. Dexlansoprazole exhibited higher systemic exposure (AUC) in geriatric subjects (34.5% higher) than younger subjects. No dosage adjustment is needed in geriatric patients [see Use in Specific Populations (8.5)]. 
                              
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Renal Impairment
                              
                              Dexlansoprazole is extensively metabolized in the liver to inactive metabolites, and no parent drug is recovered in the urine following an oral dose of dexlansoprazole. Therefore, the pharmacokinetics of dexlansoprazole are not expected to be altered in patients with renal impairment, and no studies were conducted in subjects with renal impairment [see Use in Specific Populations (8.6)]. In addition, the pharmacokinetics of lansoprazole were studied in patients with mild, moderate or severe renal impairment; results demonstrated no need for a dose adjustment for this patient population.
                              
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Hepatic Impairment
                              
                              In a study of 12 patients with moderately impaired hepatic function who received a single oral dose of DEXILANT 60 mg, plasma exposure (AUC) of bound and unbound dexlansoprazole in the hepatic impairment group was approximately 2 times greater compared to subjects with normal hepatic function. This difference in exposure was not due to a difference in protein binding between the two liver function groups. No adjustment for DEXILANT is necessary for patients with mild hepatic impairment (Child-Pugh Class A). DEXILANT 30 mg should be considered for patients with moderate hepatic impairment (Child-Pugh Class B). No studies have been conducted in patients with severe hepatic impairment (Child-Pugh Class C) [see Use in Specific Populations (8.7)].
                              
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Gender
                              
                              In a study of 12 male and 12 female healthy subjects who received a single oral dose of DEXILANT 60 mg, females had higher systemic exposure (AUC) (42.8% higher) than males. No dosage adjustment is necessary in patients based on gender.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                              Drug-Drug Interactions
                           
                        
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Warfarin 
                              
                              In a study of 20 healthy subjects, co-administration of DEXILANT 90 mg once daily for 11 days with a single 25 mg oral dose of warfarin on day 6 did not result in any significant differences in the pharmacokinetics of warfarin or INR compared to administration of warfarin with placebo. However, there have been reports of increased INR and prothrombin time in patients receiving PPIs and warfarin concomitantly [see Drug Interactions (7.2)].
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Cytochrome P 450 Interactions 
                              
                              Dexlansoprazole is metabolized, in part, by CYP2C19 and CYP3A4 [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)]. 
                              In vitro studies have shown that dexlansoprazole is not likely to inhibit CYP isoforms 1A1, 1A2, 2A6, 2B6, 2C8, 2C9, 2D6, 2E1 or 3A4. As such, no clinically relevant interactions with drugs metabolized by these CYP enzymes would be expected. Furthermore, in vivo studies showed that DEXILANT did not have an impact on the pharmacokinetics of coadministered phenytoin (CYP2C9 substrate) or theophylline (CYP1A2 substrate). The subjects' CYP1A2 genotypes in the drug-drug interaction study with theophylline were not determined. Although in vitro studies indicated that DEXILANT has the potential to inhibit CYP2C19 in vivo, an in vivo drug-drug interaction study in mainly CYP2C19 extensive and intermediate metabolizers has shown that DEXILANT does not affect the pharmacokinetics of diazepam (CYP2C19 substrate). 
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Clopidogrel
                              
                              Clopidogrel is metabolized to its active metabolite in part by CYP2C19. A study of healthy subjects who were CYP2C19 extensive metabolizers, receiving once daily administration of clopidogrel 75 mg alone or concomitantly with DEXILANT 60 mg (n=40), for 9 days was conducted. The mean AUC of the active metabolite of clopidogrel was reduced by approximately 9% (mean AUC ratio was 91%, with 90% CI of 86-97%) when DEXILANT was coadministered compared to administration of clopidogrel alone. Pharmacodynamic parameters were also measured and demonstrated that the change in inhibition of platelet aggregation (induced by 5 mcM ADP) was related to the change in the exposure to clopidogrel active metabolite. The clinical significance of this finding is not clear.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     Figure
                     
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         