
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              Atazanavir: Do not co-administer with DEXILANT because atazanavir systemic concentrations may be substantially decreased. (7.1)
                           
                              Drugs with pH-dependent absorption (e.g., ampicillin esters, digoxin, iron salts, ketoconazole): DEXILANT may interfere with absorption of drugs for which gastric pH is important for bioavailability. (7.1)
                           
                              Warfarin: Patients taking concomitant warfarin may require monitoring for increases in international normalized ratio (INR) and prothrombin time. (7.2)
                           
                              Tacrolimus: Concomitant tacrolimus use may increase tacrolimus whole blood concentrations. (7.3)
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 Drugs with pH-Dependent Absorption Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        DEXILANT causes inhibition of gastric acid secretion. DEXILANT is likely to substantially decrease the systemic concentrations of the HIV protease inhibitor atazanavir, which is dependent upon the presence of gastric acid for absorption, and may result in a loss of therapeutic effect of atazanavir and the development of HIV resistance. Therefore, DEXILANT should not be co-administered with atazanavir. 
                        DEXILANT may interfere with the absorption of other drugs where gastric pH is an important determinant of oral bioavailability (e.g., ampicillin esters, digoxin, iron salts, ketoconazole).
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 Warfarin
                     
                        Co-administration of DEXILANT 90 mg and warfarin 25 mg did not affect the pharmacokinetics of warfarin or INR [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)]. However, there have been reports of increased INR and prothrombin time in patients receiving PPIs and warfarin concomitantly. Increases in INR and prothrombin time may lead to abnormal bleeding and even death. Patients treated with DEXILANT and warfarin concomitantly may need to be monitored for increases in INR and prothrombin time.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3 Tacrolimus
                     
                        Concomitant administration of dexlansoprazole and tacrolimus may increase whole blood levels of tacrolimus, especially in transplant patients who are intermediate or poor metabolizers of CYP2C19.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4 Clopidogrel
                     
                        Concomitant administration of dexlansoprazole and clopidogrel in healthy subjects had no clinically important effect on exposure to the active metabolite of clopidogrel or clopidogrel-induced platelet inhibition [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)]. No dose adjustment of clopidogrel is necessary when administered with an approved dose of DEXILANT.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         