
                     
                     
                     Drug Interactions
                     
                        When given concurrently the following drugs may interact with thiazide diuretics.
                        
                           
                              Alcohol, barbiturates, or narcotics:
                            Potentiation of orthostatic hypotension may occur.
                        
                           
                              Antidiabetic drugs (oral agents and insulin):
                            Dosage adjustment of the antidiabetic drug may be required.
                        
                           
                              Other antihypertensive drugs:
                            Additive effect or potentiation.
                        
                           
                              Cholestyramine and colestipol resins:
                            Both cholestyramine and colestipol resins have the potential of binding thiazide diuretics and reducing diuretic absorption from the gastrointestinal tract.
                        
                           
                              Corticosteroids, ACTH:
                            Intensified electrolyte depletion, particularly hypokalemia.
                        
                           
                              Pressor amines (e.g., norepinephrine):
                            Possible decreased response to pressor amines but not sufficient to preclude their use.
                        
                           
                              Skeletal muscle relaxants, nondepolarizing (e.g., tubocurarine):
                            Possible increased responsiveness to the muscle relaxant.
                        
                           
                              Lithium:
                            Generally should not be given with diuretics. Diuretic agents reduce the renal clearance of lithium and add a high risk of lithium toxicity. Refer to the package insert for lithium preparations before use of such preparations with chlorothiazide.
                        
                           
                              Non-steroidal Anti-inflammatory Drugs:
                            In some patients, the administration of a nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory agent can reduce the diuretic, natriuretic, and antihypertensive effects of loop, potassium-sparing and thiazide diuretics. Therefore, when chlorothiazide and non-steroidal anti-inflammatory agents are used concomitantly, the patient should be observed closely to determine if the desired effect of the diuretic is obtained.
                     
                     
                  
               