
                     
                     
                     Drug Interactions
                     
                        
                           Use with Allopurinol
                        
                        One of the pathways for inactivation of azathioprine is inhibited by allopurinol. Patients receiving azathioprine tablets and allopurinol concomitantly should have a dose reduction of azathioprine tablets, to approximately ⅓ to ¼ the usual dose. It is recommended that a further dose reduction or alternative therapies be considered for patients with low or absent TPMT activity receiving azathioprine tablets and allopurinol because both TPMT and XO inactivation pathways are affected (see 
                              CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY, WARNINGS, PRECAUTIONS: Laboratory Tests
                           and 
                              ADVERSE REACTIONS
                           sections).
                        
                           Use with Aminosalicylates
                        
                        
                           There is in vitro evidence that aminosalicylate derivatives (e.g., sulphasalazine, mesalazine, or olsalazine) inhibit the TPMT enzyme. Concomitant use of these agents with azathioprine tablets should be done with caution.
                        
                           Use with Other Agents Affecting Myelopoesis   
                        
                        Drugs which may affect leukocyte production, including co-trimoxazole, may lead to exaggerated leukopenia, especially in renal transplant recipients. 
                        
                           Use with Angiotensin-Converting Enzyme Inhibitors   
                        
                        The use of angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors to control hypertension in patients on azathioprine has been reported to induce anemia and severe leukopenia. 
                        
                           Use with Warfarin
                        
                        Azathioprine tablets may inhibit the anticoagulant effect of warfarin.
                        
                           Carcinogenesis, Mutagenesis, Impairment of Fertility   
                        
                        See 
                              WARNINGS
                           section. 
                        
                           Use with ribavirin
                        
                        The use of ribavirin for hepatitis C in patients receiving azathioprine has been reported to induce severe pancytopenia and may increase the risk of azathioprine-related myelotoxicity. Inosine monophosphate dehydrogenase (IMDH) is required for one of the metabolic pathways of azathioprine. Ribavirin is known to inhibit IMDH, thereby leading to accumulation of an azathioprine metabolite, 6-methylthioionosine monophosphate (6MTITP), which is associated with myelotoxicity (neutropenia, thrombocytopenia, and anemia). Patients receiving azathioprine with ribavirin should have complete blood counts, including platelet counts, monitored weekly for the first month, twice monthly for the second and third months of treatment, then monthly or more frequently if dosage or other therapy changes are necessary.
                     
                     
                  
               