
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Miltefosine is an anti-leishmanial agent [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.4)]. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        The pharmacokinetic parameters of miltefosine in patients with visceral and cutaneous leishmaniasis treated for 28 days with IMPAVIDO are listed in Table 5. Due to the long half-life of miltefosine (> 6 days), trough plasma concentrations did not appear to reach a steady state at the end of treatment (i.e., Day 28). 
                        


                        



                           Absorption 
                        
                        Absolute bioavailability of miltefosine has not been determined. In patients with visceral leishmaniasis, maximum miltefosine concentrations following oral administration of IMPAVIDO capsules were reached right before the next dose in many patients, indicating that the absorption of miltefosine may proceed throughout the dosing interval.
                        
                           Distribution
                        
                        The distribution of miltefosine has not been studied in humans. Human plasma protein binding of miltefosine, evaluated by an ultracentrifugation method, was 98% over the drug concentration range from 0.1 to 10 µg/mL. In rats, radioactivity of [14C] miltefosine is widely distributed after both single and repeated oral administration with highest uptake of radioactivity in kidney, liver, and spleen.  Placental transfer and excretion into milk have not been investigated.  
                        
                           Metabolism and Excretion
                        
                        No in vitro oxidative metabolism by 15 different human cytochrome P450 enzymes (1A1, 1A2, 1B1, 2A6, 2B6, 2C8, 2C9, 2C18, 2C19, 2D6, 2E1, 3A4, 3A5, 3A7, and 4A1) was observed. 
                        A slow metabolic breakdown could be shown in human hepatocytes, resulting in the release of choline by phospholipase D-like cleavage of the miltefosine molecule.  The fatty alcohol-containing fragment of miltefosine can enter the metabolism of fatty acids after being oxidized to palmitic acid.  This oxidation is blocked in patients with Sjögren-Larsson syndrome, which is caused by a genetic defect in fatty aldehyde dehydrogenase activity.  IMPAVIDO is contraindicated in patients who have Sjögren-Larsson-Syndrome [see Contraindications (4.2)].
                        There was little or no evidence of time or metabolism dependent inhibition of the cytochrome P450 enzymes examined at up to approximately 40 µg/mL miltefosine.  
                        Oral administration of miltefosine did not markedly induce the content of hepatic CYP3A assayed by demethylation activity of erythromycin in rats.
                        In visceral leishmaniasis patients, <0.2% of the administered dose was excreted into the urine.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.4 Microbiology
                     
                        
                           Mechanism of Action
                        
                        The specific mode of action of miltefosine against Leishmania species is unknown.  The mechanism of action of miltefosine is likely to involve interaction with lipids (phospholipids and sterols), including membrane lipids, inhibition of cytochrome c oxidase (mitochondrial function), and apoptosis-like cell death.
                        
                           Activity In Vitro and In Vivo
                           
                        
                        Miltefosine has anti-leishmanial activity in vitro and in clinical infections [see Clinical Studies (14)]. Sensitivity of different Leishmania species as well as different strains of a Leishmania species to miltefosine may vary in different geographic regions.
                        
                        
                           Drug Resistance 
                        
                        
                           In vitro studies show a potential for development of resistance to miltefosine. Some strains of L. braziliensis with intrinsic resistance to miltefosine have been identified.  However, the clinical relevance of these observations is not known.
                        Drug resistance could be due to a decrease in miltefosine accumulation within Leishmania parasite which is thought to be due to either an increase in drug efflux, mediated by the overexpression of the ABC transporter P-glycoprotein and/or a decrease in drug uptake by the inactivation of the miltefosine transport machinery that consists of the miltefosine transporter and its beta subunit. Mutation in the transporter gene was reported in the isolates from a relapsed patient in one study. However, the clinical relevance of these findings is not known. 
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         