
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  Tobramycin is rapidly absorbed following intramuscular administration.  Peak serum concentrations of tobramycin occur between 30 and 90 minutes after intramuscular administration.  Following an intramuscular dose of 1 mg/kg of body weight, maximum serum concentrations reach about 4 mcg/mL, and measurable levels persist for as long as 8 hours.  Therapeutic serum levels are generally considered to range from 4 to 6 mcg/mL.  When tobramycin is administered by intravenous infusion over a 1-hour period, the serum concentrations are similar to those obtained by intramuscular administration.  Tobramycin is poorly absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract.
                  In patients with normal renal function, except neonates, tobramycin administered every 8 hours does not accumulate in the serum.  However, in those patients with reduced renal function and in neonates, the serum concentration of the antibiotic is usually higher and can be measured for longer periods of time than in normal adults.  Dosage for such patients must, therefore, be adjusted accordingly (see 
                        
                            DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION
                        
                     ).
                  Following parenteral administration, little, if any, metabolic transformation occurs, and tobramycin is eliminated almost exclusively by glomerular filtration.  Renal clearance is similar to that of endogenous creatinine.  Ultrafiltration studies demonstrate that practically no serum protein binding occurs.  In patients with normal renal function, up to 84% of the dose is recoverable from the urine in 8 hours and up to 93% in 24 hours.
                  Peak urine concentrations ranging from 75 to 100 mcg/mL have been observed following the intramuscular injection of a single dose of 1 mg/kg.  After several days of treatment, the amount of tobramycin excreted in the urine approaches the daily dose administered.  When renal function is impaired, excretion of tobramycin is slowed, and accumulation of the drug may cause toxic blood levels.
                  The serum half-life in normal individuals is 2 hours.  An inverse relationship exists between serum half-life and creatinine clearance, and the dosage schedule should be adjusted according to the degree of renal impairment (see 
                        
                            DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION
                        
                     ).  In patients undergoing dialysis, 25% to 70% of the administered dose may be removed, depending on the duration and type of dialysis.
                  Tobramycin can be detected in tissues and body fluids after parenteral administration.  Concentrations in bile and stools ordinarily have been low, which suggests minimum biliary excretion.  Tobramycin has appeared in low concentration in the cerebrospinal fluid following parenteral administration, and concentrations are dependent on dose, rate of penetration, and degree of meningeal inflammation.  It has also been found in sputum, peritoneal fluid, synovial fluid, and abscess fluids, and it crosses the placental membranes.  Concentrations in the renal cortex are several times higher than the usual serum levels.
                  Probenecid does not affect the renal tubular transport of tobramycin.
               
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Microbiology
                     
                        
                           
                              Mechanism of Action
                           
                        
                        Tobramycin acts by inhibiting protein synthesis in bacterial cells.  
                              In vitro 
                           tests demonstrate that tobramycin is bactericidal.
                        
                           
                              Resistance
                           
                        
                        Aminoglycosides are generally not active against most gram-positive organisms, including 
                              Streptococcus pyogenes, Streptococcus pneumoniae, 
                           and enterococci.  Cross-resistance between aminoglycosides may occur.
                        
                           
                              Interactions with Other Antibacterial Drugs
                           
                        
                        
                           
                              In vitro 
                           studies have shown that an aminoglycoside combined with an antibiotic that interferes with cell-wall synthesis affects some enterococcal strains synergistically.  The combination of penicillin G and tobramycin results in a synergistic bactericidal effect 
                              in vitro 
                           against certain strains of 
                              Enterococcus faecalis.  
                           However, this combination is not synergistic against other closely related organisms, e.g., 
                              Enterococcus faecium.  
                           Species-level identification of enterococci alone cannot be used to predict susceptibility.  Susceptibility testing and tests for antibiotic synergism must be performed.
                        Tobramycin has been shown to be active against most strains of the following bacteria both 
                              in vitro 
                           and in clinical infections as described in 
                              
                                 INDICATIONS AND USAGE
                              
                            section (1):
                        
                           
                              Aerobic Gram-positive bacteria
                           
                        
                        
                           
                              Staphylococcus aureus
                           
                        
                        
                           
                              Aerobic Gram-negative bacteria
                           
                        
                        
                           
                              Citrobacter
                            species
                        
                           
                              Enterobacter 
                           species
                        
                           
                              Escherichia coli
                           
                        
                        
                           
                              Klebsiella 
                           species
                        
                           
                              Morganella morganii
                           
                        
                        
                           
                              Pseudomonas aeruginosa
                           
                        
                        
                           
                              Proteus mirabilis
                           
                        
                        
                           
                              Proteus vulgaris
                           
                        
                        
                           
                              Providencia 
                           species
                        
                           
                              Serratia 
                           species
                         
                        Aminoglycosides are generally not active against most gram-positive bacteria, including 
                              Streptococcus pyogenes, Streptococcus pneumoniae, 
                           and enterococci.  For 
                              Salmonella 
                           spp. and 
                              Shigella 
                           spp., aminoglycosides may appear active 
                              in vitro
                            but are not effective clinically and should not be reported as susceptible.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Susceptibility Test Methods

                     
                     
                        When available, the clinical microbiology laboratory should provide the results of 
                              in vitro
                            susceptibility test results for antimicrobial drugs used in local hospitals and practice areas to the physician as periodic reports that describe the susceptibility profile of nosocomial and community-acquired pathogens.  These reports should aid the physician in selecting an antibacterial drug product for treatment.
                        
                           
                              Dilution Techniques
                           
                        
                        Quantitative methods are used to determine antimicrobial minimum inhibitory concentrations (MICs).  These MICs provide estimates of the susceptibility of bacteria to antibacterial compounds.  The MICs should be determined using a standardized test method1,3.  Standardized procedures are based on a dilution method (broth or agar) or equivalent with standardized inoculum concentrations and standardized concentrations of tobramycin powder.  The MIC values should be interpreted according to the criteria in Table 1.
                        
                           
                              Diffusion Techniques
                           
                        
                        Quantitative methods that require measurement of zone diameters also provide reproducible estimates of the susceptibility of bacteria to antibacterial compounds.  One such standardized procedure requires the use of standardized inoculum concentrations and paper disks impregnated with 10 mcg of tobramycin2,3.  The disk diffusion values should be interpreted according to the criteria provided in Table 1.
                         
                        
                           
                                                       Table 1:  Susceptibility Interpretive Criteria for Tobramycin
                           
                        
                        


                        


S = susceptible, I = intermediate, R = resistant
                        
                           a For 
                              Salmonella
                            spp. and 
                              Shigella
                            spp., tobramycin may appear active 
                              in vitro
                            but is not effective clinically and should not be reported as susceptible.
                         
                        A report of "Susceptible" indicates that the antimicrobial is likely to inhibit growth of the pathogen if the antimicrobial compound reaches the concentration at the infection site necessary to inhibit growth of the pathogen.  A report of "Intermediate" indicates that the result should be considered equivocal, and if the microorganism is not fully susceptible to alternative clinically feasible drugs, the test should be repeated.  This category implies possible clinical applicability in body sites where the drug is physiologically concentrated.  This category also provides a buffer zone that prevents small uncontrolled technical factors from causing major discrepancies in interpretation.  A report of "Resistant" indicates that the antimicrobial is not likely to inhibit growth of the pathogen if the antimicrobial compound reaches the concentrations usually achievable at the infection site; other therapy should be selected.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Quality Control

                     
                     
                        Standardized susceptibility test procedures require the use of laboratory controls to monitor and ensure the accuracy and precision of supplies and reagents used in the assay, and the techniques of the individuals performing the test1,2
                           ,3.  Standard tobramycin powder should provide the following range of MIC values provided in Table 2.   For the diffusion technique using the 10 mcg tobramycin disk, the criteria provided in Table 2 should be achieved.
                         
                                    
                              Table 2: Acceptable Quality Control Ranges for Susceptibility Testing
                           
                        
                        


