
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
                  Enter section text here
               
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 Drug Interactions with Azor
                     
                        The pharmacokinetics of amlodipine and olmesartan medoxomil are 
not altered when the drugs are co-administered.
                        No drug interaction studies have been conducted with Azor and other drugs, 
although studies have been conducted with the individual amlodipine and 
olmesartan medoxomil components of Azor, as described below, and no significant 
drug interactions have been observed.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 Drug Interactions with Amlodipine
                     
                        
                           In vitro data indicate that amlodipine 
has no effect on the human plasma protein binding of digoxin, phenytoin, 
warfarin, and indomethacin.
                        
                        
                        

                        
                           Effect of Other Agents on Amlodipine
                        
                           Cimetidine: Co-administration of amlodipine 
with cimetidine did not alter the pharmacokinetics of amlodipine.
   Grapefruit juice: Co-administration of 240 mL of grapefruit 
juice with a single oral dose of amlodipine 10 mg in 20 healthy volunteers had 
no significant effect on the pharmacokinetics of amlodipine.
   Maalox® (antacid): Co-administration 
of the antacid Maalox® with a single dose of amlodipine 
had no significant effect on the pharmacokinetics of amlodipine.
   Sildenafil: A single 100 mg dose of sildenafil in subjects 
with essential hypertension had no effect on the pharmacokinetic parameters of 
amlodipine. When amlodipine and sildenafil were used in combination, each agent 
independently exerted its own blood pressure lowering effect.
                        
                        
                        

                        
                           Effect of Amlodipine on Other Agents
                        
                           Atorvastatin: Co-administration of multiple 10 
mg doses of amlodipine with 80 mg of atorvastatin resulted in no significant 
change in the steady state pharmacokinetic parameters of 
atorvastatin.
   Digoxin: Co-administration of 
amlodipine with digoxin did not change serum digoxin levels or digoxin renal 
clearance in normal volunteers.
   Ethanol (alcohol): 
Single and multiple 10 mg doses of amlodipine had no significant effect 
on the pharmacokinetics of ethanol.
   Warfarin: 
Co-administration of amlodipine with warfarin did not change the warfarin 
prothrombin response time.
                        

                        In clinical trials, amlodipine has been safely administered with thiazide 
diuretics, beta-blockers, angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors, long-acting 
nitrates, sublingual nitroglycerin, digoxin, warfarin, non-steroidal 
anti-inflammatory drugs, antibiotics, and oral hypoglycemic drugs.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3 Drug Interactions with Olmesartan Medoxomil
                     
                        No significant drug interactions were reported in studies in 
which olmesartan medoxomil was co-administered with digoxin or warfarin in 
healthy volunteers. 
                        The bioavailability of olmesartan medoxomil was not significantly altered by 
the co-administration of antacids [Al(OH)3/Mg(OH)2].
                        Olmesartan medoxomil is not metabolized by the cytochrome P450 system and has 
no effects on P450 enzymes; thus, interactions with drugs that inhibit, induce, 
or are metabolized by those enzymes are not expected. 
                     
                  
               
            
         