
                     
                     
                     Drug Interactions
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Lisinopril
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Hypotension - Patients on Diuretic Therapy
                                 
                                    

                                    Patients on diuretics and especially those in whom diuretic therapy was recently instituted, may occasionally experience an excessive reduction of blood pressure after initiation of therapy with lisinopril. The possibility of hypotensive effects with lisinopril can be minimized by either discontinuing the diuretic or increasing the salt intake prior to initiation of treatment with lisinopril. If it is necessary to continue the diuretic, initiate therapy with lisinopril at a dose of 5 mg daily, and provide close medical supervision after the initial dose for at least two hours and until blood pressure has stabilized for at least an additional hour (see 
                                          
                                             WARNINGS
                                          , and 
                                          
                                             DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION
                                          
                                       ). When a diuretic is added to the therapy of a patient receiving lisinopril, an additional antihypertensive effect is usually observed (see 
                                          
                                             DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION
                                          
                                       ).
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Non-Steroidal Anti-Inflammatory Agents including Selective Cyclooxygenase-2 Inhibitors (COX-2 Inhibitors)
                                 
                                    In patients who are elderly, volume-depleted (including those on diuretic therapy), or with compromised renal function, co-administration of NSAIDs, including selective COX-2 inhibitors, with ACE inhibitors, including lisinopril, may result in deterioration of renal function, including possible acute renal failure. These effects are usually reversible. Monitor renal function periodically in patients receiving lisinopril and NSAID therapy.

                                    
                                    
                                       
The antihypertensive effect of ACE inhibitors, including lisinopril, may be attenuated by NSAIDs.

                                       

                                       Dual Blockade of the Renin-Angiotensin System (RAS)

                                       
                                       
Dual blockade of the RAS with angiotensin receptor blockers, ACE inhibitors, or aliskiren is associated with increased risks of hypotension, hyperkalemia, and changes in renal function (including acute renal failure) compared to monotherapy.

                                       
The VA NEPHRON trial enrolled 1448 patients with type 2 diabetes, elevated urinary-albumin-to-creatinine ratio, and decreased estimated glomerular filtration rate (GFR 30 to 89.9 mL/min), randomized them to lisinopril or placebo on a background of losartan therapy and followed them for a median of 2.2 years. Patients receiving the combination of losartan and lisinopril did not obtain any additional benefit compared to monotherapy for the combined endpoint of decline in GFR, end state renal disease, or death, but experienced an increased incidence of hyperkalemia and acute kidney injury compared with the monotherapy group.

                                       
In general, avoid combined use of RAS inhibitors, closely monitor blood pressure, renal function and electrolytes in patients on lisinopril and hydrochlorothiazide and other agents that affect the RAS.

                                       
Do not co-administer aliskiren with lisinopril and hydrochlorothiazide in patients with diabetes. Avoid use of aliskiren with lisinopril and hydrochlorothiazide in patients with renal impairment (GFR < 60 mL/min).
                                    

                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Other Agents
                                 
                                    

                                    Lisinopril has been used concomitantly with nitrates and/or digoxin without evidence of clinically significant adverse interactions. No meaningful clinically important pharmacokinetic interactions occurred when lisinopril was used concomitantly with propranolol, digoxin, or hydrochlorothiazide. The presence of food in the stomach does not alter the bioavailability of lisinopril.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Agents Increasing Serum Potassium
                                 
                                    

                                    
                                       Lisinopril attenuates potassium loss caused by thiazide-type diuretics. Use of lisinopril with potassium-sparing diuretics (e.g., spironolactone, eplerenone, triamterene, or amiloride), potassium supplements, or potassium-containing salt substitutes may lead to significant increases in serum potassium. Therefore, if concomitant use of these agents is indicated, because of demonstrated hypokalemia, they should be used with caution and with frequent monitoring of serum potassium.

                                       
                                    
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Lithium
                                 
                                    

                                    Lithium toxicity has been reported in patients receiving lithium concomitantly with drugs which cause elimination of sodium, including ACE inhibitors. Lithium toxicity was usually reversible upon discontinuation of lithium and the ACE inhibitor. It is recommended that serum lithium levels be monitored frequently if lisinopril is administered concomitantly with lithium.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Hydrochlorothiazide
                           
                              

                              When administered concurrently the following drugs may interact with thiazide diuretics.
                                    

                                    
Alcohol, barbiturates, or narcotics - potentiation of orthostatic hypotension may occur.
                                    

                                    
Antidiabetic drugs (oral agents and insulin) - dosage adjustment of the antidiabetic drug may be required.
                                    

                                    
Other antihypertensive drugs - additive effect or potentiation.
                                    

                                    
Cholestyramine and colestipol resins - Absorption of hydrochlorothiazide is impaired in the presence of anionic exchange resins. Single doses of either cholestyramine or colestipol resins bind the hydrochlorothiazide and reduce its absorption from the gastrointestinal tract by up to 85 and 43 percent, respectively.
                                    

                                    
Corticosteroids, ACTH - intensified electrolyte depletion, particularly hypokalemia.
                                    

                                    
Pressor amines (e.g., norepinephrine) - possible decreased response to pressor amines but not sufficient to preclude their use.
                                    

                                    
Skeletal muscle relaxants, nondepolarizing (e.g., tubocurarine) - possible increased responsiveness to the muscle relaxant.
                                    

                                    
Lithium - should not generally be given with diuretics. Diuretic agents reduce the renal clearance of lithium and add a high risk of lithium toxicity. Refer to the package insert for lithium preparations before use of such preparations with lisinopril and hydrochlorothiazide.

                                 
                                    
Non-steroidal Anti-inflammatory Drugs - In some patients, the administration of a non-steroidal anti­-inflammatory agent can reduce the diuretic, natriuretic, and antihypertensive effects of loop, potassium-sparing and thiazide diuretics. Therefore, when lisinopril and hydrochlorothiazide and non-steroidal anti-inflammatory agents are used concomitantly, the patient should be observed closely to determine if the desired effect of lisinopril and hydrochlorothiazide is obtained.
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Gold
                                 
                                    

                                    Nitritoid reactions (symptoms include facial flushing, nausea, vomiting and hypotension) have been reported rarely in patients on therapy with injectable gold (sodium aurothiomalate) and concomitant ACE inhibitor therapy including lisinopril and hydrochlorothiazide.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               