
                     
                     
                     Drug Interactions
                     
                        
                           (see also CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY, Drug-Drug Interactions)
                        
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Monoamine Oxidase Inhibition
                           
                              Linezolid is a reversible, nonselective inhibitor of monoamine oxidase. Therefore, linezolid has the potential for interaction with adrenergic and serotonergic agents.
                              
                                 Adrenergic Agents: Some individuals receiving ZYVOX may experience a reversible enhancement of the pressor response to indirect-acting sympathomimetic agents, vasopressor or dopaminergic agents. Commonly used drugs such as phenylpropanolamine and pseudoephedrine have been specifically studied. Initial doses of adrenergic agents, such as dopamine or epinephrine, should be reduced and titrated to achieve the desired response.
                              
                                 Serotonergic Agents: Co-administration of linezolid and serotonergic agents was not associated with serotonin syndrome in Phase 1, 2 or 3 studies. Spontaneous reports of serotonin syndrome associated with co-administration of ZYVOX and serotonergic agents, including antidepressants such as selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs), have been reported. Patients who are treated with ZYVOX and concomitant serotonergic agents should be closely observed as described in the PRECAUTIONS, General Section.
                              
                                 Antibiotics: In healthy volunteers, coadministration of rifampin with linezolid resulted in a 21% decrease in linezolid Cmax and a 32% decrease in linezolid AUC (see 
                                    CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY, Drug-Drug Interactions
                                 ). The clinical significance of this interaction is unknown. 
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               