
               
               
               12     CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1     Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Desirudin is a direct inhibitor of free circulating and clot-bound thrombin. The anticoagulant properties of desirudin are demonstrated by its ability to prolong the clotting time of human plasma. One molecule of desirudin binds to one molecule of thrombin and thereby blocks the thrombogenic activity of thrombin. As a result, all thrombin-dependent coagulation assays are affected. Activated partial thromboplastin time (aPTT) is a measure of the anticoagulant activity of desirudin and increases in a dose-dependent fashion. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2     Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        The pharmacodynamic effect of desirudin on proteolytic activity of thrombin was assessed as an increase in aPTT. A mean peak aPTT prolongation of about 1.38 times baseline value (range 0.58 to 3.41) was observed following subcutaneous b.i.d. injections of 15 mg desirudin. Thrombin time (TT) frequently exceeds 200 seconds even at low plasma concentrations of desirudin, which renders this test unsuitable for routine monitoring of Iprivask therapy. At therapeutic serum concentrations, desirudin has no effect on other enzymes of the hemostatic system such as factors IXa, Xa, kallikrein, plasmin, tissue plasminogen activator, or activated protein C. In addition, it does not display any effect on other serine proteases, such as the digestive enzymes trypsin, chymotrypsin, or on complement activation by the classical or alternative pathways.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3     Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        
                           Properties
                        
                        Pharmacokinetic parameters were calculated based on plasma concentration data obtained by a non-specific ELISA method that does not discriminate between native desirudin and its metabolites. It is not known if the metabolites are pharmacologically active.
                        
                           Absorption
                        
                        The absorption of desirudin is complete when subcutaneously administered at doses of 0.3 mg/kg or 0.5 mg/kg. Following subcutaneous administration of single doses of 0.1 to 0.75 mg/kg, plasma concentrations of desirudin increased to a maximum level (Cmax) between 1 and 3 hours. Both Cmax and area-under-the-curve (AUC) values are dose proportional.
                        Mean Desirudin Concentrations and Changes in APTT
After A Single 15 mg Subcutaneous Dose in 12 Healthy Subjects
                        
                        
                           Distribution
                        
                        The pharmacokinetic properties of desirudin following intravenous administration are well described by a two- or three- compartment disposition model. Desirudin is distributed in the extracellular space with a volume of distribution at steady state of 0.25 L/kg, independent of the dose. Desirudin binds specifically and directly to thrombin, forming an extremely tight, non-covalent complex with an inhibition constant of approximately 2.6 x 10-13 M. Thus, free or protein bound desirudin immediately binds circulating thrombin. The pharmacological effect of desirudin is not modified when co-administered with highly protein bound drugs (>99%).
                        
                           Metabolism
                        
                        Human and animal data suggest that desirudin is primarily eliminated and metabolized by the kidney. The total urinary excretion of unchanged desirudin amounts to 40 to 50% of the administered dose. Metabolites lacking one or two C-terminal amino acids constitute a minor proportion of the material recovered from urine (< 7%). There is no evidence for the presence of other metabolites. This indicates that desirudin is metabolized by stepwise degradation from the C-terminus probably catalyzed by carboxypeptidase(s) such as carboxypeptidase A, originating from the pancreas. Total clearance of desirudin is approximately 1.5 to 2.7 mL/min/kg following either subcutaneous or intravenous administration and is independent of dose. This clearance value is close to the glomerular filtration rate.
                        
                           Elimination
                        
                        The elimination of desirudin from plasma is rapid after intravenous administration, with approximately 90% of the dose disappearing from the plasma within 2 hours of the injection. Plasma concentrations of desirudin then decline with a mean terminal elimination half-life of 2 to 3 hours. After subcutaneous administration, the mean terminal elimination half-life is also approximately 2 hours.
                        
                           Specific Populations
                        
                        
                           Renal Impairment
                        
                        In a pharmacokinetic study of renally impaired subjects, subjects with mild [creatinine clearance (CLcr) between 61 and 90 mL/min], moderate (CLcr between 31 and 60 mL/min), and severe (CLcr below 31 mL/min) renal impairment, were administered a single intravenous dose of 0.5, 0.25, or 0.125 mg/kg desirudin, respectively. This resulted in mean dose-normalized AUCeffect (AUC0-60th for aPTT prolongation) increases of approximately 3-, and 9-fold for the moderate and severe renally impaired subjects, respectively, compared with healthy individuals. In subjects with mild renal impairment, there was no increase in AUCeffect compared with healthy individuals. In subjects with severe renal impairment, terminal elimination half-lives were prolonged up to 12 hours compared with 2 to 4 hours in normal volunteers or subjects with mild to moderate renal impairment. Dose adjustments are recommended in certain circumstances in relation to the degree of impairment or degree of aPTT abnormality [see Dosage and Administration (2.2, 2.3), and Warnings and Precautions (5.1)
                           ].
                        
                        
                           Hepatic Impairment
                        
                        No pharmacokinetic studies have been conducted to investigate the effects of Iprivask in hepatic impairment
                        
                           Age and Gender
                        
                        The mean plasma clearance of desirudin in patients ≥65 years of age (n=12; 110 mL/min) is approximately 28% lower than in patients <65 years of age (n=8; 153 mL/min). Population pharmacokinetics conducted in 301 patients undergoing elective total hip replacement indicate that age or gender do not affect the systemic clearance of desirudin when renal creatinine clearance is considered. This drug is substantially excreted by the kidney, and the risk of adverse events due to it may be greater in patients with impaired renal function. Because elderly patients are more likely to have decreased renal function, care should be taken in dose selection, and it may be useful to monitor renal function. Dosage adjustment in the case of moderate and severe renal impairment is necessary. [see Dosage and Administration (2.2, 2.3)].
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           Mean Desirudin Concentrations and Changes in APTT
After A Single 15 mg Subcutaneous Dose in 12 Healthy Subjects

                           
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         