
               
               
               7     DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  
                     
                        Avoid use with other drugs that inhibit or modify platelet function or affect blood clotting (e.g., anticoagulants, antiplatelet agents, NSAIDs, SSRIs) as coadministration may potentiate bleeding (7).
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1     Drugs that Increase Bleeding Risk
                     
                        Discontinue any agent which may enhance the risk of hemorrhage prior to initiation of Iprivask therapy. These agents include medications such as Dextran 40, systemic glucocorticoids, thrombolytics, and anticoagulants. If co-administration cannot be avoided, close clinical and laboratory monitoring should be conducted. During prophylaxis of venous thromboembolism, concomitant treatment with heparins (unfractionated and low-molecular weight heparins) or dextrans is not recommended. The effects of desirudin and unfractionated heparins on prolongation of aPTT are additive.
                        As with other anticoagulants, desirudin should be used with caution in conjunction with drugs which affect platelet function. These medications include systemic salicylates, NSAIDS including ketorolac, acetylsalicylic acid, ticlopidine, dipyridamole, sulfinpyrazone, clopidogrel, abciximab and other glycoprotein IIb/IIIa antagonists [see Warnings and Precautions (5.2)].
                           
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2     Coadministration with Warfarin 
                     
                        The concomitant administration of warfarin did not significantly affect the pharmacokinetic effects of desirudin. When warfarin and desirudin were co-administered, greater inhibition of hemostasis measured by activated partial thromboplastin time (aPTT), prothrombin time (PT), and international normalized ratio (INR) was observed [see Dosage and Administration (2.4)
                           ].
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         