
               
               
               12  CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  Oxycodone is a pure mu receptor opioid agonist whose
principal therapeutic action is analgesia.  Other members of the class known as
opioid agonists include substances such as morphine, hydromorphone, fentanyl,
codeine, hydrocodone and oxymorphone.  Pharmacological effects of opioid
agonists include anxiolysis, euphoria, feelings of relaxation, respiratory
depression, constipation, miosis, and cough suppression, as well as analgesia. 
Increasing doses of pure mu receptor agonists are associated with increasing
analgesia.  There is no defined maximum dose; the ceiling to analgesic
effectiveness is imposed only by adverse reactions, the more serious of which
may include somnolence and respiratory depression.
               
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1  Mechanism of Action
                     
                        
                           
                              Central Nervous System
                           
                        
                        The precise mechanism of the analgesic action is unknown. 
However, specific CNS opioid receptors for endogenous compounds with
opioid-like activity have been identified throughout the brain and spinal cord
and are thought to play a role in the analgesic effects of this drug.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2  Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        A single-dose, double-blind, placebo- and dose-controlled
study was conducted using OxyContin (10, 20, and 30 mg) in an analgesic pain
model involving 182 patients with moderate to severe pain.  OxyContin  doses of
20 mg and 30 mg produced statistically significant pain reduction compared to
placebo. 
                        
                           
                              Central Nervous System 
                           
                        
                        Oxycodone produces respiratory depression by direct action on brain stem respiratory centers. The respiratory depression involves both a
reduction in the responsiveness of the brain stem respiratory centers to increases in CO2 tension and to electrical stimulation.
                        Oxycodone depresses the cough reflex by direct effect on the cough center in the medulla.  Antitussive effects may occur with doses lower
than those usually required for analgesia.
                        Oxycodone causes miosis, even in total darkness.  Pinpoint pupils are a sign of opioid overdose but are not pathognomonic (e.g., pontine lesions of hemorrhagic or ischemic origin may produce similar findings). Marked mydriasis rather than miosis may be seen with hypoxia in the setting of oxycodone overdose 
                              [see Overdosage (10)]
                           .
                        
                           
                              Gastrointestinal Tract and Other Smooth Muscle
                           
                        
                        Oxycodone causes a reduction in motility associated with an increase in smooth muscle tone in the antrum of the stomach and duodenum. Digestion of food in the small intestine is delayed and propulsive contractions are decreased.  Propulsive peristaltic waves in the colon are decreased, while tone may be increased to the point of spasm resulting in constipation.  Other opioid-induced effects may include a reduction in gastric, biliary and
pancreatic secretions, spasm of sphincter of Oddi, and transient elevations in serum amylase.
                        
                           
                              Cardiovascular System
                           
                        
                        Oxycodone may produce release of histamine with or without
associated peripheral vasodilation.  Manifestations of histamine release and/or
peripheral vasodilation may include pruritus, flushing, red eyes, sweating,
and/or orthostatic hypotension.
                        
                           
                              Endocrine System
                           
                        
                        Opioids may influence the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal or
-gonadal axes.  Some changes that can be seen include an increase in serum
prolactin, and decreases in plasma cortisol and testosterone.  Clinical signs
and symptoms may be manifest from these hormonal changes.
                        
                           
                              Immune System
                           
                        
                        In vitro and animal studies indicate that opioids have a
variety of effects on immune functions, depending on the context in which they
are used. The clinical significance of these findings is unknown.
                        
                           
                              Concentration – Efficacy Relationships
                           
                        
                        Studies in normal volunteers and patients reveal predictable
relationships between oxycodone dosage and plasma oxycodone concentrations, as
well as between concentration and certain expected opioid effects, such as
pupillary constriction, sedation, overall subjective "drug effect", analgesia
and feelings of "relaxation".
                        The minimum effective analgesic concentration will vary
widely among patients, especially among patients who have been previously
treated with potent agonist opioids.  As a result, patients must be treated
with individualized titration of dosage to the desired effect.  The minimum
effective analgesic concentration of oxycodone for any individual patient may
increase over time due to an increase in pain, the development of a new pain
syndrome and/or the development of analgesic tolerance.
                        
                           
                              Concentration – Adverse Reaction Relationships
                           
                        
                        There is a relationship between increasing oxycodone plasma
concentration and increasing frequency of dose-related opioid adverse reactions
such as nausea, vomiting, CNS effects, and respiratory depression.  In
opioid-tolerant patients, the situation may be altered by the development of
tolerance to opioid-related side effects.
                        The dose of OxyContin must be individualized 
                              [see Dosage
and Administration (2.6)]
                           , because the effective analgesic dose for some
patients will be too high to be tolerated by other patients.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3  Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        The activity of OxyContin is primarily due to the parent drug oxycodone.  OxyContin is designed to provide delivery of oxycodone over 12 hours.
                        Cutting, breaking, chewing, crushing or dissolving OxyContin impairs the controlled-release delivery mechanism and results in the rapid release and absorption of a potentially fatal dose of oxycodone.
                        Oxycodone release from OxyContin is pH independent.  The oral bioavailability of oxycodone is 60% to 87%.  The relative oral bioavailability of oxycodone from OxyContin to that from immediate-release oral dosage forms is 100%.  Upon repeated dosing with OxyContin in healthy subjects in pharmacokinetic studies, steady-state levels were achieved within 24-36 hours. Oxycodone is extensively metabolized and eliminated primarily in the urine as
both conjugated and unconjugated metabolites.  The apparent elimination half-life of oxycodone following the administration of OxyContin was 4.5 hours compared to 3.2 hours for immediate-release oxycodone.
                        
                           
                              Absorption
                           
                        
                        About 60% to 87% of an oral dose of oxycodone reaches the central compartment in comparison to a parenteral dose.  This high oral bioavailability is due to low pre-systemic and/or first-pass metabolism.
                        
                           
                              Plasma Oxycodone Concentration Over Time
                           
                        
                        Dose proportionality has been established for OxyContin 10 mg, 15 mg, 20 mg, 30 mg, 40 mg, 60 mg, and 80 mg tablet strengths for both peak plasma concentrations (Cmax) and extent of absorption (AUC) 
                              (see Table 3)
                           .  Given the short elimination half-life of oxycodone, steady-state plasma concentrations of oxycodone are achieved within 24-36 hours of initiation of dosing with OxyContin.  In a study comparing 10 mg of OxyContin every 12 hours to 5 mg of immediate-release oxycodone every 6 hours, the two treatments were found to be equivalent for AUC and Cmax, and similar for Cmin (trough) concentrations.
                        


                        



                           
                              Food Effects
                           
                        
                        Food has no significant effect on the extent of absorption of oxycodone from OxyContin. 
                        
                           
                              Distribution
                           
                        
                        Following intravenous administration, the steady-state volume of distribution (Vss) for oxycodone was 2.6 L/kg.  Oxycodone binding to
plasma protein at 37°C and a pH of 7.4 was about 45%.  Once absorbed, oxycodone is distributed to skeletal muscle, liver, intestinal tract, lungs, spleen, and
brain.  Oxycodone has been found in breast milk 
                              [see Use In Specific Populations (8.3)]
                           .
                        
                           
                              Metabolism
                           
                        
                        Oxycodone is extensively metabolized by multiple metabolic
pathways to produce noroxycodone, oxymorphone and noroxymorphone, which are
subsequently glucuronidated.  Noroxycodone and noroxymorphone are the major
circulating metabolites. CYP3A mediated N-demethylation to noroxycodone is the
primary metabolic pathway of oxycodone with a lower contribution from CYP2D6
mediated O-demethylation to oxymorphone. Therefore, the formation of these and
related metabolites can, in theory, be affected by other drugs 
                              (see Drug-Drug Interactions)
                           .
                        Noroxycodone exhibits very weak anti-nociceptive potency
compared to oxycodone, however, it undergoes further oxidation to produce
noroxymorphone, which is active at opioid receptors.  Although noroxymorphone
is an active metabolite and present at relatively high concentrations in
circulation, it does not appear to cross the blood-brain barrier to a
significant extent.  Oxymorphone is present in the plasma only at low
concentrations and undergoes further metabolism to form its glucuronide and
noroxymorphone.  Oxymorphone has been shown to be active and possessing
analgesic activity but its contribution to analgesia following oxycodone
administration is thought to be clinically insignificant.  Other metabolites
(α- and ß-oxycodol, noroxycodol and oxymorphol) may be present at very low
concentrations and demonstrate limited penetration in to the brain as compared
to oxycodone.  The enzymes responsible for keto-reduction and glucuronidation
pathways in oxycodone metabolism have not been established.
                        
                           
                              Excretion
                           
                        
                        Oxycodone and its metabolites are excreted primarily via the
kidney.  The amounts measured in the urine have been reported as follows: free
and conjugated oxycodone 8.9%, free noroxycodone 23%, free oxymorphone less
than 1%, conjugated oxymorphone 10%, free and conjugated noroxymorphone 14%,
reduced free and conjugated metabolites up to 18%.  The total plasma clearance
was approximately 1.4 L/min in adults.
                        
                           
                              Special Populations
                           
                        
                        
                           
                              Elderly (≥65 years)
                           
                        
                        The plasma concentrations of oxycodone are only nominally
affected by age, being 15% greater in elderly as compared to young subjects
(age 21-45).
                        
                           
                              Gender
                           
                        
                        Across individual pharmacokinetic studies, average plasma
oxycodone concentrations for female subjects were up to 25% higher than for
male subjects on a body weight adjusted basis.  The reason for this difference
is unknown 
                              [see Use In Specific Populations (8.8)]
                           .
                        
                           
                              Renal Impairment
                           
                        
                        Data from a pharmacokinetic study involving 13 patients with
mild to severe renal dysfunction (creatinine clearance <60 mL/min) showed
peak plasma oxycodone and noroxycodone concentrations 50% and 20% higher,
respectively, and AUC values for oxycodone, noroxycodone, and oxymorphone 60%,
50%, and 40% higher than normal subjects, respectively.  This was accompanied
by an increase in sedation but not by differences in respiratory rate,
pupillary constriction, or several other measures of drug effect.  There was an
increase in mean elimination t½ for oxycodone of 1 hour.
                        
                           
                              Hepatic Impairment
                           
                        
                        Data from a study involving 24 patients with mild to moderate hepatic dysfunction show peak plasma oxycodone and noroxycodone concentrations 50% and 20% higher, respectively, than healthy subjects.  AUC values are 95% and 65% higher, respectively.  Oxymorphone peak plasma concentrations and AUC values are lower by 30% and 40%.  These differences are accompanied by increases in some, but not other, drug effects.  The mean elimination t½ for oxycodone increased by 2.3 hours.
                        
                           
                              Drug-Drug Interactions
                           
                        
                        Oxycodone is extensively metabolized by multiple metabolic pathways.  CYP3A4 is the major enzyme involved in noroxycodone formation followed by CYP2B6, CYP2C9/19 and CYP2D6.  Drugs that inhibit CYP3A4 activity, such as macrolide antibiotics (e.g., erythromycin), azole-antifungal agents (e.g., ketoconazole), and protease inhibitors (e.g., ritonavir), may cause decreased clearance of oxycodone which could lead to an increase in oxycodone
plasma concentrations. For example, a published study showed that the co-administration of the antifungal drug, voriconazole, increased oxycodone AUC and Cmax by 3.6 and 1.7 fold, respectively. Similarly, CYP450 inducers, such as rifampin, carbamazepine, and phenytoin, may induce the metabolism of oxycodone and, therefore, may cause increased clearance of the drug which could lead to a decrease in oxycodone plasma concentrations, lack of efficacy or, possibly, development of an abstinence syndrome in a patient who had developed physical dependence to oxycodone. A published study showed that the co-administration of rifampin, a drug metabolizing enzyme inducer, decreased oxycodone (oral) AUC and Cmax by 86% and 63%, respectively.
                        Oxymorphone is a minor metabolite, its formation is catalyzed primarily by CYP2D6 and to a small extent by CYP2C19.  The formation of oxymorphone may be blocked by a variety of drugs (such as antipsychotics, beta blockers, antidepressants, etc.) that inhibit these enzymes.  However, in a study involving ten subjects using quinidine, a known inhibitor of CYP2D6, the pharmacodynamic effects of oxycodone were unchanged.  The genetic expression of CYP2D6 may have some influence in the pharmacokinetic properties of oxycodone.
                        The in vitro drug-drug interaction studies with noroxymorphone using human liver microsomes showed no significant inhibition of CYP2D6 and CYP3A4 activities which suggests that noroxymorphone may not alter the metabolism of other drugs that are metabolized by CYP2D6 and CYP3A4, and such blockade has not been shown to be of clinical significance with oxycodone 
                              [see Drug Interactions (7.2)]
                           .
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         