
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
                  No specific interaction studies have been conducted with hydrocodone bitartrate and pseudoephedrine hydrochloride oral solution. 
               
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              Opioids, antihistamines, antipsychotics, anti-anxiety agents, or other CNS depressants may exhibit additive CNS depression. Avoid using with hydrocodone bitartrate and pseudoephedrine hydrochloride oral solution. (7.1) 
                           
                           
                              MAOIs or tricyclic antidepressants: Do not use. May increase the effect of either the antidepressant or hydrocodone, may cause increase in blood pressure or hypertensive crisis may occur. (7.2) 
                           
                           
                              Anticholinergic drugs: Use with caution in order to avoid paralytic ileus and excessive anticholinergic effects. (7.3) 
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1  Opioids, Antihistamines, Antipsychotics, Anti-anxiety Agents, or Other CNS Depressants (Including Alcohol)
                     
                        The use of opioids, antihistamines, antipsychotics, anti-anxiety agents, or other CNS depressants concomitantly with hydrocodone bitartrate and pseudoephedrine hydrochloride oral solution may cause an additive CNS depressant effect and should be avoided. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2  Monoamine Oxidase Inhibitors and Tricyclic Antidepressants
                     
                        Do not prescribe hydrocodone bitartrate and pseudoephedrine hydrochloride oral solution if the patient is taking a prescription MAOI (i.e., certain drugs used for depression, psychiatric or emotional conditions, or Parkinson’s disease), or for 2 weeks after stopping a MAOI drug. The use of MAOIs or tricyclic antidepressants with hydrocodone preparations may increase the effect of either the antidepressant or hydrocodone. An increase in blood pressure or hypertensive crisis may also occur when pseudoephedrine containing preparations are used with MAOIs [see 
                                 Warnings and Precautions (5.7)
                              
                           
                           ]. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3  Anticholinergic Drugs
                     
                        Hydrocodone should be administered cautiously to persons receiving anticholinergic drugs in order to avoid paralytic ileus and excessive anticholinergic effects [see 
                                 Warnings and Precautions (5.6)
                              
                           
                           ]. 
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         