
               
               
               7 	DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
                  Stavudine is unlikely to interact with drugs metabolized by cytochrome P450 isoenzymes.
               
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           Coadministration of stavudine with zidovudine should be avoided. (7)
                           Coadministration of stavudine and doxorubicin or ribavirin should be undertaken with caution. (7)
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           Zidovudine: Zidovudine competitively inhibits the intracellular phosphorylation of stavudine. Therefore, use of zidovudine in combination with stavudine should be avoided.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           Doxorubicin: In vitro data indicate that the phosphorylation of stavudine is inhibited at relevant concentrations by doxorubicin. The clinical significance of this interaction is unknown; therefore, concomitant use of stavudine with doxorubicin should be undertaken with caution.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           Ribavirin: In vitro data indicate ribavirin reduces phosphorylation of lamivudine, stavudine, and zidovudine. The clinical significance of the interaction with stavudine is unknown; therefore, concomitant use of stavudine with ribavirin should be undertaken with caution. No pharmacokinetic (eg, plasma concentrations or intracellular triphosphorylated active metabolite concentrations) or pharmacodynamic (eg, loss of HIV-1/HCV virologic suppression) interaction was observed when ribavirin and lamivudine (n=18), stavudine (n=10), or zidovudine (n=6) were coadministered as part of a multi-drug regimen to HIV-1/HCV co-infected patients [see 
                              Warnings and Precautions (5.2)
                           ].
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         