
               
               
               Clinical Pharmacology
               
                  
                     Mechanism of Action
                     
The mechanism of action of Tigan® as determined in animals is obscure, but may involve the chemoreceptor trigger zone (CTZ), an
area in the medulla oblongata through which emetic impulses are conveyed to the vomiting center; direct impulses to the vomiting
center apparently are not similarly inhibited. In dogs pretreated with trimethobenzamide HCl, the emetic response to apomorphine is
inhibited, while little or no protection is afforded against emesis induced by intragastric copper sulfate.

                  
                  
                     Pharmacokinetics
                     
The pharmacokinetics of trimethobenzamide have been studied in healthy adult subjects. Following administration of 200 mg
(100 mg/mL) Tigan I.M. injection, the time to reach maximum plasma concentration (Tmax) was about half an hour, about 15
minutes longer for Tigan 300 mg oral capsule than an I.M. injection. A single dose of Tigan 300 mg oral capsule provided a plasma
concentration profile of trimethobenzamide similar to Tigan 200 mg I.M. The relative bioavailability of the capsule formulation
compared to the solution is 100%. The mean elimination half-life of trimethobenzamide is 7 to 9 hours. Between 30 – 50% of a single
dose in humans is excreted unchanged in the urine within 48 – 72 hours. The metabolic disposition of trimethobenzamide in humans is
not known. Specifically, it is not known if active metabolites are generated in humans.

                  
                  
                     Special Populations
                     

                  
                  Age
The clearance of trimethobenzamide is not known in patients with renal impairment. However, it may be advisable to consider
reduction in the dosing of trimethobenzamide in elderly patients with renal impairment considering that a substantial amount of
excretion and elimination of trimethobenzamide occurs via the kidney and that elderly patients may have various degrees of renal
impairment. (See PRECAUTIONS: General and DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION).

                  
                  Gender
Systemic exposure to trimethobenzamide was similar between men (N=40) and women (N=28).

                  
                  Race
Pharmacokinetics appeared to be similar for Caucasians (N=53) and African Americans (N=12).

                  
                  Renal Impairment
The clearance of trimethobenzamide is not known in patients with renal impairment. However, it may be advisable to consider
reduction in the dosing of trimethobenzamide in patients with renal impairment considering that a substantial amount of
excretion and elimination of trimethobenzamide occurs via the kidney. (See PRECAUTIONS: General and DOSAGE AND
ADMINISTRATION).
               
               
            
         