
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
                  
                     Effects of NUVIGIL on CYP3A4/5 Substrates
                  
                  The clearance of drugs that are substrates for CYP3A4/5 (e.g., steroidal contraceptives, cyclosporine, midazolam, and triazolam) may be increased by NUVIGIL via induction of metabolic enzymes, which results in lower systemic exposure. Dosage adjustment of these drugs should be considered when these drugs are used concomitantly with NUVIGIL
                        
                           [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)]
                        
                     . 
                  The effectiveness of steroidal contraceptives may be reduced when used with NUVIGIL and for one month after discontinuation of therapy. Alternative or concomitant methods of contraception are recommended for patients taking steroidal contraceptives (e.g., ethinyl estradiol) when treated concomitantly with NUVIGIL and for one month after discontinuation of NUVIGIL treatment.
                  Blood levels of cyclosporine may be reduced when used with NUVIGIL.  Monitoring of circulating cyclosporine concentrations and appropriate dosage adjustment for cyclosporine should be considered when used concomitantly with NUVIGIL. 
                  
                     Effects of NUVIGIL on CYP2C19 Substrates
                  
                  Elimination of drugs that are substrates for CYP2C19 (e.g., phenytoin, diazepam, propranolol, omeprazole, and clomipramine) may be prolonged by NUVIGIL via inhibition of metabolic enzymes, with resultant higher systemic exposure.  Dose reduction of these drugs may be required when these drugs are used concomitantly with NUVIGIL.
                  
                     Warfarin

                     
                  
                  More frequent monitoring of prothrombin times/INR should be considered whenever NUVIGIL is coadministered with warfarin 
                        [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)]
                     .
                  
                     Monoamine Oxidase (MAO) Inhibitors  
                  
                  Caution should be used when concomitantly administering MAO inhibitors and NUVIGIL.
               
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              •Steroidal contraceptives (e.g., ethinyl estradiol): use alternative or concomitant methods of contraception while taking NUVIGIL and for one month after discontinuation of NUVIGIL treatment. (7)
                           
                              •Cyclosporine: blood concentrations of cyclosporine may be reduced. (7)
                           
                              •CYP2C19 substrates, such as omeprazole, phenytoin, and diazepam: exposure of these medications may be increased.(7)
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         