
               
               
               
                  CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY: Vitamin B12 with Intrinsic

               
               
                  Factor: when secretion of intrinsic factor in gastric juice is inadequate or absent (e.g., Addisonian pernicious anemia or after gastrectomy), vitamin B12 in physiologic doses is absorbed poorly, if at all. The resulting deficiency of vitamin B12 leads to the clinical manifestations of pernicious anemia. Similar megaloblastic anemias may develop in fish tapeworm (Diphyllobothrium latum) infection or after a surgically created small bowel blind loop; in these situations, treatment requires freeing the host of the parasites or bacteria that appear to compete for the available vitamin B12. Strict vegetarianism and malabsorption syndromes may also lead to vitamin B12 deficiency. In the latter case, parenteral therapy or oral therapy with so-called massive doses of vitamin B12 may be necessary for adequate treatment of the patient.
                  Potency of intrinsic factor concentrates is determined physiologically, i.e., by their use in patients with pernicious anemia. The liver-stomach concetrate with intrinsic factor and the vitamin B12 contained in two TRICON™ Capsules provide 1½ times the minimum amount of therapeutic agent that, when given daily in an uncomplicated case of pernicious anemia, will produce a satisfactory response and relief of anemia and symptoms.
                  Concentrates of intrinsic factor derived from hog gastric, pyloric, and duodenal mucosa have been used successfully in patients who lack intrinsic factor.
                  
                     Folic Acid: Folic acid deficiency is the immediate cause of most, if not all, cases of nutritional megaloblastic anemia and of the megaloblastic anemias of pregnancy and infancy; usually, it is also at least partially responsible for the megaloblastic anemias of malabsorption syndromes, e.g., tropical and nontropical sprue.
                  It is apparent that in vitamin B12 deficiency (e.g., pernicious anemia) lack of this vitamin results in impaired utilization of folic acid. There are other evidences of the close folic acid-vitamin B12 interrelationship: (1) B12 influences the storage, absorption, and utilization of folic acid, and (2) as a deficiency of B12 progresses, the requirement for folic acid increases. However, folic acid does not change the requirements for vitamin B12.
                  
                     Iron: A very common anemia is that due to iron deficiency. In most cases, the response to iron salts is prompt, safe, and predictable. Within limits, the response is quicker and more certain to large doses of iron than to small doses.
                  Each TRICON™ (hematinic concentrate with intrinsic factor) Capsule furnishes 110 mg of elemental iron (as ferrous fumarate) to provide a maximum response.
                  
                     Ascorbic Acid: Vitamin C plays a role in anemia therapy. It augments the conversion of folic acid to its active form, folinic acid. In addition, ascorbic acid promotes the reduction of ferric iron in food to the more readily absorbed ferrous form. Severe and prolonged vitamin C deficiency is associated with an anemia that is usually hypochromic but occasionally megaloblastic in type.
               
               
            
         