
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  Enter section text here
               
               
               
                  
                     image of figure 1
                     
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Endogenous estrogens are largely responsible for the development 
and maintenance of the female reproductive system and secondary sexual 
characteristics. Although circulating estrogens exist in a dynamic equilibrium 
of metabolic interconversions, estradiol is the principal intracellular human 
estrogen and is substantially more potent than its metabolites, estrone and 
estriol, at the receptor level.
                        The primary source of estrogen in normally cycling adult women is the ovarian 
follicle, which secretes 70 to 500 mcg of estradiol daily, depending on the 
phase of the menstrual cycle. After menopause, most endogenous estrogen is 
produced by conversion of androstenedione, secreted by the adrenal cortex, to 
estrone by peripheral tissues. Thus, estrone and the sulfate conjugated form, 
estrone sulfate, are the most abundant circulating estrogens in postmenopausal 
women.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        Estrogens act through binding to nuclear receptors in 
estrogen-responsive tissues. To date, two estrogen receptors have been 
identified. These vary in proportions from tissue to tissue.
                        Circulating estrogens modulate the pituitary secretion of the gonadotropins, 
luteinizing hormone (LH) and follicle stimulating hormone (FSH), through a 
negative feedback mechanism. Estrogens act to reduce the elevated levels of 
these hormones seen in postmenopausal women.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        
                           Absorption
                        
                        In a multiple-dose study, 72 postmenopausal women were treated for 14 days 
with Evamist to the inner forearm. Serum concentrations of estradiol appeared to 
reach steady state after 7 to 8 days of application of one, two, or three 90-mcL 
sprays of Evamist per day (Figure 1).
                        
                           
                        
                        
                        Figure 1. Mean (±SD) Serum Estradiol Concentrations 
on Day 14 Following Topical Application for 14 Days of One, Two or Three Sprays 
of Evamist (Unadjusted for Baseline)
                        Pharmacokinetics parameters for estradiol from one, two, or three 90-mcL 
sprays of Evamist, as assessed on Day 14 of this study, are described in Table 2.
                        
                        


                        



                        
                        
                           1 Values expressed are arithmetic 
means (%CV)

                           2 Values expressed are medians 
(minimum-maximum)
                        
                           
                              

                           
                        
                        
                           Distribution
                        
                        The distribution of exogenous estrogens is similar to that of endogenous 
estrogens. Estrogens are widely distributed in the body and are generally found 
in higher concentrations in the sex hormone target organs. Estrogens circulate 
in blood largely bound to sex hormone binding globulin (SHBG) and albumin.
                        
                        
                        
                           Metabolism
                        
                        Exogenous estrogens are metabolized in the same manner as endogenous 
estrogens. Circulating estrogens exist in a dynamic equilibrium of metabolic 
interconversions. These transformations take place mainly in the liver. 
Estradiol is converted reversibly to estrone, and both can be converted to 
estriol, which is a major urinary metabolite. Estrogens also undergo 
enterohepatic recirculation via sulfate and glucuronide conjugation in the 
liver, biliary secretion of conjugates into the intestine, and hydrolysis in the 
intestine followed by reabsorption. In postmenopausal women, a significant 
proportion of the circulating estrogens exist as sulfate conjugates, especially 
estrone sulfate, which serves as a circulating reservoir for the formation of 
more active estrogens.
                        
                        
                        
                           Excretion
                        
                        Estradiol, estrone and estriol are excreted in the urine along with 
glucuronide and sulfate conjugates.
                     
                  
               
            
         