
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        PULMOZYME is recombinant human deoxyribonuclease I (rhDNase), an enzyme which selectively cleaves DNA. In preclinical in vitro studies, PULMOZYME hydrolyzes the DNA in sputum of CF patients and reduces sputum viscoelasticity. In CF patients, retention of viscous purulent secretions in the airways contributes both to reduced pulmonary function and to exacerbations of infection. Purulent pulmonary secretions contain very high concentrations of extracellular DNA released by degenerating leukocytes that accumulate in response to infection.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        When 2.5 mg PULMOZYME was administered by inhalation to eighteen CF patients, mean sputum concentrations of 3 µg/mL DNase were measurable within 15 minutes. Mean sputum concentrations declined to an average of 0.6 µg/mL two hours following inhalation. Inhalation of up to 10 mg TID of PULMOZYME by 4 CF patients for six consecutive days, did not result in a significant elevation of serum concentrations of DNase above normal endogenous levels. After administration of up to 2.5 mg of PULMOZYME twice daily for six months to 321 CF patients, no accumulation of serum DNase was noted. Dornase alfa is expected to be metabolized by proteases present in biological fluids. A human intravenous dose study suggested an elimination half-life of 3-4 hours for dornase alpha.
                        PULMOZYME, 2.5 mg by inhalation, was administered daily to 98 patients aged 3 months to ≤ 10 years, and bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) fluid was obtained within 90 minutes of the first dose. BAL DNase concentrations were detectable in all patients but showed a broad range, from 0.007 to 1.8 µg/mL. Over an average of 14 days of exposure, serum DNase concentrations (mean ± s.d.) increased by 1.1 ± 1.6 ng/mL for the 3 months to  < 5 year age group and by 0.8 ± 1.2 ng/mL for the 5 to  ≤ 10 year age group. The relationship between BAL or serum DNase concentration and adverse experiences and clinical outcomes is unknown.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         