
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
                   In clinical studies performed with Fondaparinux Sodium Solution, the concomitant use of oral anticoagulants (warfarin), platelet inhibitors (acetylsalicylic acid), NSAIDs (piroxicam), and digoxin did not significantly affect the pharmacokinetics/pharmacodynamics of fondaparinux sodium. In addition, Fondaparinux Sodium Solution neither influenced the pharmacodynamics of warfarin, acetylsalicylic acid, piroxicam, and digoxin, nor the pharmacokinetics of digoxin at steady state.
                   Agents that may enhance the risk of hemorrhage should be discontinued prior to initiation of therapy with Fondaparinux Sodium Solution unless these agents are essential. If co-administration is necessary, monitor patients closely for hemorrhage. [See Warnings and Precautions (5.1).]
                  
                   In an in vitro study in human liver microsomes, inhibition of CYP2A6 hydroxylation of coumarin by fondaparinux (200 micromolar i.e., 350 mg/L) was 17 to 28%. Inhibition of the other isozymes evaluated (CYPs 1A2, 2C9, 2C19, 2D6, 3A4, and 3E1) was 0 to 16%. Since fondaparinux does not markedly inhibit CYP450s (CYP1A2, CYP2A6, CYP2C9, CYP2C19, CYP2D6, CYP2E1, or CYP3A4) in vitro,  fondaparinux sodium is not expected to significantly interact with other drugs in vivo by inhibition of metabolism mediated by these isozymes.
                   Since fondaparinux sodium does not bind significantly to plasma proteins other than ATIII, no drug interactions by protein-binding displacement are expected.
               
               
               
                  
                     
                         Discontinue agents that may enhance the risk of hemorrhage prior to initiation of therapy with Fondaparinux Sodium Solution unless essential. If co-administration is necessary, monitor patients closely for hemorrhage. (7)
                     
                  
               
            
         