
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  Isosorbide mononitrate is the major active metabolite of isosorbide dinitrate (ISDN), and most of the clinical activity of the dinitrate is attributable to the mononitrate. 
                  The principal pharmacological action of isosorbide mononitrate is relaxation of vascular smooth muscle and consequent dilatation of peripheral arteries and veins, especially the latter.  Dilation of the veins promotes peripheral pooling of blood and decreases venous return to the heart, thereby reducing left ventricular end-diastolic pressure and pulmonary capillary wedge pressure (preload).  Arteriolar relaxation reduces systemic vascular resistance, systolic arterial pressure, and mean arterial pressure (afterload).  Dilatation of the coronary arteries also occurs.  The relative importance of preload reduction, afterload reduction and coronary dilatation remains undefined.
               
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        Dosing regimens for most chronically used drugs are designed to provide plasma concentrations that are continuously greater than a minimally effective concentration.  This strategy is inappropriate for organic nitrates.  Several well-controlled clinical trials have used exercise testing to assess the antianginal efficacy of continuously-delivered nitrates.  In the large majority of these trials, active agents were indistinguishable from placebo after 24 hours (or less) of continuous therapy.  Attempts to overcome tolerance by dose escalation, even to doses far in excess of those used acutely, have consistently failed.  Only after nitrates have been absent from the body for several hours has their antianginal efficacy been restored. 
                        The drug-free interval sufficient to avoid tolerance to isosorbide mononitrate has not been completely defined.  In the only regimen of twice-daily isosorbide mononitrate that has been shown to avoid development of tolerance, the two doses of monoket® tablets are given 7 hours apart, so there is a gap of 17 hours between the second dose of each day and the first dose of the next day.  Taking account of the relatively long half-life of isosorbide mononitrate this result is consistent with those obtained for other organic nitrates. 
                        The asymmetric twice-daily regimen of monoket® tablets successfully avoided significant rebound/withdrawal effects.  The incidence and magnitude of such phenomena have appeared, in studies of other nitrates, to be highly dependent upon the schedule of nitrate administration. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        monoket® is rapidly and completely absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract.  In humans, monoket® is not subject to first pass metabolism in the liver.  The absolute bioavailability of isosorbide mononitrate from monoket® tablets is nearly 100%.  Peak plasma concentrations usually occur in about 30-60 minutes.  monoket® exhibits dose proportionality over the recommended dose range.  Food does not significantly affect the absorption or bioavailability of monoket®.  Metoprolol coadministration did not change the pharmacokinetics of monoket®.  The volume of distribution is approximately 0.6 L/kg.  Plasma protein binding of monoket® was found to be less than 5%. 
                        When radiolabelled isosorbide mononitrate was administered to humans in order to elucidate the metabolic fate, about half of the dose was found denitrated and renally excreted as isosorbide and sorbitol.  One quarter of the dose was accounted for as conjugates of the parent drug in the urine.  None of these metabolites is vasoactive.  Only 2% of the dose was excreted as unchanged drug. 
                        The overall elimination half-life of monoket® is about 5 hours.  The rate of clearance is the same in healthy young adults, in patients with various degrees of renal, hepatic or cardiac dysfunction and in the elderly.  When radiolabelled isosorbide mononitrate was administered to humans, 93% of the dose was excreted within 48 hours into the urine.  Renal excretion was virtually complete after 5 days; fecal excretion amounted to only 1% of the dose. 
                        monoket® has no known effect on renal and hepatic function.  In patients with varying degrees of renal failure, dosage adjustment does not appear necessary.  In patients with liver cirrhosis, the pharmacokinetic parameters after a single dose of monoket® were similar to the values found in healthy volunteers. 
                        Isosorbide mononitrate is significantly removed from the blood during hemodialysis; however , an additional dose to compensate for drug lost is not necessary.  In patients undergoing continuous ambulatory peritoneal dialysis, blood levels are similar to patients not on dialysis.  
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Clinical Trials
                     
                        The acute and chronic antianginal efficacy of monoket® has been confirmed in clinical trials.  The clinical efficacy of monoket® was studied in 21 stable angina pectoris patients.  After single dose administration of monoket®, 20 mg, the exercise capacity was increased by 42.7% after one hour, 29.6% after 6 hours, and by 25% after eight hours when compared to placebo.  Controlled trials of single doses of monoket® tablets have demonstrated that antianginal activity is present about 1 hour after dosing, with peak effect seen from 1-4 hours after dosing. 
                        In one multicenter placebo-controlled trial, monoket® was found to be safe and effective during acute and chronic (3 weeks) treatment of angina pectoris.  Two hundred fourteen (214) patients were enrolled in the trial; 54 patients were randomized to receive placebo and 106 patients were randomized to receive 10 or 20 mg of monoket® twice daily seven hours apart.  The largest effect of monoket®, compared to placebo, was on day one – dose one.  Although 14 hours after the first dose of day 14, the increase in exercise tolerance due to monoket® was statistically significant, the increase was about half of that seen 2 hours after the first dose of day one.  On day 21, two hours after the first dose the effect of monoket® was 60 to 70% of that seen on day one. 
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         