
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY 
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action 
                     
                        Cefazolin is a cephalosporin antibacterial drug [see 
                           Clinical Pharmacology (12.4)].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics 
                     
                        The pharmacokinetic/pharmacodynamic relationship for cefazolin has not been evaluated in patients.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics 
                     
                        Studies have shown that following intravenous administration of cefazolin to normal volunteers, mean serum concentrations peaked at approximately 185 mcg/mL and were approximately 4 mcg/mL at 8 hours for a 1 g dose.
                        The serum half-life for cefazolin is approximately 1.8 hours following intravenous administration.
                        In a study, using normal volunteers, of constant intravenous infusion with dosages of 3.5 mg/kg for 1 hour (approximately 250 mg) and 1.5 mg/kg the next 2 hours (approximately 100 mg), cefazolin produced a steady serum concentration at the third hour of approximately 28 mcg/mL.
                        Plasma pharmacokinetic parameters of cefazolin in normal volunteers (N=12) following a single 15-minute intravenous infusion of 2 g of Cefazolin for injection and Dextrose injection are summarized in Table 1.
                        


                        


N= number of subjects observed; Cmax = maximum plasma concentration; Tmax = time to maximum plasma concentration; AUC0‑inf = area under the plasma concentration-time curve extrapolated to infinity; t1/2 = apparent plasma terminal elimination half-life; CL = total clearance; Vz = volume of distribution
                        Studies in patients hospitalized with infections indicate that cefazolin produces mean peak serum concentrations approximately equivalent to those seen in normal volunteers.
                        
                           Distribution
                        
                        Bile concentrations in patients without obstructive biliary disease can reach or exceed serum concentrations by up to five times; however, in patients with obstructive biliary disease, bile concentrations of cefazolin are considerably lower than serum concentrations (less than 1.0 mcg/mL).
                        In synovial fluid, the cefazolin concentration becomes comparable to that reached in serum at about 4 hours after drug administration.
                        Studies of cord blood show prompt transfer of cefazolin across the placenta. Cefazolin is present in very low concentrations in the milk of nursing mothers.
                        
                           Excretion
                        
                        Cefazolin is excreted unchanged in the urine. In the first 6 hours approximately 60% of the drug is excreted in the urine and this increases to 70% to 80% within 24 hours. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.4 Microbiology 
                     
                        
                           
                              Mechanism of Action
                           
                        
                        Cefazolin is a bactericidal agent that acts by inhibition of bacterial cell wall synthesis.
                        
                           
                              Mechanism of Resistance
                           
                        
                        Predominant mechanisms of bacterial resistance to cephalosporins include the presence of extended-spectrum beta-lactamases and enzymatic hydrolysis.
                        
                           
                              Antimicrobial Activity
                           
                        
                        Cefazolin has been shown to be active against most isolates of the following microorganisms:
                        
                           Gram-positive Bacteria
                           

                           Staphylococcus aureus (methicillin-susceptible isolates only)
                        
                           
                               
                              Streptococcus agalactiae
                              

                              Streptococcus pyogenes
                           
                        
                        
                           Gram-negative Bacteria
                        
                        
                           Escherichia coli
                           

                           Proteus mirabilis
                        
                        Most isolates of indole positive Proteus (Proteus vulgaris), Enterobacter spp., Morganella morganii, Providencia rettgeri, Serratia spp., and Pseudomonas spp. are resistant to cefazolin.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         