
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
                  Other short-acting sympathomimetic aerosol bronchodilators should not be used concomitantly with albuterol. If additional adrenergic drugs are to be administered by any route, they should be used with caution to avoid deleterious cardiovascular effects.
               
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              •Beta-blockers: Use with caution. May block bronchodilatory effects of beta-agonists and produce severe bronchospasm. (7.1)
                           
                              •Diuretics: Use with caution. Electrocardiographic changes and/or hypokalemia associated with non–potassium-sparing diuretics may worsen with concomitant beta-agonists. (7.2)
                           
                              •Digoxin: May decrease serum digoxin levels. Consider monitoring digoxin levels. (7.3)
                           
                              •Monoamine oxidase inhibitors and tricyclic antidepressants: Use with extreme caution. May potentiate effect of albuterol on vascular system. (7.4)
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 Beta-Adrenergic Receptor Blocking Agents
                     
                        Beta-blockers not only block the pulmonary effect of beta-agonists, such as VENTOLIN HFA, but may also produce severe bronchospasm in patients with asthma. Therefore, patients with asthma should not normally be treated with beta-blockers. However, under certain circumstances, there may be no acceptable alternatives to the use of beta-adrenergic blocking agents for these patients; cardioselective beta-blockers could be considered, although they should be administered with caution.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 Non–Potassium-Sparing Diuretics
                     
                        The ECG changes and/or hypokalemia that may result from the administration of non‑potassium-sparing diuretics (such as loop or thiazide diuretics) can be acutely worsened by beta-agonists, especially when the recommended dose of the beta-agonist is exceeded. Although the clinical significance of these effects is not known, caution is advised in the coadministration of VENTOLIN HFA with non–potassium-sparing diuretics.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3 Digoxin
                     
                        Mean decreases of 16% to 22% in serum digoxin levels were demonstrated after single-dose intravenous and oral administration of albuterol, respectively, to normal volunteers who had received digoxin for 10 days. The clinical relevance of these findings for patients with obstructive airway disease who are receiving inhaled albuterol and digoxin on a chronic basis is unclear. Nevertheless, it would be prudent to carefully evaluate the serum digoxin levels in patients who are currently receiving digoxin and albuterol.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4 Monoamine Oxidase Inhibitors and Tricyclic Antidepressants
                     
                        VENTOLIN HFA should be administered with extreme caution to patients being treated with monoamine oxidase inhibitors or tricyclic antidepressants, or within 2 weeks of discontinuation of such agents, because the action of albuterol on the vascular system may be potentiated.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         