
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Iopromide is a nonionic, water soluble, tri-iodinated x-ray contrast agent for intravascular administration. 
                        Intravascular injection of iopromide opacifies those vessels in the path of flow of the contrast agent, permitting radiographic visualization of the internal structures until significant hemodilution occurs. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        Following ULTRAVIST administration, the degree of contrast enhancement is directly related to the iodine content in the administered dose; peak iodine plasma levels occur immediately following rapid intravenous injection. Iodine plasma levels fall rapidly within 5 to 10 minutes. This can be accounted for by the dilution in the vascular and extravascular fluid compartments. 
                        Intravascular Contrast: Contrast enhancement appears to be greatest immediately after bolus injections (15 seconds to 120 seconds). Thus, greatest enhancement may be detected by a series of consecutive two-to-three second scans performed within 30 to 90 seconds after injection (that is, dynamic computed tomographic imaging). 
                        ULTRAVIST Injection may be visualized in the renal parenchyma within 30–60 seconds following rapid intravenous injection. Opacification of the calyces and pelves in patients with normal renal function becomes apparent within 1–3 minutes, with optimum contrast occurring within 5–15 minutes. 
                        In contrast CT, some performance characteristics are different in the brain and body. In contrast CT of the body, iodinated contrast agents diffuse rapidly from the vascular into the extravascular space. Following the administration of iodinated contrast agents, the increase in tissue density to x-rays is related to blood flow, the concentration of the contrast agent, and the extraction of the contrast agent by various interstitial tissues. Contrast enhancement is thus due to any relative differences in extravascular diffusion between adjacent tissues. 
                        In the normal brain with an intact blood-brain barrier, contrast is generally due to the presence of iodinated contrast agent within the intravascular space. The radiographic enhancement of vascular lesions, such as arteriovenous malformations and aneurysms, depends on the iodine content of the circulating blood pool. 
                        In tissues with a break in the blood-brain barrier, contrast agent accumulates within interstitial brain tissue. The time to maximum contrast enhancement can vary from the time that peak blood iodine levels are reached to 1 hour after intravenous bolus administration. This delay suggests that radiographic contrast enhancement is at least in part dependent on the accumulation of iodine containing medium within the lesion and outside the blood pool. The mechanism by which this occurs is not clear. 
                        For information on coagulation parameters, fibrinolysis and complement system [see Drug Interactions (7.2)].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Distribution
                           
                           
                              After intravenous administration to healthy young volunteers, plasma iopromide concentration time profile shows an initial distribution phase with a half-life of 0.24 hour; a main elimination phase with a half-life of 2 hours; and a terminal elimination phase with a half-life of 6.2 hours. The total volume of distribution at steady state is about 16 L suggesting distribution in to extracellular space. Plasma protein binding of iopromide is 1%.
                              Iodinated contrast agents may cross the blood-brain barrier [see Warnings and Precautions (5.8)]. 
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Metabolism
                           
                           
                              Iopromide is not metabolized. 
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Elimination
                           
                           
                              The amounts excreted unchanged in urine represent 97% of the dose in young healthy subjects. Only 2% of the dose is recovered in the feces. Similar recoveries in urine and feces are observed in middle-aged and elderly patients. This finding suggests that, compared to the renal route, biliary and/or gastrointestinal excretion is not important for iopromide. During the slower terminal phase only 3% of the dose is eliminated; 97% of the dose is disposed of during the earlier phases, the largest part of which occurs during the main elimination phase. The ratio of the renal clearance of iopromide to the creatinine clearance is 0.82 suggesting that iopromide is mainly excreted by glomerular filtration. Additional tubular reabsorption is possible. Pharmacokinetics of iopromide at intravenous doses up to 80 g iodine, are dose proportionate and first order.
                              The mean total and renal clearances are 107 mL/min and 104 mL/min, respectively.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Specific Populations
                           
                              A pharmacokinetic study was conducted in 11 patients with renal impairment [see Use in Specific Populations (8.6)].
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         