
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  
                  Human Pharmacology 
                  Cephalexin is acid stable and may be given without regard to 
meals. It is rapidly absorbed after oral administration. Following doses of 250 
mg, 500 mg, and 1 g, average peak serum levels of approximately 9, 18, and 32 
mcg/mL respectively were obtained at 1 hour. Measurable levels were present 6 
hours after administration. Cephalexin is excreted in the urine by glomerular 
filtration and tubular secretion. Studies showed that over 90% of the drug was 
excreted unchanged in the urine within 8 hours. During this period, peak urine 
concentrations following the 250 mg, 500 mg, and 1 g doses were approximately 
1,000, 2,200, and 5,000 mcg/mL respectively.
                  
                  
                  Microbiology 
                  
                     In vitro tests demonstrate that the 
cephalosporins are bactericidal because of their inhibition of cell-wall 
synthesis. Cephalexin has been shown to be active against most strains of the 
following microorganisms both in vitro and in 
clinical infections as described in the INDICATIONS AND 
USAGE section
                  
                     Aerobes, Gram-positive: 
                  
                  
                     Staphylococcus aureus (including 
penicillinase-producing strains)
                  
                     Staphylococcus epidermidis (penicillin-susceptible 
strains)
                  
                     Streptococcus pneumoniae 
                  
                  
                     Streptococcus pyogenes
                  
                  
                     Aerobes, Gram-negative: 
                  
                  
                     Escherichia coli 
                  
                  
                     Haemophilus influenzae 
                  
                  
                     Klebsiella pneumoniae 
                  
                  
                     Moraxella (Branhamella) catarrhalis 
                  
                  
                     Proteus mirabilis
                  
                  
                     Note — Methicillin-resistant staphylococci and 
most strains of enterococci (Enterococcus faecalis 
[formerly Streptococcus faecalis]) are resistant to 
cephalosporins, including cephalexin. It is not active against most strains of 
Enterobacter spp, Morganella 
morganii, and Proteus vulgaris. It has no 
activity against Pseudomonas spp or Acinetobacter calcoaceticus.
                  
                  
                  Susceptibility Tests
                  
                  Diffusion techniques:Quantitative methods that require measurement of zone diameters 
provide reproducible estimates of the susceptibility of bacteria to 
antimicrobial compounds. One such standardized procedure1 
that has been recommended for use with disks to test the susceptibility of 
microorganisms to cephalexin uses the 30 mcg cephalothin disk. Interpretation 
involves correlation of the diameter obtained in the disk test with the minimal 
inhibitory concentration (MIC) for cephalexin.
                  Reports from the laboratory providing results of the standard single-disk 
susceptibility test with a 30 mcg cephalothin disk should be interpreted 
according to the following criteria:
                  


                  


A report of “Susceptible” indicates that the pathogen is likely to be 
inhibited by usually achievable concentrations of the antimicrobial compound in 
blood. A report of “Intermediate” indicates that the result should be considered 
equivocal, and, if microorganism is not fully susceptible to alternative, 
clinically feasible drugs, the test should be repeated. This category implies 
possible clinical applicability in body sites where the drug is physiologically 
concentrated or in situations where high dosage of drug can be used. This 
category also provides a buffer zone that prevents small uncontrolled technical 
factors from causing major discrepancies in interpretation. A report of 
“Resistant” indicates that usually achievable concentrations of the 
antimicrobial compound in the blood are unlikely to be inhibitory and that other 
therapy should be selected.
                  Measurement of MIC or MBC and achieved antimicrobial compound concentrations 
may be appropriate to guide therapy in some infections. (See 
CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY section for information on drug concentrations 
achieved in infected body sites and other pharmacokinetic properties of this 
antimicrobial drug product.)
                  Standardized susceptibility test procedures require the use of laboratory 
control microorganisms. The 30 mcg cephalothin disk should provide the following 
zone diameters in these laboratory test quality control strains:
                  


                  



                  Dilution techniques:Quantitative methods that are used to determine MICs provide 
reproducible estimates of the susceptibility of bacteria to antimicrobial 
compounds. One such standardized procedure uses a standardized dilution 
method2 (broth, agar, microdilution) or equivalent with 
cephalothin powder. The MIC values obtained should be interpreted according to 
the following criteria:
                  


                  


Interpretation should be as stated above for results using diffusion 
techniques.
                  As with standard diffusion techniques, dilution methods require the use of 
laboratory control microorganisms. Standard cephalothin powder should provide 
the following MIC values:
                  


