
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY

               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action

                     
                        AVYCAZ is an antibacterial drug [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.4)].

                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics

                     
                        As with other beta-lactam antimicrobial drugs, the time that unbound plasma concentrations of ceftazidime exceeds the AVYCAZ minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) against the infecting organism has been shown to best correlate with efficacy in a neutropenic murine thigh infection model with Enterobacteriaceae and Pseudomonas aeruginosa. The time above a threshold concentration has been determined to be the parameter that best predicts the efficacy of avibactam in in vitro and in vivo nonclinical models.

                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Cardiac Electrophysiology
                              
                              In a thorough QT study, a supratherapeutic dose of ceftazidime (3 grams) was investigated for QT effects in combination with a supratherapeutic dose of avibactam (2 grams) given as a 30-minute single infusion. No significant effect on QTcF interval was detected at peak plasma concentration or at any other time. The largest 90% upper bound for the placebo corrected mean change from baseline was 5.9 ms. There were no QTcF intervals greater than 450 ms, nor were there any QTcF interval changes from baseline greater than 30 ms.

                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics

                     
                        The mean pharmacokinetic parameters for ceftazidime and avibactam in healthy adult male subjects with normal renal function after single and multiple 2-hour intravenous  infusions of AVYCAZ 2.5 grams (2 grams ceftazidime and 0.5 grams avibactam) administered every 8 hours are summarized in Table 5.

                        Pharmacokinetic parameters of ceftazidime and avibactam were similar for single and multiple dose administration of AVYCAZ and were similar to those determined when ceftazidime or avibactam were administered alone.

                        


                        


The Cmax and AUC of ceftazidime increase in proportion to dose. Avibactam demonstrated approximately linear pharmacokinetics across the dose range studied (50 mg to 2000 mg) for single intravenous administration. No appreciable accumulation of ceftazidime or avibactam was observed following multiple intravenous infusions of AVYCAZ 2.5 grams (2 grams ceftazidime and 0.5 grams avibactam) administered every 8 hours for up to 11 days in healthy adults with normal renal function.

                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Distribution
                              
                              Less than 10% of ceftazidime was protein bound. The degree of protein binding was independent of concentration. The binding of avibactam to human plasma proteins was low (5.7% to 8.2%) and was similar across the range of concentrations tested in vitro (0.5 to 50 mg/L).

                              The steady-state volumes of distribution of ceftazidime and avibactam were 17 L and 22.2 L, respectively in healthy adults following multiple doses of AVYCAZ 2.5 grams (2 grams ceftazidime and 0.5 grams avibactam) infused every 8 hours over 2 hours for 11 days.

                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Metabolism
                              
                              Ceftazidime is mostly (80% to 90% of the dose) eliminated as unchanged drug. No metabolism of avibactam was observed in human liver preparations (microsomes and hepatocytes). Unchanged avibactam was the major drug-related component in human plasma and urine after a single intravenous dose of 0.5 grams 14C-labelled avibactam.

                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Excretion
                              
                              Both ceftazidime and avibactam are excreted mainly by the kidneys.

                              Approximately 80% to 90% of an intravenous dose of ceftazidime is excreted unchanged by the kidneys over a 24-hour period. After the intravenous administration of single 0.5-grams or 1-gram doses, approximately 50% of the dose appeared in the urine in the first 2 hours. An additional 20% was excreted between 2 and 4 hours after dosing, and approximately another 12% of the dose appeared in the urine between 4 and 8 hours later. The elimination of ceftazidime by the kidneys resulted in high therapeutic concentrations in the urine. The mean renal clearance of ceftazidime was approximately 100 mL/min. The calculated plasma clearance of approximately 115 mL/min indicated nearly complete elimination of ceftazidime by the renal route.

                              Following administration of a single 0.5-grams intravenous dose of radiolabelled avibactam, an average of 97% of administered radioactivity was recovered from the urine, with over 95% recovered within 12 hours of dosing. An average of 0.20% of administered total radioactivity was recovered in feces within 96 hours of dosing. An average of 85% of administered avibactam was recovered from the urine as unchanged drug within 96 hours, with over 50% recovered within 2 hours of the start of the infusion. Renal clearance was 158 mL/min, which is greater than the glomerular filtration, suggesting that active tubular secretion contributes to the excretion of avibactam in addition to glomerular filtration.

                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Specific Populations
                              
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Renal Impairment
                                    
                                    Ceftazidime is eliminated almost solely by the kidneys; its serum half-life is significantly prolonged in patients with impaired renal function.

                                    The clearance of avibactam was significantly decreased in subjects with mild (CrCL 50 to 80 mL/min, n = 6), moderate (CrCL 30 to 50 mL/min, n = 6), and severe (CrCL 30 mL/min or less, not requiring hemodialysis; n = 6) renal impairment compared to healthy subjects with normal renal function (CrCL greater than 80 mL/min, n = 6) following administration of a single 100 - mg intravenous dose of avibactam. The slower clearance resulted in increases in systemic exposure (AUC) of avibactam of 2.6-fold, 3.8-fold, and 7-fold in subjects with mild, moderate, and severe renal impairment, respectively, compared to subjects with normal renal function.

                                    A single 100-mg dose of avibactam was administered to subjects with ESRD (n = 6) either 1 hour before or after hemodialysis. The avibactam AUC following the post-hemodialysis infusion was 19.5-fold the AUC of healthy subjects with normal renal function. Avibactam was extensively removed by hemodialysis, with an extraction coefficient of 0.77 and a mean hemodialysis clearance of 9.0 L/h. approximately 55% of the avibactam dose was removed during a 4-hour hemodialysis session.

                                    Dosage adjustment of AVYCAZ is recommended in patients with moderate and severe renal impairment and end-stage renal disease. Population PK models for ceftazidime and avibactam were used to conduct simulations for patients with impaired renal function. Simulations demonstrated that the recommended dose adjustments [see Dosage and Administration (2.2)] provide comparable exposures of ceftazidime and avibactam in patients with moderate and severe renal impairment and end-stage renal disease to those in patients with normal renal function or mild renal impairment. Because the exposure of both ceftazidime and avibactam is highly dependent on renal function, monitor CrCL at least daily and adjust the dosage of AVYCAZ accordingly for patients with changing renal function [see Dosage and Administration (2.2)].

                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Hepatic Impairment
                                    
                                    The presence of hepatic dysfunction had no effect on the pharmacokinetics of ceftazidime in individuals administered 2 grams intravenously every 8 hours for 5 days.

                                    The pharmacokinetics of avibactam in patients with hepatic impairment have not been established. Avibactam does not appear to undergo significant hepatic metabolism, therefore the systemic clearance of avibactam is not expected to be significantly affected by hepatic impairment.

                                    Dose adjustments are not currently considered necessary for AVYCAZ in patients with impaired hepatic function.

                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Geriatric Patients
                                    
                                    Following single-dose administration of 0.5 grams avibactam as a 30-minute infusion the mean AUC for avibactam was 17% higher in healthy elderly subjects (65 years of age and older, n = 16) than in healthy young adult subjects (18 to 45 years of age, n = 17). There was no statistically significant age effect for avibactam Cmax.

                                    No dose adjustment is recommended based on age. Dosage adjustment for AVYCAZ in elderly patients should be based on renal function [see Dosage and Administration (2.2)].

                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Gender
                                    
                                    Following single-dose administration of 0.5 grams avibactam as a 30-minute infusion, healthy male subjects (n = 17) had 18% lower avibactam Cmax values than healthy female subjects (n = 16). There was no gender effect for avibactam AUC parameters.

                                    No dose adjustment is recommended based on gender.

                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Drug Interaction Studies
                              
                              Avibactam at clinically relevant concentrations does not inhibit the cytochrome P450 isoforms CYP1A2, CYP2A6, CYP2B6, CYP2C8, CYP2C9, CYP2C19, CYP2D6, CYP2E1 and CYP3A4/5 in vitro in human liver microsomes. Avibactam showed no potential for in vitro induction of CYP1A2, 2B6, 2C9 and 3A4 isoenzymes in human hepatocytes. Against CYP2E1, avibactam showed a slight induction potential at very high concentrations that exceed any clinically relevant exposure. Ceftazidime was evaluated independently in human hepatocytes and showed no induction potential on the activity or mRNA expression of CYP1A1/2, CYP2B6, and CYP3A4/5.

                              Neither ceftazidime nor avibactam was found to be an inhibitor of the following hepatic and renal transporters in vitro at clinically relevant concentrations: MDR1, BCRP, OAT1, OAT3, OATP1B1, OATP1B3, BSEP, MRP4, OCT1 and OCT2. Avibactam was not a substrate of MDR1, BCRP, MRP4, or OCT2, but was a substrate of human OAT1 and OAT3 kidney transporters based on results generated in human embryonic kidney cells expressing these transporters. Probenecid inhibits 56% to 70% of the uptake of avibactam by OAT1 and OAT3 in vitro. Ceftazidime does not inhibit avibactam transport mediated by OAT1 and OAT3. The clinical impact of potent OAT inhibitors on the pharmacokinetics of avibactam is not known. Co-administration of AVYCAZ with probenecid is not recommended [see Drug Interactions (7.1)].

                              Administration of AVYCAZ 2.5 grams (2 grams ceftazidime and 0.5 grams avibactam) to healthy male subjects (n = 28) as a 2-hour infusion following a 1-hour infusion of metronidazole every 8 hours for 3 days, did not affect the Cmax and AUC values for avibactam or ceftazidime compared to administration of AVYCAZ 2.5 grams (2 grams ceftazidime and 0.5 grams avibactam) alone. Administration of 0.5 grams metronidazole to healthy male subjects as a 1-hour infusion before a 2-hour infusion of AVYCAZ 2.5 grams (2 grams ceftazidime and 0.5 grams avibactam) every 8 hours for 3 days did not affect the Cmax and AUC of metronidazole compared to administration of 0.5 grams metronidazole alone.

                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.4 Microbiology

                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Mechanism of Action
                              
                              The ceftazidime component of AVYCAZ is a cephalosporin antibacterial drug with in vitro activity against certain gram-negative and gram-positive bacteria. The bactericidal action of ceftazidime is mediated through binding to essential penicillin-binding proteins (PBPs). The avibactam component of AVYCAZ is a non-beta-lactam beta-lactamase inhibitor that inactivates some beta-lactamases and protects ceftazidime from degradation by certain beta-lactamases. Avibactam does not decrease the activity of ceftazidime against ceftazidime-susceptible organisms.

                              AVYCAZ demonstrated in vitro activity against Enterobacteriaceae in the presence of some beta-lactamases and extended-spectrum beta-lactamases (ESBLs) of the following groups: TEM, SHV, CTX-M, Klebsiella pneumoniae carbapenemase (KPCs), AmpC, and certain oxacillinases (OXA). AVYCAZ also demonstrated in vitro activity against P. aeruginosa in the presence of some AmpC beta-lactamases, and certain strains lacking outer membrane porin (OprD). AVYCAZ is not active against bacteria that produce metallo-beta lactamases and may not have activity against gram-negative bacteria that overexpress efflux pumps or have porin mutations.

                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Cross-Resistance
                              
                              No cross-resistance with other classes of antimicrobials has been identified. Some isolates resistant to other cephalosporins (including ceftazidime) and to carbapenems may be susceptible to AVYCAZ.

                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Interaction with Other Antimicrobials
                              
                              
                                 In vitro studies have not demonstrated antagonism between AVYCAZ and colistin, levofloxacin, linezolid, metronidazole, tigecycline, tobramycin, or vancomycin.

                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Activity against Ceftazidime-Nonsusceptible Bacteria in Animal Infection Models
                              
                              Avibactam restored activity of ceftazidime in animal models of infection (e.g. thigh infection, pyelonephritis, systemic infection induced by intraperitoneal injection) caused by ceftazidime non-susceptible beta-lactamase-producing (e.g., ESBL, KPC and AmpC) gram-negative bacteria.

                              AVYCAZ has been shown to be active against most isolates of the following bacteria, both in vitro and in clinical infections [see Indications and Usage (1.1) and (1.2)].

                              
                                 Complicated Intra-abdominal Infections (cIAI)
                              
                              
                                 Gram-negative bacteria
                                       
                                          Escherichia coli
                                       
                                       
                                          Enterobacter cloacae
                                       
                                       
                                          Klebsiella pneumoniae
                                       
                                       
                                          Klebsiella oxytoca
                                       
                                       
                                          Proteus mirabilis
                                       
                                       
                                          Providencia stuartii
                                       
                                       
                                          Pseudomonas aeruginosa
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                              
                                 Complicated Urinary Tract Infections (cUTI), including Pyelonephritis
                              
                              
                                 Aerobic Gram-negative bacteria
                                       
                                          Citrobacter freundii
                                       
                                       
                                          Citrobacter koseri
                                       
                                       
                                          Escherichia coli
                                       
                                       
                                          Pseudomonas aeruginosa
                                       
                                       
                                          Enterobacter aerogenes
                                       
                                       
                                          Enterobacter cloacae
                                       
                                       
                                          Proteus spp.

                                       
                                          Klebsiella pneumoniae
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                              The following in vitro data are available, but their clinical significance is unknown. AVYCAZ exhibits in vitro MIC values of ≤ 8 mcg/mL against most (≥ 90%) isolates of the following bacteria; however, the safety and effectiveness of AVYCAZ in treating clinical infections due to these bacteria have not been established in adequate and well-controlled clinical trials.

                              
                                 Gram-negative bacteria
                                       
                                          Morganella morganii
                                       
                                       
                                          Providencia rettgeri
                                       
                                       
                                          Serratia marcescens
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Susceptibility Test Methods
                              
                              When available, the clinical microbiology laboratory should provide the results of in vitro susceptibility test results for antimicrobial drugs used in local hospitals and practice areas to the physician as periodic reports that describe the susceptibility profile of nosocomial and community-acquired pathogens. These reports should aid the physician in selecting an antibacterial drug product for treatment.

                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Dilution Techniques
                              
                              Quantitative methods are used to determine antimicrobial MIC values. These MIC values provide estimates of the susceptibility of bacteria to antimicrobial compounds. The MIC values should be determined using a standardized test method (broth or agar)1-3. MIC values should be determined using serial dilutions of ceftazidime combined with a fixed concentration of 4 mcg/mL of avibactam. Broth dilution MIC values need to be read within 18 hours because of degradation of ceftazidime activity by 24 hours. The MIC values should be interpreted according to the criteria in Table 6.

                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Diffusion Techniques
                              
                              Quantitative methods that require measurement of zone diameters can also provide reproducible estimates of the susceptibility of bacteria to antimicrobial compounds. The zone size provides an estimate of the susceptibility of bacteria to antimicrobial compounds. The zone size should be determined using a standardized method2. This procedure uses paper disks impregnated with 30 mcg of ceftazidime and 20 mcg avibactam to test the susceptibility of bacteria to AVYCAZ. The disk interpretive criteria are provided in Table 6.

                              


                              


A report of “Susceptible” indicates that the antimicrobial drug is likely to inhibit growth of the pathogen if the antimicrobial drug reaches the concentration at the site of infection. A report of “Resistant” indicates that the antimicrobial drug is not likely to inhibit growth of the pathogen if the antimicrobial drug reaches the concentrations usually achievable at the site of infection; other therapy should be selected.

                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Quality Control
                              
                              Standardized susceptibility test procedures require the use of laboratory controls to monitor and ensure the accuracy and precision of supplies and reagents used in the assay, and the techniques of the individuals performing the test1-3. Standard AVYCAZ powder should provide the following range of MIC values provided in Table 7. For the diffusion technique using the 30 mcg ceftazidime/20-mcg avibactam disk, the criteria provided in Table 7 should be achieved.

                              


