
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY:

               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Pharmacodynamics

                     
                        Diclofenac Sodium is one of a series of phenylacetic acids that has demonstrated anti-inflammatory and analgesic properties in pharmacological studies. It is thought to inhibit the enzyme cyclooxygenase, which is essential in the biosynthesis of prostaglandins.

                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Animal Studies

                     
                        Prostaglandins have been shown in many animal models to be mediators of certain kinds of intraocular inflammation. In studies performed in animal eyes, prostaglandins have been shown to produce disruption of the blood-aqueous humor barrier, vasodilation, increased vascular permeability, leukocytosis, and increased intraocular pressure.

                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Pharmacokinetics

                     
                        Results from a bioavailability study established that plasma levels of diclofenac following ocular instillation of two drops of Diclofenac Sodium Ophthalmic Solution to each eye were below the limit of quantification (10 ng/mL) over a 4-hour period. This study suggests that limited, if any, systemic absorption occurs with Diclofenac Sodium Ophthalmic Solution.

                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Clinical Trials:

                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Postoperative Anti-Inflammatory Effects:

                           
                              In two double-masked, controlled, efficacy studies of postoperative inflammation, a total of 206 cataract patients were treated with Diclofenac Sodium Ophthalmic Solution and 103 patients were treated with vehicle placebo. Diclofenac Sodium Ophthalmic Solution was favored over vehicle placebo over a 2-week period for the clinical assessments of inflammation as measured by anterior chamber cells and flare.

                              In double-masked, controlled studies of corneal refractive surgery (radial keratotomy (RK) and laser photorefractive keratectomy (PRK)) patients were treated with Diclofenac Sodium Ophthalmic Solution and/or vehicle placebo. The efficacy of Diclofenac Sodium Ophthalmic Solution given before and shortly after surgery was favored over vehicle placebo during the 6-hour period following surgery for the clinical assessments of pain and photophobia. Patients were permitted to use a hydrogel soft contact lens with Diclofenac Sodium Ophthalmic Solution for up to three days after PRK.

                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         