
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
                  Ondansetron does not itself appear to induce or inhibit the cytochrome P-450 drug-metabolizing enzyme system of the liver.
               
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           Apomorphine - profound hypotension and loss of consciousness. Concomitant use with ondansetron is contraindicated. (7.1)
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 Apomorphine
                     
                        Based on reports of profound hypotension and loss of consciousness when apomorphine was administered with ondansetron, the concomitant use of apomorphine with ondansetron is contraindicated [see Contraindications (4)]. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 Phenytoin, Carbamazepine, Rifampicin
                     
                        In patients treated with potent inducers of CYP3A4 (i.e., phenytoin, carbamazepine, and rifampicin), the clearance of ondansetron was significantly increased and ondansetron blood concentrations were decreased.  However, on the basis of available data, no dosage adjustment for ondansetron is recommended for patients on these drugs.1,3
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3 Tramadol
                     
                        Although there are no data on pharmacokinetic drug interactions between ondansetron and tramadol, data from two small studies indicate that concomitant use of ondansetron may result in reduced analgesic activity of tramadol. Patients in the studies self administered tramadol more frequently, leading to an increased cumulative dose in patient controlled administration (PCA) of tramadol.4,5
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4 Chemotherapy
                     
                        In humans, carmustine, etoposide, and cisplatin do not affect the pharmacokinetics of ondansetron.
                        In a crossover study in 76 pediatric patients, intravenous ondansetron did not increase blood levels of high-dose methotrexate.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.5 Temazepam
                     
                        The coadministration of ondansetron had no effect on the pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of temazepam.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.6 Antacids
                     
                        Bioavailability of ondansetron is unaffected by antacids.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.7 Alfentanil and Atracurium
                     
                        Ondansetron does not alter the respiratory depressant effects produced by alfentanil or the degree of neuromuscular blockade produced by atracurium. Interactions with general or local anesthetics have not been studied.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         