
               
               
               7  DRUG
INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           Coadministration of P-gp and CYP3A4 inhibitors may increase
nintedanib exposure. Monitor patients closely for tolerability of
OFEV. (7.1)
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1  P-glycoprotein (P-gp)
and CYP3A4 Inhibitors and Inducers
                     
                        Nintedanib is a substrate of P-gp and, to
a minor extent, CYP3A4 [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)]. Coadministration with
oral doses of a P-gp and CYP3A4 inhibitor, ketoconazole, increased
exposure to nintedanib by 60%. Concomitant use of P-gp and CYP3A4
inhibitors (e.g., erythromycin) with OFEV may increase exposure to
nintedanib [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)]. In such cases, patients
should be monitored closely for tolerability of OFEV. Management of
adverse reactions may require interruption, dose reduction, or discontinuation
of therapy with OFEV [see Dosage and Administration (2.3)].
                        Coadministration with oral doses of a P-gp
and CYP3A4 inducer, rifampicin, decreased exposure to nintedanib by
50%. Concomitant use of P-gp and CYP3A4 inducers (e.g., carbamazepine,
phenytoin, and St. John’s wort) with OFEV should be avoided as these
drugs may decrease exposure to nintedanib [see Clinical Pharmacology
(12.3)].
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2  Anticoagulants
                     
                        Nintedanib is a VEGFR inhibitor, and may
increase the risk of bleeding. Monitor patients on full anticoagulation
therapy closely for bleeding and adjust anticoagulation treatment
as necessary [see Warnings and Precautions (5.5)].
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         