
               
               
               12  CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1  Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Nintedanib is a small molecule that inhibits multiple receptor
tyrosine kinases (RTKs) and non-receptor tyrosine kinases (nRTKs).
Nintedanib inhibits the following RTKs: platelet-derived growth factor
receptor (PDGFR) α and β, fibroblast growth factor receptor (FGFR)
1-3, vascular endothelial growth factor receptor (VEGFR) 1-3, and
Fms-like tyrosine kinase-3 (FLT3). Among them, FGFR, PDGFR, and VEGFR
have been implicated in IPF pathogenesis. Nintedanib binds competitively
to the adenosine triphosphate (ATP) binding pocket of these receptors
and blocks the intracellular signaling which is crucial for the proliferation,
migration, and transformation of fibroblasts representing essential
mechanisms of the IPF pathology. In addition, nintedanib inhibits
the following nRTKs: Lck, Lyn and Src kinases. The contribution of
FLT3 and nRTK inhibition to IPF efficacy is unknown.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2  Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        
                           Cardiac Electrophysiology
                           
In a
study in renal cell cancer patients, QT/QTc measurements were recorded
and showed that a single oral dose of 200 mg nintedanib as well as
multiple oral doses of 200 mg nintedanib administered twice daily
for 15 days did not prolong the QTcF interval.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3  Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        The PK properties of nintedanib were similar in healthy volunteers,
patients with IPF, and cancer patients. The PK of nintedanib is linear.
Dose proportionality was shown by an increase of nintedanib exposure
with increasing doses (dose range 50 to 450 mg once daily and 150
to 300 mg twice daily). Accumulation upon multiple administrations
in patients with IPF was 1.76-fold for AUC. Steady-state plasma concentrations
were achieved within one week of dosing. Nintedanib trough concentrations
remained stable for more than one year. The inter-individual variability
in the PK of nintedanib was moderate to high (coefficient of variation
of standard PK parameters in the range of 30% to 70%), intra-individual
variability low to moderate (coefficients of variation below 40%).
                        
                           Absorption
                           
Nintedanib reached maximum plasma concentrations approximately
2 to 4 hours after oral administration as a soft gelatin capsule under
fed conditions. The absolute bioavailability of a 100 mg dose was
4.7% (90% CI: 3.62 to 6.08) in healthy volunteers. Absorption and
bioavailability are decreased by transporter effects and substantial
first-pass metabolism.
                        After food intake, nintedanib exposure increased by approximately
20% compared to administration under fasted conditions (90% CI: 95.3%
to 152.5%) and absorption was delayed (median tmax fasted: 2.00 hours; fed: 3.98 hours), irrespective of the food type.
                        
                           Distribution
                           
Nintedanib follows bi-phasic disposition kinetics. After
intravenous infusion, a high volume of distribution which was larger
than total body volume (Vss: 1050 L) was observed.
                        The in vitro protein binding of nintedanib in human plasma was high, with a bound
fraction of 97.8%. Serum albumin is considered to be the major binding
protein. Nintedanib is preferentially distributed in plasma with a
blood to plasma ratio of 0.87.
                        
                           Elimination
                           
The effective half-life of nintedanib in patients with IPF was 9.5
hours (gCV 31.9%). Total plasma clearance after intravenous infusion
was high (CL: 1390 mL/min; gCV 28.8%). Urinary excretion of unchanged
drug within 48 hours was about 0.05% of the dose after oral and about
1.4% of the dose after intravenous administration; the renal clearance
was 20 mL/min.
                        
                           Metabolism
                           
The prevalent metabolic reaction for
nintedanib is hydrolytic cleavage by esterases resulting in the free
acid moiety BIBF 1202. BIBF 1202 is subsequently glucuronidated by
UGT enzymes, namely UGT 1A1, UGT 1A7, UGT 1A8, and UGT 1A10 to BIBF
1202 glucuronide. Only a minor extent of the biotransformation of
nintedanib consisted of CYP pathways, with CYP 3A4 being the predominant
enzyme involved. The major CYP-dependent metabolite could not be detected
in plasma in the human absorption, distribution, metabolism, and elimination
study. In vitro, CYP-dependent metabolism accounted
for about 5% compared to about 25% ester cleavage.
                        
                           Excretion
                           
The
major route of elimination of drug-related radioactivity after oral
administration of [14C] nintedanib was
via fecal/biliary excretion (93.4% of dose), and the majority of OFEV
was excreted as BIBF 1202. The contribution of renal excretion to
the total clearance was low (0.65% of dose). The overall recovery
was considered complete (above 90%) within 4 days after dosing.
                        
                           Specific Populations
                           

                           Age, Body Weight, and Sex
                           
Based on population PK analysis, age and body weight were correlated
with nintedanib exposure. However, their effects on exposure are not
sufficient to warrant a dose adjustment. There was no influence of
sex on the exposure of nintedanib.
                        
                           Renal Impairment
                           
Based on a population PK analysis of data from 933 patients with
IPF, exposure to nintedanib was not influenced by mild (CrCl: 60 to
90 mL/min; n=399) or moderate (CrCl: 30 to 60 mL/min; n=116) renal
impairment. Data in severe renal impairment (CrCl below 30 mL/min)
was limited.
                        
                           Hepatic Impairment
                           
No dedicated PK study was
conducted in patients with hepatic impairment. As nintedanib is eliminated
primarily by biliary/fecal excretion (>90%), hepatic impairment is
likely to increase plasma nintedanib concentrations. Clinical studies
excluded patients with AST or ALT greater than 1.5 times ULN. Patients
with total bilirubin greater than 1.5 times ULN were also excluded.
Therefore, monitor for adverse reactions and consider dose modification
or discontinuation of OFEV as needed for patients with mild hepatic
impairment.
                        
                           Smokers
                           
In the population PK analysis, the exposure
of nintedanib was 21% lower in current smokers compared to ex- and
never-smokers. The effect is not sufficient to warrant a dose adjustment.
                        
                           Drug Interaction Studies
                           

                           Potential for Nintedanib to Affect Other Drugs
                           
Effect of nintedanib coadministration on pirfenidone
AUC and Cmax was evaluated in a multiple-dose
study. Nintedanib did not have an effect on the exposure of pirfenidone.
                        In in vitro studies,
nintedanib was shown not to be an inhibitor of OATP-1B1, OATP-1B3,
OATP-2B1, OCT-2, or MRP-2. In vitro studies also
showed that nintedanib has weak inhibitory potential on OCT-1, BCRP,
and P-gp; these findings are considered to be of low clinical relevance.
Nintedanib and its metabolites, BIBF 1202 and BIBF 1202 glucuronide,
did not inhibit or induce CYP enzymes in vitro.
                        
                           Potential for Other Drugs
to Affect Nintedanib
                           
Nintedanib is a substrate
of P-gp and, to a minor extent, CYP3A4. Coadministration with the
P-gp and CYP3A4 inhibitor, ketoconazole, increased exposure to nintedanib
1.61-fold based on AUC and 1.83-fold based on Cmax in a dedicated drug-drug interaction study. In a drug-drug interaction
study with the P-gp and CYP3A4 inducer, rifampicin, exposure to nintedanib
decreased to 50.3% based on AUC and to 60.3% based on Cmax upon coadministration with rifampicin compared to
administration of nintedanib alone.
                        Based on a multiple-dose study in Japanese
IPF patients, exposure to nintedanib decreased to 68.3% based on AUC
and to 59.2% based on Cmax upon coadministration
with pirfenidone compared to administration of nintedanib alone.
                        Nintedanib displays a pH-dependent
solubility profile with increased solubility at acidic pH<3. However,
in the clinical trials, coadministration with proton pump inhibitors
or histamine H2 antagonists did not influence the exposure (trough
concentrations) of nintedanib.
                        In in vitro studies, nintedanib
was shown not to be a substrate of OATP-1B1, OATP-1B3, OATP-2B1, OCT-2,
MRP-2, or BCRP. In vitro studies also showed that
nintedanib was a substrate of OCT-1; these findings are considered
to be of low clinical relevance.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         