
               
               
               12. CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY

               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action

                     
                        Tobramycin is an antibacterial drug [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.4)].
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics

                     
                        Tobramycin inhalation solution contains tobramycin, a cationic polar molecule that does not readily cross epithelial membranes. The bioavailability of tobramycin inhalation solution may vary because of individual differences in nebulizer performance and airway pathology. Following administration of tobramycin inhalation solution, tobramycin remains concentrated primarily in the airways.

                        
                           Sputum Concentrations: Ten minutes after inhalation of the first 300-mg dose of tobramycin inhalation solution, the average concentration of tobramycin was 1237 mcg/g (ranging from 35 to 7414 mcg/g) in sputum. Tobramycin does not accumulate in sputum; after 20 weeks of therapy with the tobramycin inhalation solution regimen, the average concentration of tobramycin at ten minutes after inhalation was 1154 mcg/g (ranging from 39 to 8085 mcg/g) in sputum. High variability of tobramycin concentration in sputum was observed. Two hours after inhalation, sputum concentrations declined to approximately 14% of tobramycin levels at ten minutes after inhalation.

                        
                           Serum Concentrations: The average serum concentration of tobramycin one hour after inhalation of a single 300 mg dose of tobramycin inhalation solution by cystic fibrosis patients was 0.95 mcg/mL. After 20 weeks of therapy on the tobramycin inhalation solution regimen, the average serum tobramycin concentration one hour after dosing was 1.05 mcg/mL.

                        
                           Elimination: The elimination half-life of tobramycin from serum is approximately 2 hours after intravenous (IV) administration. Assuming tobramycin absorbed following inhalation behaves similarly to tobramycin following IV administration, systemically absorbed tobramycin is eliminated principally by glomerular filtration. Unabsorbed tobramycin, following tobramycin inhalation solution administration, is likely eliminated primarily in expectorated sputum.

                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.4 Microbiology

                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Mechanism of Action
                              
                              Tobramycin is an aminoglycoside antibacterial produced by Streptomyces tenebrarius. It acts primarily by disrupting protein synthesis, leading to altered cell membrane permeability, progressive disruption of the cell envelope, and eventual cell death.

                              Tobramycin has in vitro activity against Gram-negative bacteria including P. aeruginosa. It is bactericidal in vitro at peak concentrations equal to or slightly greater than the minimum inhibitory concentration.

                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Susceptibility Testing
                              
                              Interpretive criteria for inhaled antibacterial products are not defined. In vitro antimicrobial susceptibility test methods used to determine the susceptibility for parenteral tobramycin therapy can be used to monitor the susceptibility of P. aeruginosa isolated from cystic fibrosis patients.(1,2,3)  The relationship between in vitro susceptibility test results and clinical outcome with tobramycin inhalation solution therapy is not clear. A single sputum sample from a cystic fibrosis patient may contain multiple morphotypes of P. aeruginosa and each morphotype may require a different concentration of tobramycin to inhibit its growth in vitro.  Patients should be monitored for changes in tobramycin susceptibility.

                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         