
               
               
               7. DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           Concomitant use with the following drugs should be avoided: stavudine (7.1), zalcitabine (7.1), doxorubicin (7.2). 
                           Bone marrow suppressive/cytotoxic agents: May increase the hematologic toxicity of zidovudine. (7.3)
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        No drug interaction studies have been conducted using lamivudine and zidovudine tablets [see CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY (12.3)].
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     7.1 Antiretroviral Agents
                     
                        
                           Lamivudine: Zalcitabine
                        
                        Lamivudine and zalcitabine may inhibit the intracellular phosphorylation of one another. Therefore, use of lamivudine and zidovudine tablets in combination with zalcitabine is not recommended.
                        
                           Zidovudine: Stavudine
                        
                        Concomitant use of lamivudine and zidovudine tablets with stavudine should be avoided since an antagonistic relationship with zidovudine has been demonstrated in vitro.
                        
                           Nucleoside Analogues Affecting DNA Replication
                        
                        Some nucleoside analogues affecting DNA replication, such as ribavirin, antagonize the in vitro antiviral activity of zidovudine against HIV-1; concomitant use of such drugs should be avoided.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     7.2 Doxorubicin
                     
                        
                           Zidovudine
                        
                        Concomitant use of lamivudine and zidovudine tablets with doxorubicin should be avoided since an antagonistic relationship with zidovudine has been demonstrated in vitro.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     7.3 Hematologic/Bone Marrow Suppressive/Cytotoxic Agents
                     
                        
                           Zidovudine
                        
                        Coadministration of ganciclovir, interferon alfa, ribavirin, and other bone marrow suppressive or cytotoxic agents may increase the hematologic toxicity of zidovudine.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     7.4 Interferon- and Ribavirin-Based Regimens
                     
                        
                           Lamivudine
                        
                        Although no evidence of a pharmacokinetic or pharmacodynamic interaction (e.g., loss of HIV-l/HCV virologic suppression) was seen when ribavirin was coadministered with lamivudine in HIV-l/HCV co-infected patients, hepatic decompensation (some fatal) has occurred in HIV-l/HCV co-infected patients receiving combination antiretroviral therapy for HIV-1 and interferon alfa with or without ribavirin [see WARNINGS AND PRECAUTIONS (5.5), CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY (12.3)]. 
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     7.5 Trimethoprim/Sulfamethoxazole (TMP/SMX)
                     
                        
                           Lamivudine
                        
                        No change in dose of either drug is recommended. There is no information regarding the effect 
                        on lamivudine pharmacokinetics of higher doses of TMP/SMX such as those used to treat PCP. 
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         