
                     
                     
                     Drug Interactions
                     
                        Aspirin
                        
                        
                           Concomitant administration of oxaprozin and aspirin is not recommended because oxaprozin displaces salicylates from plasma protein binding sites. Coadministration would be expected to increase the risk of salicylate toxicity. 
                        As with other NSAIDs, concomitant administration of oxaprozin and aspirin is not generally recommended because of the potential for increased adverse effects.
                        Methotrexate
                        
                           NSAIDs have been reported to competitively inhibit methotrexate accumulation in rabbit kidney slices. This may indicate that they could enhance the toxicity of methotrexate. Caution should be used when NSAIDs are administered concomitantly with methotrexate. Coadministration of oxaprozin with methotrexate results in approximately a 36% reduction in apparent oral clearance of methotrexate. A reduction in methotrexate dosage may be considered due to the potential for increased methotrexate toxicity associated with the increased exposure.
                        ACE-Inhibitors
                        Reports suggest that NSAIDs may diminish the antihypertensive effect of ACE-inhibitors. Oxaprozin has been shown to alter the pharmacokinetics of enalapril (significant decrease in dose-adjusted AUC0-24
                           and Cmax) and its active metabolite enalaprilat (significant increase in dose-adjusted AUC0-24). This interaction should be given consideration in patients taking NSAIDs concomitantly with ACE-inhibitors.
                        Diuretics
                        Clinical studies, as well as post marketing observations, have shown that oxaprozin can reduce the natriuretic effect of furosemide and thiazides in some patients. This response has been attributed to inhibition of renal prostaglandin synthesis. During concomitant therapy with NSAIDs, the patient should be observed closely for signs of renal failure (see WARNINGS, Renal Effects), as well as to assure diuretic efficacy.
                        Lithium
                        Oxaprozin, like other NSAIDs has produced an elevation of plasma lithium levels and a reduction in renal lithium clearance. The mean minimum lithium concentration increased 15% and the renal clearance was decreased by approximately 20%. 
                        These effects have been attributed to inhibition of renal prostaglandin synthesis by the nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug. Thus, when NSAIDs and lithium are administered concurrently, subjects should be observed carefully for signs of lithium toxicity.
                        Glyburide
                        While oxaprozin does alter the pharmacokinetics of glyburide, coadministration of oxaprozin to type II non-insulin dependent diabetic patients did not affect the area under the glucose concentration curve nor the magnitude or duration of control. However, it is advisable to monitor patients’ blood glucose in the beginning phase of glyburide and oxaprozin cotherapy.
                        Warfarin
                        The effects of warfarin and NSAIDs on gastrointestinal (GI) bleeding are synergistic, such that users of both drugs together have a risk of serious GI bleeding higher than that of users of either drug alone.
                        H2-receptor Antagonists
                        The total body clearance of oxaprozin was reduced by 20% in subjects who concurrently received therapeutic doses of cimetidine or ranitidine; no other pharmacokinetic parameter was affected. A change of clearance of this magnitude lies within the range of normal variation and is unlikely to produce a clinically detectable difference in the outcome of therapy.
                        Beta-Blockers
                        Subjects receiving 1200 mg oxaprozin QD with 100 mg metoprolol bid exhibited statistically significant but transient increases in sitting and standing blood pressures after 14 days. Therefore, as with all NSAIDs, routine blood pressure monitoring should be considered in these patients when starting oxaprozin therapy.
                        Other Drugs
                        The coadministration of oxaprozin and antacids, acetaminophen, or conjugated estrogens resulted in no statistically significant changes in pharmacokinetic parameters in single- and/or multiple-dose studies. The interaction of oxaprozin with cardiac glycosides has not been studied.
                     
                     
                  
               