
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  The mechanisms by which immunotherapy (hyposensitization) is achieved are not completely understood. Anaphylaxis or "anaphylactic shock," and hay fever are caused by the same basic process: the production of IgE antibody, its attachment to mast cells and, on renewed contact with the same antigen explosive degranulation of the mast cells and release of mediators, which act on smooth muscle, mucous glands, and blood vessels. With massive release there is bronchospasm, vomiting, skin rashes, edema of the nose and throat, and vascular collapse, sometimes fatal, while with more localized release one or more of these symptoms predominates, depending on the site (tissue shock organ) of exposure to the antigen. 
                  Antigens that can trigger these reactions are known as "allergens"; they have very diverse origins but a curious similarity of molecular weight. People who suffer unduly from allergy are called "atopic"; this trait is usually inherited and has been attributed to a variety of constitutional abnormalities. 
                  The IgE dependent degranulation of mast cells is initiated by the bridging of pairs of cell-bound IgE by antigen and terminates rapidly. Bridging results in alteration of the cell membrane, which is associated with increased energy dependent entry of calcium, alterations in phospholipid metabolism and increase of cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cyclic AMP). 
                  The mast cell membrane is ruffled and possesses receptors both for the Fc portion of IgE and C3b. Receptors for anaphylatoxin (C3a and C5a), have been defined functionally. In addition to IgE antigen interaction and stimulation by anaphylatoxin, mast cells may be degranulated by non-immunological stimuli such as enzymes, ionophores, polycations, radio-contrast dyes and opiates. Atopic individuals develop their symptoms principally as a result of IgE-dependent processes; however, non- IgE mediated mechanisms for the release of mast cell mediators provide additional potential for recruitment of mediators. 
                  Subsequent to activation, the secretion of granules is under cyclic nucleotide regulation. Of direct relevance is the possibility that the mast cell itself, by histamine (H2) and prostaglandins (E2, D2, I2) may increase cyclic AMP and inhibit secretion. Conversely histamine (H1) could elevate cyclic GMP and PGF, 2 alpha lower cyclic AMP, augmenting the release of mediators. 18
                  
               
               
            
         