
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Mechanism of action in acne vulgaris is unknown. [See Microbiology (12.4)]
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        Pharmacodynamics of EVOCLIN Foam is unknown.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        In an open label, parallel group study in 24 subjects with acne vulgaris, 12 subjects (3 male and 9 female) applied 4 grams of EVOCLIN Foam once-daily for five days, and 12 subjects (7 male and 5 female) applied 4 grams of a clindamycin gel, 1%, once daily for five days. On Day 5, the mean Cmax and AUC(0-12) were 23% and 9% lower, respectively, for EVOCLIN Foam than for the clindamycin gel, 1%.
                        Following multiple applications of EVOCLIN Foam, less than 0.024% of the total dose was excreted unchanged in the urine over 12 hours on Day 5.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.4 Microbiology
                     
                        No microbiology studies were conducted in the clinical trials with this product.
                        Clindamycin binds to the 50S ribosomal subunits of susceptible bacteria and prevents elongation of peptide chains by interfering with peptidyl transfer, thereby suppressing protein synthesis. Clindamycin has been shown to have in vitro activity against Propionibacterium acnes (P. acnes), an organism that has been associated with acne vulgaris; however, the clinical significance of this activity against P. acnes was not examined in clinical studies with EVOCLIN Foam. P. acnes resistance to clindamycin has been documented.
                        
                           Inducible Clindamycin Resistance
                        
                        The treatment of acne with antimicrobials is associated with the development of antimicrobial resistance in P. acnes as well as other bacteria (e.g. Staphylococcus aureus, Streptococcus pyogenes). The use of clindamycin may result in developing inducible resistance in these organisms. This resistance is not detected by routine susceptibility testing.
                        
                           Cross Resistance
                        
                        Resistance to clindamycin is often associated with resistance to erythromycin.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         