
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              •Co-administration with anticoagulants, antiplatelets, or NSAIDS can increase risk of bleeding (7.1)
                           
                              •Decreased renal function can occur with co-administration with NSAIDS (7.1)
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 Drug Interaction Study Information Obtained From Literature
                     
                        
                           
                               
                              Adenosine
                           
                        
                        Dipyridamole has been reported to increase the plasma levels and cardiovascular effects of adenosine. Adjustment of adenosine dosage may be necessary.
                        
                           
                               
                              Angiotensin Converting Enzyme (ACE) Inhibitors
                           
                        
                        Due to the indirect effect of aspirin on the renin-angiotensin conversion pathway, the hyponatremic and hypotensive effects of ACE inhibitors may be diminished by concomitant administration of aspirin.
                        
                           
                               
                              Acetazolamide
                           
                        
                        Concurrent use of aspirin and acetazolamide can lead to high serum concentrations of acetazolamide (and toxicity) due to competition at the renal tubule for secretion.
                        
                           
                               
                              Anticoagulants and Antiplatelets
                           
                        
                        Patients taking aspirin and extended-release dipyridamole capsules in combination with anticoagulants, antiplatelets, or any substance impacting coagulation are at increased risk for bleeding.  Aspirin can displace warfarin from protein binding sites, leading to prolongation of both the prothrombin time and the bleeding time. Aspirin can increase the anticoagulant activity of heparin, increasing bleeding risk.
                        
                           
                               
                              Anticonvulsants
                           
                        
                        Salicylic acid can displace protein-bound phenytoin and valproic acid, leading to a decrease in the total concentration of phenytoin and an increase in serum valproic acid levels. 
                        
                           
                               
                              Beta Blockers
                           
                        
                        The hypotensive effects of beta blockers may be diminished by the concomitant administration of aspirin due to inhibition of renal prostaglandins, leading to decreased renal blood flow and salt and fluid retention.
                        
                           
                               
                              Cholinesterase Inhibitors
                           
                        
                        Dipyridamole may counteract the anticholinesterase effect of cholinesterase inhibitors, thereby potentially aggravating myasthenia gravis. 
                        
                           
                               
                              Diuretics
                           
                        
                        The effectiveness of diuretics in patients with underlying renal or cardiovascular disease may be diminished by the concomitant administration of aspirin due to inhibition of renal prostaglandins, leading to decreased renal blood flow and salt and fluid retention.
                        
                           
                               
                              Methotrexate
                           
                        
                        Salicylate can inhibit renal clearance of methotrexate, leading to bone marrow toxicity, especially in the elderly or renal impaired.
                        
                           
                               
                              Nonsteroidal Anti-Inflammatory Drugs (NSAIDs)
                           
                        
                        The concurrent use of aspirin with other NSAIDs may increase bleeding or lead to decreased renal function.
                        
                           
                               
                              Oral Hypoglycemics
                              
                           
                        
                        Moderate doses of aspirin may increase the effectiveness of oral hypoglycemic drugs, leading to hypoglycemia.
                        
                           
                               
                              Uricosuric Agents (probenecid and sulfinpyrazone)
                           
                        
                        Salicylates antagonize the uricosuric action of uricosuric agents.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         