
                     
                     
                     Drug Interactions 
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Aminoglycosides 
                           
                              The mixing of beta-lactam antibiotics with aminoglycosides 
                                    in vitro
                                  can result in substantial inactivation of the aminoglycoside. However, amikacin and gentamicin have been shown to be compatible 
                                    in vitro
                                  with reformulated Zosyn containing EDTA supplied in vials or bulk pharmacy containers in certain diluents at specific concentrations for a simultaneous Y-site infusion. (See 
                                     DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION 
                                 .) Reformulated Zosyn containing EDTA is not compatible with tobramycin for simultaneous coadministration via Y-site infusion. 
                              The inactivation of aminoglycosides in the presence of penicillin-class drugs has been recognized. It has been postulated that penicillin-aminoglycoside complexes form; these complexes are microbiologically inactive and of unknown toxicity. Sequential administration of Zosyn with tobramycin to patients with normal renal function and mild to moderate renal impairment has been shown to modestly decrease serum concentrations of tobramycin but does not significantly affect tobramycin pharmacokinetics. When aminoglycosides are administered in combination with piperacillin to patients with end-stage renal disease requiring hemodialysis, the concentrations of the aminoglycosides (especially tobramycin) may be significantly altered and should be monitored. Since aminoglycosides are not equally susceptible to inactivation by piperacillin, consideration should be given to the choice of the aminoglycoside when administered in combination with piperacillin to these patients. 
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Probenecid 
                           
                              Probenecid administered concomitantly with Zosyn prolongs the half-life of piperacillin by 21% and that of tazobactam by 71%. 
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Vancomycin 
                           
                              No pharmacokinetic interactions have been noted between Zosyn and vancomycin. 
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Heparin 
                           
                              Coagulation parameters should be tested more frequently and monitored regularly during simultaneous administration of high doses of heparin, oral anticoagulants, or other drugs that may affect the blood coagulation system or the thrombocyte function. 
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Vecuronium 
                           
                              Piperacillin when used concomitantly with vecuronium has been implicated in the prolongation of the neuromuscular blockade of vecuronium. Zosyn (piperacillin/tazobactam) could produce the same phenomenon if given along with vecuronium. Due to their similar mechanism of action, it is expected that the neuromuscular blockade produced by any of the non-depolarizing muscle relaxants could be prolonged in the presence of piperacillin. (See package insert for vecuronium bromide.)
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Methotrexate 
                           
                              Limited data suggests that co-administration of methotrexate and piperacillin may reduce the clearance of methotrexate due to competition for renal secretion. The impact of tazobactam on the elimination of methotrexate has not been evaluated. If concurrent therapy is necessary, serum concentrations of methotrexate as well as the signs and symptoms of methotrexate toxicity should be frequently monitored. 
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               