
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  
                     Human Pharmacology: After intramuscular 
administration of cefazolin to normal volunteers, the mean serum concentrations 
were 37 mcg/mL at 1 hour and 3 mcg/mL at 8 hours following a 500 mg dose, and 64 
mcg/mL at 1 hour and 7 mcg/mL at 8 hours following a 1 gram dose.
                  Studies have shown that following intravenous administration of cefazolin to 
normal volunteers, mean serum concentrations peaked at approximately 185 mcg/mL 
and were approximately 4 mcg/mL at 8 hours for a 1 gram dose.
                  The serum half-life for cefazolin is approximately 1.8 hours following IV 
administration and approximately 2 hours following IM administration.
                  In a study (using normal volunteers] of constant intravenous infusion with 
dosages of 3.5 mg/kg for 1 hour (approximately 250 mg) and 1.5 mg/kg the next 2 
hours (approximately 100 mg) cefazolin produced a steady serum level at the 
third hour of approximately 28 mcg/mL.
                  Studies in patients hospitalized with infections indicate that cefazolin 
produces mean peak serum levels approximately equivalent to those seen in normal 
volunteers.
                  Bile levels in patients without obstructive biliary disease can reach or 
exceed serum levels by up to five times; however, in patients with obstructive 
biliary disease, bile levels of cefazolin are considerably lower than serum 
levels (< 1 mcg/mL).
                  In synovial fluid, the cefazolin level becomes comparable to that reached in 
serum at about 4 hours after drug administration. Studies of cord blood show 
prompt transfer of cefazolin across the placenta. Cefazolin is present in very 
low concentrations in the milk of nursing mothers.
                  Cefazolin is excreted unchanged in the urine. In the first 6 hours 
approximately 60% of the drug is excreted in the urine and this increases to 70% 
to 80% within 24 hours. Cefazolin achieves peak urine concentrations of 
approximately 2400 mcg/mL and 4000 mcg/mL respectively following 500 mg and 1 
gram intramuscular doses.
                  In patients undergoing peritoneal dialysis (2 L/hr), cefazolin produced mean 
serum levels of approximately 10 and 30 mcg/mL after 24 hours' instillation of a 
dialyzing solution containing 50 mg/L and 150 mg/L respectively. Mean peak 
levels were 29 mcg/mL (range 13-44 mcg/mL) with 50 mg/L (three patients), and 72 
mcg/mL (range 26-142 mcg/mL) with 150 mg/L (six patients). Intraperitoneal 
administration of cefazolin is usually well tolerated.
                  Controlled studies on adult normal volunteers, receiving 1 gram 4 times a day 
for 10 days, monitoring CBC, SGOT, SGPT, bilirubin, alkaline phosphatase, BUN, 
creatinine and urialysis, indicated no clinically significant changes attributed 
to cefazolin.
                  
                  
                  
                     Microbiology:
                     In 
vitro tests demonstrate that the bactericidal action of cephalosporins 
results from inhibition of cell wall synthesis.
                  Cefazolin is active against the following organisms in 
vitro and in clinical infections:
                  
                     Staphylococcus aureus (Including 
penicillinase-producing strains)
                  
                     Staphylococcus epidermidis
                  
                  Methicillin-resistant staphylococci are uniformly resistant to cefazolin
                  Group A beta-hemolytic streptococci and other strains of streptococci (many 
strains of enterococci are resistant)
                  
                     Streptococcus pneumoniae
                  
                  
                     Escherichia coli
                  
                  
                     Proteus mirabilis
                  
                  
                     Klebsiella species
                  
                     Enterobacter aerogenes
                  
                  
                     Haemophilus influenzae
                  
                  Most strains of indole positive Proteus (Proteus 
vulgaris), Enterobacter cloacae, Morganella morganii and Providencia rettgeri are resistant. Serratia, Pseudomonas, Mima, Herellea species are almost 
uniformly resistant to cefazolin.
                  
                  
                  Disk Susceptibility Tests
                  
                  
                     Disk diffusion technique - Quantitative 
methods that require measurement of zone diameters give the most precise 
estimates of antibiotic susceptibility. One such procedure1 has been recommended for use 
with disks to test susceptibility to cefazolin.
                  Reports from a laboratory using the standardized single-disk susceptibility 
test1 with a 30 mcg cefazolin disk should be 
interpreted according to the following criteria:
                  
                     Susceptible organisms produce zones of 18 mm or greater, indicating that the 
tested organism is likely to respond to therapy.
                     Organisms of intermediate susceptibility produce zones 15 to 17 mm, 
indicating that the tested organism would be susceptible if high dosage is used 
or if the infection is confined to tissues and fluids (e.g., urine), in which 
high antibiotic levels are attained,
                     Resistant organisms produce zones of 14 mm or less, indicating that other 
therapy should be selected.
                  
                  For gram-positive isolates, a zone of 18 mm is indicative of a 
cefazolin-susceptible organism when tested with eitherthe cephalosporin-class 
disk (30 mcg cephalothin) or the cefazolin disk (30 mcg cefazolin).
                  Gram-negative organisms should be tested with the cefazolin disk (using the 
above criteria), since cefazolin has been shown by in 
vitro tests to have activity against certain strains of enterobacteriaceae found resistant when tested with the 
cephalothin disk. Gram-negative organisms having zones of less than 18 mm around 
the cephalothin disk may be susceptible to cefazolin.
                  Standardized procedures require use of control organisms. The 30 mcg 
cefazolin disk should give zone diameter between 23 and 29 mm for E. coli ATCC 25922 and between 29 and 35 mm for S. aureus ATCC 25923.
                  The cefazolin disk should not be used fortesting susceptibility to other 
cephalosporins.
                  1Bauer, A.W.;Kirby, W.M.M.; Sherris, J.C., and Turck, M.: Antibiotic Testing 
by a Standardized Single Disc Method, Am-J. Clin. Path. 45:493, 1966. 
Standardized Disc Susceptibility Test, Federal Register 
39:19182-19184,1974.
                  
                  
                     Dilution techniques - A bacterial isolate 
may be considered susceptible if the minimal inhibitory concentration (MIC) for 
cefazolin is not more than 16 mcg per mL Organisms are considered resistant if 
the MIC is equal to or greater than 64 mcg per mL.
                  The range of MIC's for the control strains are as follows:
                  
                     S. aureus ATCC 25923,0.25 to 1.0 mcg/mL 

                     E. coli ATCC 25922, 1.0 to 4.0 mcg/mL
               
               
            
         