
                     
                     
                     Drug Interactions
                     
                        Bisoprolol should not be combined with other beta-blocking agents. Patients receiving catecholamine-depleting drugs, such as reserpine or guanethidine, should be closely monitored, because the added beta-adrenergic blocking action of bisoprolol may produce excessive reduction of sympathetic activity. In patients receiving concurrent therapy with clonidine, if therapy is to be discontinued, it is suggested that bisoprolol be discontinued for several days before the withdrawal of clonidine.
                        Bisoprolol should be used with care when myocardial depressants or inhibitors of AV conduction, such as certain calcium antagonists [particularly of the phenylalkylamine (verapamil) and benzothiazepine (diltiazem) classes], or antiarrhythmic agents, such as disopyramide, are used concurrently.
                        Both digitalis glycosides and beta-blockers slow atrioventricular conduction and decrease heart rate. Concomitant use can increase the risk of bradycardia.
                        Concurrent use of rifampin increases the metabolic clearance of bisoprolol, resulting in a shortened elimination half-life of bisoprolol. However, initial dose modification is generally not necessary. Pharmacokinetic studies document no clinically relevant interactions with other agents given concomitantly, including thiazide diuretics and cimetidine. There was no effect of bisoprolol on prothrombin time in patients on stable doses of warfarin.
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Risk of Anaphylactic Reaction
                           
                              While taking beta-blockers, patients with a history of severe anaphylactic reaction to a variety of allergens may be more reactive to repeated challenge, either accidental, diagnostic, or therapeutic. Such patients may be unresponsive to the usual doses of epinephrine used to treat allergic reactions.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               