
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Umeclidinium is a long-acting, antimuscarinic agent, which is often referred to as an anticholinergic. It has similar affinity to the subtypes of muscarinic receptors M1 to M5. In the airways, it exhibits pharmacological effects through the inhibition of M3 receptor at the smooth muscle leading to bronchodilation. The competitive and reversible nature of antagonism was shown with human and animal origin receptors and isolated organ preparations. In preclinical in vitro as well as in vivo studies, prevention of methacholine and acetylcholine-induced bronchoconstrictive effects was dose-dependent and lasted longer than 24 hours. The clinical relevance of these findings is unknown. The bronchodilation following inhalation of umeclidinium is predominantly a site-specific effect.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        
                           Cardiac Electrophysiology: QTc interval prolongation was studied in a double-blind, multiple dose, placebo- and positive-controlled, crossover trial in 86 healthy subjects. Following repeat doses of umeclidinium 500 mcg once daily (8 times the recommended dosage) for 10 days, umeclidinium does not prolong QTc to any clinically relevant extent.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        Linear pharmacokinetics was observed for umeclidinium (62.5 to 500 mcg).
                        
                           Absorption: Umeclidinium plasma levels may not predict therapeutic effect. Following inhaled administration of umeclidinium in healthy subjects, Cmax occurred at 5 to 15 minutes. Umeclidinium is mostly absorbed from the lung after inhaled doses with minimum contribution from oral absorption. Following repeat dosing of inhaled INCRUSE ELLIPTA, steady state was achieved within 14 days with 1.8-fold accumulation.
                        
                           Distribution: Following intravenous administration to healthy subjects, the mean volume of distribution was 86 L. In vitro plasma protein binding in human plasma was on average 89%.
                        
                           Metabolism:
                            In vitro data showed that umeclidinium is primarily metabolized by the enzyme cytochrome P450 2D6 (CYP2D6) and is a substrate for the P-glycoprotein (P-gp) transporter. The primary metabolic routes for umeclidinium are oxidative (hydroxylation, O-dealkylation) followed by conjugation (e.g., glucuronidation), resulting in a range of metabolites with either reduced pharmacological activity or for which the pharmacological activity has not been established. Systemic exposure to the metabolites is low.
                        
                           Elimination: Following intravenous dosing with radiolabeled umeclidinium, mass balance showed 58% of the radiolabel in the feces and 22% in the urine. The excretion of the drug-related material in the feces following intravenous dosing indicated elimination in the bile. Following oral dosing to healthy male subjects, radiolabel recovered in feces was 92% of the total dose and that in urine was less than 1% of the total dose, suggesting negligible oral absorption. The effective half-life after once daily dosing is 11 hours.
                        
                           Special Populations: Population pharmacokinetic analysis showed no evidence of a clinically significant effect of age (40 to 93 years) (see Figure 1), gender (69% male) (see Figure 1), inhaled corticosteroid use (48%), or weight (34 to 161 kg) on systemic exposure of umeclidinium. In addition, there was no evidence of a clinically significant effect of race.
                        
                           Hepatic Impairment: The impact of hepatic impairment on the pharmacokinetics of INCRUSE ELLIPTA has been evaluated in subjects with moderate hepatic impairment (Child-Pugh score of 7-9). There was no evidence of an increase in systemic exposure to umeclidinium (Cmax and AUC) (see Figure 1). There was no evidence of altered protein binding in subjects with moderate hepatic impairment compared with healthy subjects. INCRUSE ELLIPTA has not been evaluated in subjects with severe hepatic impairment.
                        
                           Renal Impairment: The pharmacokinetics of INCRUSE ELLIPTA has been evaluated in subjects with severe renal impairment (creatinine clearance less than 30 mL/min). There was no evidence of an increase in systemic exposure to umeclidinium (Cmax and AUC) (see Figure 1). There was no evidence of altered protein binding in subjects with severe renal impairment compared with healthy subjects.
                        
                           Figure 1. Impact of Intrinsic and Extrinsic Factors on the Systemic Exposure of Umeclidinium
                        
                        
                        
                           Drug Interactions:
                            Umeclidinium and P-glycoprotein Transporter: Umeclidinium is a substrate of P-gp. The effect of the moderate P-gp transporter inhibitor verapamil (240 mg once daily) on the steady-state pharmacokinetics of umeclidinium was assessed in healthy subjects. No effect on umeclidinium Cmax was observed; however, an approximately 1.4-fold increase in umeclidinium AUC was observed (see Figure 1).
                        
                           Umeclidinium and Cytochrome P450 2D6: In vitro metabolism of umeclidinium is mediated primarily by CYP2D6. However, no clinically meaningful difference in systemic exposure to umeclidinium (500 mcg) (8 times the approved dose) was observed following repeat daily inhaled dosing to normal (ultrarapid, extensive, and intermediate metabolizers) and CYP2D6 poor metabolizer subjects (see Figure 1).
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           Figure 1. Impact of Intrinsic and Extrinsic Factors on the Systemic Exposure of Umeclidinium
                           
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         