
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  ULTIVA is a µ-opioid agonist with rapid onset and peak effect, and short duration of action. The µ-opioid activity of ULTIVA is antagonized by opioid antagonists such as naloxone.
                  Unlike other opioids, ULTIVA is rapidly metabolized by hydrolysis of the propanoic acid-methyl ester linkage by nonspecific blood and tissue esterases. ULTIVA is not a substrate for plasma cholinesterase (pseudocholinesterase) and, therefore, patients with atypical cholinesterase are expected to have a normal duration of action.
               
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        The analgesic effects of ULTIVA are rapid in onset and offset. Its effects and side effects are dose dependent and similar to other µ-opioids. ULTIVA in humans has a rapid blood-brain equilibration half-time of 1 ± 1 minutes (mean ± SD) and a rapid onset of action. The pharmacodynamic effects of ULTIVA closely follow the measured blood concentrations, allowing direct correlation between dose, blood levels, and response. Blood concentration decreases 50% in 3 to 6 minutes after a 1-minute infusion or after prolonged continuous infusion due to rapid distribution and elimination processes and is independent of duration of drug administration. Recovery from the effects of ULTIVA occurs rapidly (within 5 to 10 minutes). New steady-state concentrations occur within 5 to 10 minutes after changes in infusion rate. When used as a component of an anesthetic technique, ULTIVA can be rapidly titrated to the desired depth of anesthesia/analgesia (e.g., as required by varying levels of intraoperative stress) by changing the continuous infusion rate or by administering an IV bolus injection.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Hemodynamics
                     
                        In premedicated patients undergoing anesthesia, 1-minute infusions of <2 mcg/kg of ULTIVA cause dose-dependent hypotension and bradycardia. While additional doses >2 mcg/kg (up to 30 mcg/kg) do not produce any further decreases in heart rate or blood pressure, the duration of the hemodynamic change is increased in proportion to the blood concentrations achieved. Peak hemodynamic effects occur within 3 to 5 minutes of a single dose of ULTIVA or an infusion rate increase. Glycopyrrolate, atropine, and vagolytic neuromuscular blocking agents attenuate the hemodynamic effects associated with ULTIVA. When appropriate, bradycardia and hypotension can be reversed by reduction of the rate of infusion of ULTIVA, or the dose of concurrent anesthetics, or by the administration of fluids or vasopressors.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Respiration
                     
                        ULTIVA depresses respiration in a dose-related fashion. Unlike other fentanyl analogs, the duration of action of ULTIVA at a given dose does not increase with increasing duration of administration, due to lack of drug accumulation. When ULTIVA and alfentanil were dosed to equal levels of respiratory depression, recovery of respiratory drive after 3-hour infusions was more rapid and less variable with ULTIVA (see Figure 1).
                        
                           Figure 1: Recovery of Respiratory Drive After Equipotent* Doses of ULTIVA and Alfentanil Using CO2-Stimulated Minute Ventilation in Adult Volunteers (±1.5 SEM) 
                        
                        Spontaneous respiration occurs at blood concentrations of 4 to 5 ng/mL in the absence of other anesthetic agents; for example, after discontinuation of a 0.25-mcg/kg/min infusion of remifentanil, these blood concentrations would be reached in 2 to 4 minutes. In patients undergoing general anesthesia, the rate of respiratory recovery depends upon the concurrent anesthetic; N2O < propofol < isoflurane (see CLINICAL TRIALS: Recovery).
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           Figure 1: Recovery of Respiratory Drive After Equipotent Doses of ULTIVA and Alfentanil Using CO2-Stimulated Minute Ventilation in Adult Volunteers (±1.5 SEM)
                           
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Muscle Rigidity
                     
                        Skeletal muscle rigidity can be caused by ULTIVA and is related to the dose and speed of administration. ULTIVA may cause chest wall rigidity (inability to ventilate) after single doses of >1 mcg/kg administered over 30 to 60 seconds or infusion rates >0.1 mcg/kg/min; peripheral muscle rigidity may occur at lower doses. Administration of doses <1 mcg/kg may cause chest wall rigidity when given concurrently with a continuous infusion of ULTIVA. Prior or concurrent administration of a hypnotic (propofol or thiopental) or a neuromuscular blocking agent may attenuate the development of muscle rigidity. Excessive muscle rigidity can be treated by decreasing the rate or discontinuing the infusion of ULTIVA or by administering a neuromuscular blocking agent.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Histamine Release
                     
                        Assays of histamine in patients and normal volunteers have shown no elevation in plasma histamine levels after administration of ULTIVA in doses up to 30 mcg/kg over 60 seconds.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Analgesia
                     
                        Infusions of 0.05 to 0.1 mcg/kg/min, producing blood concentrations of 1 to 3 ng/mL, are typically associated with analgesia with minimal decrease in respiratory rate. Supplemental doses of 0.5 to 1 mcg/kg, incremental increases in infusion rate >0.05 mcg/kg/min, and blood concentrations exceeding 5 ng/mL (typically produced by infusions of 0.2 mcg/kg/min) have been associated with transient and reversible respiratory depression, apnea, and muscle rigidity.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Anesthesia
                     
                        ULTIVA is synergistic with the activity of hypnotics (propofol and thiopental), inhaled anesthetics, and benzodiazepines (see CLINICAL TRIALS, PRECAUTIONS, and DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION).
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Age
                     
                        The pharmacodynamic activity of ULTIVA (as measured by the EC50 for development of delta waves on the EEG) increases with increasing age. The EC50 of remifentanil for this measure was 50% less in patients over 65 years of age when compared to healthy volunteers (25 years of age) (see DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION).
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Gender
                     
                        No differences have been shown in the pharmacodynamic activity (as measured by the EEG) of ULTIVA between men and women.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Drug Interactions
                     
                        In animals the duration of muscle paralysis from succinylcholine is not prolonged by remifentanil.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Intraocular Pressure
                     
                        There was no change in intraocular pressure after the administration of ULTIVA prior to ophthalmic surgery under monitored anesthesia care.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Cerebrodynamics
                     
                        Under isoflurane-nitrous oxide anesthesia (PaCO2 <30 mmHg), a 1-minute infusion of ULTIVA (0.5 or 1.0 mcg/kg) produced no change in intracranial pressure. Mean arterial pressure and cerebral perfusion decreased as expected with opioids. In patients receiving ULTIVA and nitrous oxide anesthesia, cerebrovascular reactivity to carbon dioxide remained intact. In humans, no epileptiform activity was seen on the EEG (n = 44) at remifentanil doses up to 8 mcg/kg/min.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Renal Dysfunction
                     
                        The pharmacodynamics of ULTIVA (ventilatory response to hypercarbia) are unaltered in patients with end stage renal disease (creatinine clearance <10 mL/min).
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Hepatic Dysfunction
                     
                        The pharmacodynamics of ULTIVA (ventilatory response to hypercarbia) are unaltered in patients with severe hepatic dysfunction awaiting liver transplant.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        After IV doses administered over 60 seconds, the pharmacokinetics of remifentanil fit a three-compartment model with a rapid distribution half-life of 1 minute, a slower distribution half-life of 6 minutes, and a terminal elimination half-life of 10 to 20 minutes. Since the terminal elimination component contributes less than 10% of the overall area under the concentration versus time curve (AUC), the effective biological half-life of ULTIVA is 3 to 10 minutes. This is similar to the 3- to 10-minute half-life measured after termination of prolonged infusions (up to 4 hours; see Figure 2) and correlates with recovery times observed in the clinical setting after infusions up to 12 hours. Concentrations of remifentanil are proportional to the dose administered throughout the recommended dose range. The pharmacokinetics of remifentanil are unaffected by the presence of renal or hepatic impairment.
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Distribution
                              
                           
                           
                              The initial volume of distribution (Vd) of remifentanil is approximately 100 mL/kg and represents distribution throughout the blood and rapidly perfused tissues. Remifentanil subsequently distributes into peripheral tissues with a steady-state volume of distribution of approximately 350 mL/kg. These two distribution volumes generally correlate with total body weight (except in severely obese patients when they correlate better with ideal body weight [IBW]). Remifentanil is approximately 70% bound to plasma proteins of which two-thirds is binding to alpha-1-acid-glycoprotein.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Metabolism
                              
                           
                           
                              Remifentanil is an esterase-metabolized opioid. A labile ester linkage renders this compound susceptible to hydrolysis by nonspecific esterases in blood and tissues. This hydrolysis results in the production of the carboxylic acid metabolite (3-[4-methoxycarbonyl-4-[(1-oxopropyl)phenylamino]-1-piperidine]propanoic acid), and represents the principal metabolic pathway for remifentanil (>95%). The carboxylic acid metabolite is essentially inactive (1/4600 as potent as remifentanil in dogs) and is excreted by the kidneys with an elimination half-life of approximately 90 minutes. Remifentanil is not metabolized by plasma cholinesterase (pseudocholinesterase) and is not appreciably metabolized by the liver or lung.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Elimination
                              
                           
                           
                              The clearance of remifentanil in young, healthy adults is approximately 40 mL/min/kg. Clearance generally correlates with total body weight (except in severely obese patients when it correlates better with IBW). The high clearance of remifentanil combined with a relatively small volume of distribution produces a short elimination half-life of approximately 3 to 10 minutes (see Figure 2). This value is consistent with the time taken for blood or effect site concentrations to fall by 50% (context-sensitive half-times) which is approximately 3 to 6 minutes. Unlike other fentanyl analogs, the duration of action does not increase with prolonged administration.
                              
                                 Figure 2: Mean Concentration (sd) versus Time 
                              
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                  Figure 2: Mean Concentration (sd) versus Time
                                 
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Titration to Effect
                              
                           
                           
                              The rapid elimination of remifentanil permits the titration of infusion rate without concern for prolonged duration. In general, every 0.1-mcg/kg/min change in the IV infusion rate will lead to a corresponding 2.5-ng/mL change in blood remifentanil concentration within 5 to 10 minutes. In intubated patients only, a more rapid increase (within 3 to 5 minutes) to a new steady state can be achieved with a 1.0-mcg/kg bolus dose in conjunction with an infusion rate increase.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Special Populations
                              
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Pediatrics
                                 
                                    In pediatric patients, 5 days to 17 years of age (n = 47), the clearance and volume of distribution of remifentanil were increased in younger children and declined to young healthy adult values by age 17. The average clearance of remifentanil in neonates (less than 2 months of age) was approximately 90.5 ± 36.8 mL/min/kg (mean ± SD) while in adolescents (13 to 16 years) this value was 57.2 ± 21.1 mL/min/kg. The total (steady-state) volume of distribution in neonates was 452 ± 144 mL/kg versus 223 ± 30.6 mL/kg in adolescents. The half-life of remifentanil was the same in neonates and adolescents. Clearance of remifentanil was maintained at or above normal adult values in patients 5 days to 17 years of age.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Renal Impairment
                                 
                                    The pharmacokinetic profile of ULTIVA is not changed in patients with end stage renal disease (creatinine clearance <10 mL/min). In anephric patients, the half-life of the carboxylic acid metabolite increases from 90 minutes to 30 hours. The metabolite is removed by hemodialysis with a dialysis extraction ratio of approximately 30%.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Hepatic Impairment
                                 
                                    The pharmacokinetics of remifentanil and its carboxylic acid metabolite are unchanged in patients with severe hepatic impairment.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Elderly
                                 
                                    The clearance of remifentanil is reduced (approximately 25%) in the elderly (>65 years of age) compared to young adults (average 25 years of age). However, remifentanil blood concentrations fall as rapidly after termination of administration in the elderly as in young adults.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Gender
                                 
                                    There is no significant difference in the pharmacokinetics of remifentanil in male and female patients after correcting for differences in weight.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Obesity
                                 
                                    There is no difference in the pharmacokinetics of remifentanil in non-obese versus obese (greater than 30% over IBW) patients when normalized to IBW.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Cardiopulmonary Bypass (CPB)
                                 
                                    Remifentanil clearance is reduced by approximately 20% during hypothermic CPB.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Drug Interactions
                              
                           
                           
                              Remifentanil clearance is not altered by concomitant administration of thiopental, isoflurane, propofol, or temazepam during anesthesia. In vitro studies with atracurium, mivacurium, esmolol, echothiophate, neostigmine, physostigmine, and midazolam revealed no inhibition of remifentanil hydrolysis in whole human blood by these drugs.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         