
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  Enter section text here
               
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Rabeprazole belongs to a class of antisecretory compounds 
(substituted benzimidazole proton-pump inhibitors) that do not exhibit 
anticholinergic or histamine H2-receptor antagonist 
properties, but suppress gastric acid secretion by inhibiting the gastric H+, K+ATPase at the secretory surface of 
the gastric parietal cell. Because this enzyme is regarded as the acid (proton) 
pump within the parietal cell, rabeprazole has been characterized as a gastric 
proton-pump inhibitor. Rabeprazole blocks the final step of gastric acid 
secretion.
                        In gastric parietal cells, rabeprazole is protonated, accumulates, and is 
transformed to an active sulfenamide. When studied in 
vitro, rabeprazole is chemically activated at pH 1.2 with a half-life of 
78 seconds. It inhibits acid transport in porcine gastric vesicles with a 
half-life of 90 seconds.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        
                           Antisecretory Activity
                        
                        The anti-secretory effect begins within one hour after oral administration of 
20 mg ACIPHEX. The median inhibitory effect of ACIPHEX on 24 hour gastric 
acidity is 88% of maximal after the first dose. ACIPHEX 20 mg inhibits basal and 
peptone meal-stimulated acid secretion versus placebo by 86% and 95%, 
respectively, and increases the percent of a 24-hour period that the gastric 
pH>3 from 10% to 65% (see table below). This relatively prolonged 
pharmacodynamic action compared to the short pharmacokinetic half-life (1-2 
hours) reflects the sustained inactivation of the H+, 
K+ATPase.
                        


                        


*(p<0.01 versus placebo)
                        
                           

                        
                        Compared to placebo, ACIPHEX, 10 mg, 20 mg, and 40 mg, administered once 
daily for 7 days significantly decreased intragastric acidity with all doses for 
each of four meal-related intervals and the 24-hour time period overall. In this 
study, there were no statistically significant differences between doses; 
however, there was a significant dose-related decrease in intragastric acidity. 
The ability of rabeprazole to cause a dose-related decrease in mean intragastric 
acidity is illustrated below.
                        


                        


*(p<0.001 versus placebo)
                        
                           

                        
                        After administration of 20 mg ACIPHEX once daily for eight days, the mean 
percent of time that gastric pH>3 or gastric pH>4 after a single dose (Day 
1) and multiple doses (Day 8) was significantly greater than placebo (see table 
below). The decrease in gastric acidity and the increase in gastric pH observed 
with 20 mg ACIPHEX administered once daily for eight days were compared to the 
same parameters for placebo, as illustrated below:
                        


                        



                           a No inferential statistics conducted for this parameter.
* (p<0.001 versus placebo)

                           b Gastric pH was measured every hour over a 24-hour 
period.
                        
                           

                        
                        
                           Effects on Esophageal Acid Exposure
                        
                        In patients with gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) and moderate to 
severe esophageal acid exposure, ACIPHEX 20 mg and 40 mg per day decreased 
24-hour esophageal acid exposure. After seven days of treatment, the percentage 
of time that esophageal pH<4 decreased from baselines of 24.7% for 20 mg and 
23.7% for 40 mg, to 5.1% and 2.0%, respectively. Normalization of 24-hour 
intraesophageal acid exposure was correlated to gastric pH>4 for at least 35% 
of the 24-hour period; this level was achieved in 90% of subjects receiving 
ACIPHEX 20 mg and in 100% of subjects receiving ACIPHEX 40 mg. With ACIPHEX 20 
mg and 40 mg per day, significant effects on gastric and esophageal pH were 
noted after one day of treatment, and more pronounced after seven days of 
treatment.
                        
                           Effects on Serum Gastrin
                        
                        In patients given daily doses of ACIPHEX for up to eight weeks to treat 
ulcerative or erosive esophagitis and in patients treated for up to 52 weeks to 
prevent recurrence of disease the median fasting gastrin level increased in a 
dose-related manner. The group median values stayed within the normal range. 

                        In a group of subjects treated daily with ACIPHEX 20 mg for 4 weeks a 
doubling of mean serum gastrin concentrations were observed. Approximately 35% 
of these treated subjects developed serum gastrin concentrations above the upper 
limit of normal. In a study of CYP2C19 genotyped subjects in Japan, poor 
metabolizers developed statistically significantly higher serum gastrin 
concentrations than extensive metabolizers.
                        
                           Effects on Enterochromaffin-like (ECL) Cells
                        
                        Increased serum gastrin secondary to antisecretory agents stimulates 
proliferation of gastric ECL cells which, over time, may result in ECL cell 
hyperplasia in rats and mice and gastric carcinoids in rats, especially in 
females (see Carcinogenesis, Mutagenesis, Impairment of Fertility (
                              13.1
                           )}.
                        In over 400 patients treated with ACIPHEX (10 or 20 mg/day) for up to one 
year, the incidence of ECL cell hyperplasia increased with time and dose, which 
is consistent with the pharmacological action of the proton-pump inhibitor. No 
patient developed the adenomatoid, dysplastic or neoplastic changes of ECL cells 
in the gastric mucosa. No patient developed the carcinoid tumors observed in 
rats.
                        
                           Endocrine Effects
                        
                        Studies in humans for up to one year have not revealed clinically significant 
effects on the endocrine system. In healthy male volunteers treated with ACIPHEX 
for 13 days, no clinically relevant changes have been detected in the following 
endocrine parameters examined: 17 β-estradiol, thyroid stimulating hormone, 
tri-iodothyronine, thyroxine, thyroxine-binding protein, parathyroid hormone, 
insulin, glucagon, renin, aldosterone, follicle-stimulating hormone, 
luteotrophic hormone, prolactin, somatotrophic hormone, dehydroepiandrosterone, 
cortisol-binding globulin, and urinary 6β-hydroxycortisol, serum testosterone 
and circadian cortisol profile.
                        
                           Other Effects
                        
                        In humans treated with ACIPHEX for up to one year, no systemic effects have 
been observed on the central nervous, lymphoid, hematopoietic, renal, hepatic, 
cardiovascular, or respiratory systems. No data are available on long-term 
treatment with ACIPHEX and ocular effects.
                        
                           Microbiology
                        
                        The following in vitro data are available but the 
clinical significance is unknown.
                        Rabeprazole sodium, amoxicillin and clarithromycin as a three drug regimen 
has been shown to be active against most strains of Helicobacter pylori in vitro and in clinical infections as 
described in the CLINICAL STUDIES (
                              14
                           ) and INDICATIONS AND USAGE (
                              1
                           )sections.
                        
                           Helicobacter pylori
                        
                        Susceptibility testing of H. pylori isolates was 
performed for amoxicillin and clarithromycin using agar dilution 
methodology1, and minimum inhibitory concentrations 
(MICs) were determined. The clarithromycin and amoxicillin MIC values should be 
interpreted according to the following criteria:
                        


                        



                           a These are breakpoints for the agar dilution methodology 
and they should not be used to interpret results using alternative methods.

                           b There were not enough organisms with MICs > 0.25 
μg/mL to determine a resistance breakpoint.
                        
                           

                        
                        Standardized susceptibility test procedures require the use of laboratory 
control microorganisms to control the technical aspects of the laboratory 
procedures. Standard clarithromycin and amoxicillin powders should provide the 
following MIC values:
                        


                        



                           a These are quality control ranges for the agar dilution 
methodology and they should not be used to control test results obtained using 
alternative methods.
                        
                           

                        
                        
                           Incidence of Antibiotic-Resistant Organisms Among 
Clinical Isolates
                        
                        
                           Pretreatment Resistance
                           : 
Clarithromycin pretreatment resistance rate (MIC > 1 μg/mL) to H. pylori was 9% (51/ 560) at baseline in all treatment 
groups combined. A total of > 99% (558/560) of patients had H. pylori isolates which were considered to be susceptible 
(MIC < 0.25 μg/mL) to amoxicillin at baseline. Two patients had baseline H. pylori isolates with an amoxicillin MIC of 0.5 
μg/mL.
                        
                           Clarithromycin Susceptibility Test Results and 
Clinical/Bacteriologic Outcomes: For the U.S. multicenter study, the 
baseline H. pylori clarithromycin susceptibility results and the H. pylori 
eradication results post-treatment are shown in the table below:
                        


                        



                           a Includes only patients with pretreatment and 
post-treatment clarithromycin susceptibility test results.

                           b Susceptible (S) MIC < 0.25 μg/mL, Intermediate (I) MIC 
= 0.5 μg/mL, Resistant (R) MIC > 1 μg/mL
                        Patients with persistent H. pylori infection 
following rabeprazole, amoxicillin, and clarithromycin therapy will likely have 
clarithromycin resistant clinical isolates. Therefore, clarithromycin 
susceptibility testing should be done when possible. If resistance to 
clarithromycin is demonstrated or susceptibility testing is not possible, 
alternative antimicrobial therapy should be instituted.
                        
                           Amoxicillin Susceptibility Test Results and 
Clinical/Bacteriological Outcomes: In the U.S. multicenter study, a total 
of >99% (558/560) of patients had H. pylori 
isolates which were considered to be susceptible (MIC < 0.25 μg/mL) to 
amoxicillin at baseline. The other 2 patients had baseline H. pylori isolates with an amoxicillin MIC of 0.5 μg/mL, 
and both isolates were clarithromycin-resistant at baseline; in one case the 
H. pylori was eradicated. In the 7- and 10-day 
treatment groups 75% (107/145) and 79% (112/142), respectively, of the patients 
who had pretreatment amoxicillin susceptible MICs (<0.25 μg/mL) were eradicated 
of H. pylori. No patients developed 
amoxicillin-resistant H. pylori during therapy.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        ACIPHEX delayed-release tablets are enteric-coated to allow 
rabeprazole sodium, which is acid labile, to pass through the stomach relatively 
intact. After oral administration of 20 mg ACIPHEX, peak plasma concentrations 
(Cmax) of rabeprazole occur over a range of 2.0 to 5.0 
hours (Tmax). The rabeprazole Cmax 
and AUC are linear over an oral dose range of 10 mg to 40 mg. There is no 
appreciable accumulation when doses of 10 mg to 40 mg are administered every 24 
hours; the pharmacokinetics of rabeprazole are not altered by multiple dosing. 
The plasma half-life ranges from 1 to 2 hours.
                        
                           Absorption: Absolute bioavailability for a 20 mg 
oral tablet of rabeprazole (compared to intravenous administration) is 
approximately 52%. When rabeprazole is administered with a high fat meal, its 
Tmax is variable and may delay its absorption up to 4 
hours or longer, however, the Cmax and the extent of 
rabeprazole absorption (AUC) are not significantly altered. Thus rabeprazole may 
be taken without regard to timing of meals.
                        
                           Distribution: Rabeprazole is 96.3% bound to 
human plasma proteins.
                        
                           Metabolism: Rabeprazole is extensively 
metabolized. A significant portion of rabeprazole is metabolized via systemic 
nonenzymatic reduction to a thioether compound. Rabeprazole is also metabolized 
to sulphone and desmethyl compounds via cytochrome P450 in the liver. The 
thioether and sulphone are the primary metabolites measured in human plasma. 
These metabolites were not observed to have significant antisecretory activity. 
In vitro studies have demonstrated that rabeprazole 
is metabolized in the liver primarily by cytochromes P450 3A (CYP3A) to a 
sulphone metabolite and cytochrome P450 2C19 (CYP2C19) to desmethyl rabeprazole. 
CYP2C19 exhibits a known genetic polymorphism due to its deficiency in some 
sub-populations (e.g. 3 to 5% of Caucasians and 17 to 20% of Asians). 
Rabeprazole metabolism is slow in these sub-populations, therefore, they are 
referred to as poor metabolizers of the drug.
                        
                           Elimination: Following a single 20 mg oral dose 
of 14C-labeled rabeprazole, approximately 90% of the drug 
was eliminated in the urine, primarily as thioether carboxylic acid; its 
glucuronide, and mercapturic acid metabolites. The remainder of the dose was 
recovered in the feces. Total recovery of radioactivity was 99.8%. No unchanged 
rabeprazole was recovered in the urine or feces.
                        
                           Geriatric: In 20 healthy elderly subjects 
administered 20 mg rabeprazole once daily for seven days, AUC values 
approximately doubled and the Cmax increased by 60% 
compared to values in a parallel younger control group. There was no evidence of 
drug accumulation after once daily administration. {see USE 
IN SPECIAL POPULATIONS Geriatric Use (
                              8.5
                           )}.
                        
                           Pediatric: The pharmacokinetics of rabeprazole 
was studied in 12 adolescent patients with GERD 12 to 16 years of age, in a 
multicenter study. Patients received rabeprazole 20 mg once daily for five or 
seven days. An approximate 40% increase in exposure was noted following 5 to 7 
days of dosing compared with the exposure after 1 day dosing. Pharmacokinetic 
parameters in adolescent patients with GERD 12 to 16 years of age were within 
the range observed in healthy adult volunteers.
                        
                           Gender and Race: In analyses adjusted for body 
mass and height, rabeprazole pharmacokinetics showed no clinically significant 
differences between male and female subjects. In studies that used different 
formulations of rabeprazole, AUC0-∞ values for healthy 
Japanese men were approximately 50-60% greater than values derived from pooled 
data from healthy men in the United States.
                        
                           Renal Disease: In 10 patients with stable 
end-stage renal disease requiring maintenance hemodialysis (creatinine clearance 
≤5 mL/min/1.73 m2), no clinically significant differences 
were observed in the pharmacokinetics of rabeprazole after a single 20 mg oral 
dose when compared to 10 healthy volunteers. (see DOSAGE AND 
ADMINISTRATION (
                              2.7
                           )}
                        
                           Hepatic Disease: In a single dose study of 10 
patients with chronic mild to moderate compensated cirrhosis of the liver who 
were administered a 20 mg dose of rabeprazole, AUC0-24 
was approximately doubled, the elimination half-life was 2- to 3-fold higher, 
and total body clearance was decreased to less than half compared to values in 
healthy men.
                        In a multiple dose study of 12 patients with mild to moderate hepatic 
impairment administered 20 mg rabeprazole once daily for eight days, AUC0-∞ and Cmax values increased 
approximately 20% compared to values in healthy age- and gender-matched 
subjects. These increases were not statistically significant.
                        No information exists on rabeprazole disposition in patients with severe 
hepatic impairment. Please refer to the DOSAGE AND 
ADMINISTRATION section (
                              2.7
                           ) for information on dosage adjustment in 
patients with hepatic impairment.
                        
                           Combined Administration with Antimicrobials: 
Sixteen healthy volunteers genotyped as extensive metabolizers with respect to 
CYP2C19 were given 20 mg rabeprazole sodium, 1000 mg amoxicillin, 500 mg 
clarithromycin, or all 3 drugs in a four-way crossover study. Each of the four 
regimens was administered twice daily for 6 days. The AUC and Cmax for 
clarithromycin and amoxicillin were not different following combined 
administration compared to values following single administration. However, the 
rabeprazole AUC and Cmax increased by 11% and 34%, respectively, following 
combined administration. The AUC and Cmax for 14-hydroxyclarithromycin (active 
metabolite of clarithromycin) also increased by 42% and 46%, respectively. This 
increase in exposure to rabeprazole and 14-hydroxyclarithromycin is not expected 
to produce safety concerns.
                     
                  
               
            
         