
               
               
               
                  CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     General
                     
                        Pentetreotide is a DTPA conjugate of octreotide, which is a long-acting analog of the human hormone, somatostatin. Indium In 111 pentetreotide binds to somatostatin receptors on cell surfaces throughout the body. Within an hour of injection, most of the dose of indium In 111 pentetreotide distributes from plasma to extravascular body tissues and concentrates in tumors containing a high density of somatostatin receptors. After background clearance, visualization of somatostatin receptor-rich tissue is achieved. In addition to somatostatin receptor-rich tumors, the normal pituitary gland, thyroid gland, liver, spleen and urinary bladder also are visualized in most patients, as is the bowel, to a lesser extent. Excretion is almost exclusively via the kidneys.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        Radioactivity leaves the plasma rapidly; one third of the radioactive injected dose remains in the blood pool at 10 minutes after administration. Plasma levels continue to decline so that by 20 hours post-injection, about 1% of the radioactive dose is found in the blood pool. The biological half-life of indium In 111 pentetreotide is 6 hours.
                        Half of the injected dose is recoverable in urine within six hours after injection, 85% is recovered in the first 24 hours, and over 90% is recovered in urine by two days.
                        Hepatobiliary excretion represents a minor route of elimination, and less than 2% of the injected dose is recovered in feces within three days after injection.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Metabolism
                     
                        For several hours after administration, plasma radioactivity is predominantly in parent form. Ten percent of the radioactivity excreted is nonpeptide-bound.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        Indium In 111 pentetreotide binds to cell surface receptors for somatostatin. In nonclinical pharmacologic studies, the hormonal effect of OctreoScan in vitro is one-tenth that of octreotide. Since diagnostic imaging doses of indium In 111 pentetreotide are lower than the therapeutic doses of octreotide, indium In 111 pentetreotide is not expected to exert clinically significant somatostatin effects.
                        Indium In 111 pentetreotide is cleared from the body primarily by renal excretion. Indium In 111 pentetreotide elimination has not been studied in anephric patients or in those with poorly functioning kidneys. It is not known whether indium In 111 pentetreotide can be removed by dialysis. Dosage adjustments in patients with decreased renal function have not been studied.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         