
               
               
               DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
                  

                  
ACE-inhibitors: Reports suggest that NSAIDs may diminish the antihypertensive effect of ACE-inhibitors. This interaction should be given consideration in patients taking hydrocodone bitartrate and ibuprofen concomitantly with ACE-inhibitors.
Anticholingerics: The concurrent use of anticholingerics with hydrocodone preparations may produce paralytic ileus.
Antidepressants: The use of MAO inhibitors of tricyclic antidepressants with hydrocodone bitartrate and ibuprofen may increase the effect of either the antidepressant or hydrocodone.
CNS Depressants: Patients receiving other opioids, antihistamines, antipsychotics, antianxiety agents, or other CNS depressants (including alcohol) concomitantly with hydrocodone bitartrate and ibuprofen may exhibit an additive CNS depression. When combined therapy is contemplated, the dose of one or both agents should be reduced.
Furosemide: Ibuprofen has been shown to reduce the natriuretic effect of furosemide and thiazides in some patients. This response has been attributed to inhibition of renal prostaglandin synthesis. During concomitant therapy with hydrocodone bitartrate and ibuprofen the patient should be observed closely for signs of renal failure (seePRECAUTIONS-Renal Effects), as well as diuretic efficacy.
Lithium: Ibuprofen has been shown to elevate plasma lithium concentration and reduce renal lithium clearance. This effect has been attributed to inhibition of renal prostaglandin synthesis by ibuprofen. Thus, when hydrocodone bitartrate and ibuprofen and lithium are administered concurrently, patients should be observed for signs of lithium toxicity.
Methotrexate: Ibuprofen, as well as other NSAIDs, has been reported to competitively inhibit methotrexate accumulation in rabbit kidney slices. This may indicate that ibuprofen could enhance the toxicity of methotrexate. Caution should be used when hydrocodone bitartrate and ibuprofen are administered concomitantly with methotrexate.
Warfarin: The effects of warfarin and NSAIDs on GI bleeding are synergistic, such that users of both drugs together have a risk of serious GI bleeding higher than users of either drug alone.

                  

               
               
            
         