
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           Drug Interactions Associated with Increased Risk of Myopathy/Rhabdomyolysis (2.3, 2.4, 4, 5.1, 7.1, 7.2, 7.3, 12.3)
                        


                        



                           
                              •For patients with HoFH who have been taking 80 mg simvastatin chronically (e.g., for 12 months or more) without evidence of muscle toxicity, do not exceed 40 mg simvastatin when taking lomitapide.
                           
                              •Other Lipid-lowering Medications: Use with other fibrate products or lipid-modifying doses (≥1 g/day) of niacin increases the risk of adverse skeletal muscle effects. Caution should be used when prescribing with simvastatin.(5.1, 7.2, 7.4)
                           
                              •Coumarin anticoagulants: Concomitant use with simvastatin prolongs INR. Achieve stable INR prior to starting simvastatin. Monitor INR frequently until stable upon initiation or alteration of simvastatin therapy. (7.6)
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 Strong CYP3A4 Inhibitors, Cyclosporine, or Danazol
                     
                        Strong CYP3A4 inhibitors: Simvastatin, like several other inhibitors of HMG-CoA reductase, is a substrate of CYP3A4. Simvastatin is metabolized by CYP3A4 but has no CYP3A4 inhibitory activity; therefore it is not expected to affect the plasma concentrations of other drugs metabolized by CYP3A4. 
                        Elevated plasma levels of HMG-CoA reductase inhibitory activity increases the risk of myopathy and rhabdomyolysis, particularly with higher doses of simvastatin.  [See 
                              Warnings and Precautions (5.1) and Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)
                           .]
                        Concomitant use of drugs labeled as having a strong inhibitory effect on CYP3A4 is contraindicated [see 
                              Contraindications (4)
                           ]. If treatment with itraconazole, ketoconazole, posaconazole, erythromycin, clarithromycin or telithromycin is unavoidable, therapy with simvastatin must be suspended during the course of treatment.   
                        Cyclosporine or Danazol: The risk of myopathy, including rhabdomyolysis is increased by concomitant administration of cyclosporine or danazol. Therefore, concomitant use of these drugs is contraindicated. [see 
                              Contraindications (4), Warnings and Precautions (5.1) and Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 Lipid-Lowering Drugs That Can Cause Myopathy When Given Alone
                     
                        Gemfibrozil: Contraindicated with simvastatin [see 
                              Contraindications (4) and Warnings and Precautions (5.1)
                           ]. 
                        Other fibrates: Caution should be used when prescribing with simvastatin [see 
                              Warnings and Precautions (5.1)
                           ]..
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3 Amiodarone, Ranolazine, or Calcium Channel Blockers
                     
                        The risk of myopathy, including rhabdomyolysis is increased by concomitant administration of amiodarone, ranolazine, or calcium channel blockers such as verapamil, diltiazem, or amlodipine [see 
                              Dosage and Administration (2.3) and Warnings and Precautions (5.1) and and Table 3 in Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)
                           ].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4 Niacin 
                     
                        Cases of myopathy/rhabdomyolysis have been observed with simvastatin coadministered with lipid-modifying doses (≥1 g/day niacin) of niacin-containing products. In particular, caution should be used when treating Chinese patients with simvastatin doses exceeding 20 mg/day coadministered with lipid-modifying doses of niacin-containing products. Because the risk for myopathy is dose-related, Chinese patients should not receive simvastatin 80 mg coadministered with lipid-modifying doses of niacin-containing products. [See 
                              Warnings and Precautions (5.1)
                              and Clinical 
                              Pharmacology (12.3).] 
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.5 Digoxin
                     
                        In one study, concomitant administration of digoxin with simvastatin resulted in a slight elevation in digoxin concentrations in plasma. Patients taking digoxin should be monitored appropriately when simvastatin is initiated [see 
                              Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.6 Coumarin Anticoagulants
                     
                        In two clinical studies, one in normal volunteers and the other in hypercholesterolemic patients, simvastatin 20-40 mg/day modestly potentiated the effect of coumarin anticoagulants: the prothrombin time, reported as International Normalized Ratio (INR), increased from a baseline of 1.7 to 1.8 and from 2.6 to 3.4 in the volunteer and patient studies, respectively. With other statins, clinically evident bleeding and/or increased prothrombin time has been reported in a few patients taking coumarin anticoagulants concomitantly. In such patients, prothrombin time should be determined before starting simvastatin and frequently enough during early therapy to ensure that no significant alteration of prothrombin time occurs. Once a stable prothrombin time has been documented, prothrombin times can be monitored at the intervals usually recommended for patients on coumarin anticoagulants. If the dose of simvastatin is changed or discontinued, the same procedure should be repeated. Simvastatin therapy has not been associated with bleeding or with changes in prothrombin time in patients not taking anticoagulants.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.7 Colchicine 
                     
                        Cases of myopathy, including rhabdomyolysis, have been reported with simvastatin coadministered with colchicine, and caution should be exercised when prescribing simvastatin with colchicine.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         