
                     
                     
                     Drug Interactions
                     
                        In some patients, the administration of a non-steroidal anti-inflammatory agent can reduce the diuretic, natriuretic, and antihypertensive effects of loop, potassium-sparing and thiazide diuretics. Therefore, when amiloride and hydrochlorothiazide and non-steroidal anti-inflammatory agents are used concomitantly, the patient should be observed closely to determine if the desired effect of the diuretic is obtained. Since indomethacin and potassium-sparing diuretics, including this product, may each be associated with increased serum potassium levels, the potential effects on potassium kinetics and renal function should be considered when these agents are administered concurrently.
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Amiloride Hydrochloride
                           
                           
                              When amiloride hydrochloride is administered concomitantly with an angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor, an angiotensin II receptor antagonist, cyclosporine or tacrolimus, the risk of hyperkalemia may be increased. Therefore, if concomitant use of these agents is indicated because of demonstrated hypokalemia, they should be used with caution and with frequent monitoring of serum potassium (see WARNINGS).
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Hydrochlorothiazide
                           
                           
                              When given concurrently the following drugs may interact with thiazide diuretics.
                              
                                 Alcohol, Barbiturates, or Narcotics: Potentiation of orthostatic hypotension may occur.
                              
                                 Antidiabetic Drugs (Oral Agents and Insulin): Dosage adjustment of the antidiabetic drug may be required.
                              
                                 Other Antihypertensive Drugs: Additive effect or potentiation.
                              
                                 Cholestyramine and Colestipol Resins: Absorption of hydrochlorothiazide is impaired in the presence of anionic exchange resins. Single doses of either cholestyramine or colestipol resins bind the hydrochlorothiazide and reduce its absorption from the gastrointestinal tract by up to 85% and 43%, respectively.
                              
                                 Corticosteroids, ACTH: Intensified electrolyte depletion, particularly hypokalemia.
                              
                                 Pressor Amines (e.g., Norepinephrine): Possible decreased response to pressor amines but not sufficient to preclude their use.
                              
                                 Skeletal Muscle Relaxants, Nondepolarizing (e.g., Tubocurarine): Possible increased responsiveness to the muscle relaxant.
                              
                                 Lithium: Generally should not be given with diuretics. Diuretic agents reduce the renal clearance of lithium and add a high risk of lithium toxicity. Refer to the package insert for lithium preparations before use of such preparations with this combination product.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               