
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                        
                           
                              Avoid concomitant use with other drugs known to be associated with neutropenia or agranulocytosis; however, if this is not possible, closely monitor the absolute neutrophil count. (7.1)
                              
                           
                        
                        
                           
                              Allow at least a 4-hour interval between Ferriprox and mineral supplements, and antacids that contain polyvalent cations (e.g., iron, aluminum, and zinc). (7.3)
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                      7.1 Drugs Associated with Neutropenia or Agranulocytosis 
                     
                        Avoid concomitant use of Ferriprox with other drugs known to be associated with neutropenia or agranulocytosis; however, if this is not possible, closely monitor the absolute neutrophil count [see Warnings and Precautions (5.1)].
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                      7.2 UDP-Glucuronosyltransferases (UGTs) 
                     
                        Deferiprone is primarily eliminated via metabolism to the 3-O-glucuronide. In vitro studies suggest that UDP glucuronosyltransferase (UGT) 1A6 is primarily responsible for the glucuronidation of deferiprone which can be reduced up to 78% in the presence of the UGT1A6 inhibitor phenylbutazone. However, the clinical significance of coadministration of Ferriprox with a UGT1A6 inhibitor (e.g. diclofenac, probenecid, or silymarin (milk thistle)) on the systemic exposure of deferiprone has not been determined. Closely monitor patients for adverse reactions that may require downward dose titration or interruption when Ferriprox is concomitantly administered with a UGT1A6 inhibitor.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                      7.3 Polyvalent Cations 
                     
                        Concurrent use of Ferriprox with foods, mineral supplements, and antacids that contain polyvalent cations has not been studied. However, since deferiprone has the potential to bind polyvalent cations (e.g., iron, aluminum, and zinc), allow at least a 4-hour interval between Ferriprox and other medications (e.g., antacids), or supplements containing these polyvalent cations [see Dosage and Administration (2)].
                     
                  
               
            
         