
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        The active ingredient in Dyloject, diclofenac, is an NSAID that exhibits anti-inflammatory analgesic and antipyretic activities in animal models.
                        The mechanism of action of Dyloject, like that of other NSAIDs, is not completely understood but may involve inhibition of the cyclooxygenase (COX-1 and COX-2) pathways. Dyloject’s mechanism may also be related to inhibition of prostaglandin synthetase. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        The effect of Dyloject on QTc prolongation was evaluated in a randomized, double-blind, positive (moxifloxacin 400 mg) - and placebo-controlled crossover study in healthy subjects. A total of 70 subjects was administered diclofenac sodium 37.5 mg and 75 mg. In a study with demonstrated ability to detect small effects, the upper bound of the 90% confidence interval for the largest placebo-adjusted, baseline-corrected QTc based on Fridericia correction method (QTcF) was below 10 ms, the threshold for regulatory concern.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        Following intravenous administration of Dyloject to healthy volunteers, plasma concentrations of diclofenac exceed that of immediate-release oral diclofenac for the first 45 minutes reaching a maximum of 4.8-fold 5 minutes after administration.
                        The pharmacokinetics of diclofenac following intravenous administration of Dyloject and oral doses of immediate-release diclofenac are compared in Table 2.
                        


                        


Dyloject administered as an intravenous bolus dose of 37.5 mg every 6 hours for 4 doses to healthy subjects (N=36) showed minimal accumulation with mean values for Cmax and AUC equivalent between the first and the fourth dose.
                        Dyloject exhibits linear pharmacokinetics over intravenous doses ranging from 18.75 to 75 mg and injection times ranging from a bolus (less than 5 seconds) to 60 seconds.
                        
                           
                              Distribution
                           
                        
                        Following administration of Dyloject, the apparent volume of distribution during the terminal elimination phase (Vz) of diclofenac is 40.1 ± 9.77 L.
                        Diclofenac is more than 99% bound to human serum proteins, primarily albumin. Serum binding is constant over the concentration range (0.15-105 mcg/mL) achieved with the recommended doses.
                        Diclofenac diffuses into and out of the synovial fluid. Diffusion into the joint occurs when plasma levels are higher than those in the synovial fluid, after which the process reverses and synovial fluid levels are higher than plasma levels. It is not known whether diffusion into the joint plays a role in the effectiveness of diclofenac.
                        HPβCD is distributed in the extracellular fluids following administration of Dyloject, and has a volume of distribution during the terminal elimination phase (Vz) of 21.8 ±7.36 L.
                        
                           
                              Metabolism
                           
                        
                        Five diclofenac metabolites have been identified in human plasma and urine. The metabolites include 4’-hydroxy-, 5-hydroxy-, 3’-hydroxy-, 4’, 5 -dihydroxy- and 3’-hydroxy-4’-methoxy diclofenac. The major diclofenac metabolite, 4’-hydroxy-diclofenac, has very weak pharmacologic activity. The formation of 4’-hydroxy diclofenac is primarily mediated by CYP2C9. Both diclofenac and its oxidative metabolites undergo glucuronidation or sulfation followed by biliary excretion. Acylglucuronidation mediated by UGT2B7 and oxidation mediated by CYP2C8 may also play a role in diclofenac metabolism. CYP3A4 is responsible for the formation of minor metabolites, 5-hydroxy and 3’-hydroxy- diclofenac.
                        In patients with renal dysfunction, peak concentrations of metabolites 4’-hydroxy- and 5-hydroxy-diclofenac were approximately 50% and 4% of the parent compound after single oral dosing compared to 27% and 1% in normal healthy subjects. 
                        
                           
                              Excretion
                           
                        
                        Diclofenac is eliminated through metabolism and subsequent urinary and biliary excretion of the glucuronide and the sulfate conjugates of the metabolites.
                        Plasma concentrations of Dyloject decline from peak levels in a biexponential fashion, with a terminal phase half-life of approximately 1.4 hours following intravenous administration.
                        Total systemic clearance of diclofenac in plasma following administration of Dyloject is 324 ± 63 mL/min.
                        Little or no free unchanged diclofenac is excreted in the urine following administration of Dyloject. Approximately 65% of the dose is excreted in the urine and approximately 35% in the bile as conjugates of unchanged diclofenac plus metabolites. Less than 1% is excreted as unchanged substance.
                        The terminal half-life of HPβCD in plasma following administration of Dyloject is approximately 2.7 ± 1.4 hours.
                        
                           
                              Special Populations
                           
                        
                        
                           
                              Age
                           
                        
                        
                           
                              Pediatric:
                            The pharmacokinetics of Dyloject have not been established in pediatric subjects [see Use in Specific Populations (8.4)
                           ].
                        
                           
                              Geriatrics:
                               
                           The effect of aging on the pharmacokinetics of Dyloject was studied in 88 subjects from 18 to 86 years old. The terminal half-life for subjects aged 65 to 74 years was 1.4 hours and for subjects greater than or equal to 75 years was 2.1 hours. Clearance of diclofenac following administration of Dyloject was not affected by age [see Use in Specific Populations (8.5)
                           ]. 
                        
                           
                              Race:
                            Pharmacokinetics of diclofenac following injection of Dyloject was studied in Caucasian, Black/African and Asian subjects. After taking body weight into account there was no difference in pharmacokinetics of diclofenac with respect to race [see Pharmacokinetics (12.3)
                           ].
                        
                           
                              Gender:
                            Systemic exposure of diclofenac was 30% higher in females compared to males following Dyloject administration. However, this is possibly due to the effect of body weight on clearance of diclofenac. After taking body weight into account there was no difference in pharmacokinetics of diclofenac with respect to gender [see Pharmacokinetics (12.3)
                           ].
                        
                           Hepatic Insufficiency 
                        
                        The pharmacokinetics of Dyloject were evaluated in 8 subjects with mild hepatic impairment (Child-Pugh Classification A, Score of 5 to 6 and a bilirubin of less than or equal to 2.5 mg/dL) compared to matched healthy subjects. The pharmacokinetics of diclofenac following administration of Dyloject in mild hepatic impaired subjects were not altered. Pharmacokinetics of Dyloject has not been evaluated in moderate or severe hepatic impaired subjects [see Use in Specific Populations (8.6)
                           ].
                        
                           Renal Insufficiency
                        
                        The pharmacokinetics of Dyloject in mild (n = 8), and moderate (n = 5) renal impaired subjects were not significantly altered compared to healthy subjects (n = 7) [see Warnings and Precautions (5.3) and Use in Specific Populations (8.7)
                           ]. 
                        
                           Effect of Body Weight
                        
                        Pharmacokinetics of diclofenac following Dyloject injection appear to be dependent on body weight. The pharmacokinetics of Dyloject were studied in 88 subjects ranging in weight from 53 to 156.2 kg. Clearance of diclofenac in subjects weighing below 95 kg is 282±68 mL/min compared to 356±53 mL/min in subjects above 95 kg body weight (approximately 30% higher clearance). The volume of distribution increased with increased body weight and the proportional increase in clearance resulted in no change in elimination half-life with increased body weight [see Use in Specific Populations (8.8)
                           ]. 
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         