
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              •Concomitant use of diclofenac and aspirin is not generally recommended because of the potential of increased adverse effects including increased GI bleeding. (7.1)
                           
                              •Concomitant use of Dyloject and anticoagulants has a risk of serious GI bleeding higher than users of either drug alone. (7.2)
                           
                              •ACE inhibitors: NSAIDs may diminish the antihypertensive effect of ACE inhibitors. (7.3)
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 Aspirin
                     
                        When administered with aspirin, the protein binding of Dyloject is reduced. The clinical significance of this interaction is not known; however, as with other NSAIDs, concomitant administration of Dyloject and aspirin is not generally recommended because of the potential of increased adverse effects.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 Anticoagulants
                     
                        The effects of anticoagulants (e.g., warfarin) and NSAIDs on GI bleeding are synergistic, such that the users of both drugs together have a higher risk of serious GI bleeding than users of either drug alone [see Warnings and Precautions (5.2)
                           ].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3 ACE Inhibitors
                     
                        NSAIDs may diminish the antihypertensive effect of ACE inhibitors. This interaction should be given consideration in patients taking NSAIDs concomitantly with ACE inhibitors.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4 Cyclosporine
                     
                        NSAIDs, including Dyloject, may affect renal prostaglandins and increase the toxicity of certain drugs. Therefore, concomitant therapy with Dyloject may increase cyclosporine’s nephrotoxicity. Use caution when Dyloject is administered concomitantly with cyclosporine.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.5 Diuretics
                     
                        Clinical studies and postmarketing observations have shown that Dyloject can reduce the natriuretic effect of furosemide and thiazides in some patients. This response has been attributed to inhibition of renal prostaglandin synthesis. During concomitant therapy with NSAIDs, observe patients closely for signs of renal failure, as well as to assure diuretic efficacy [see Warnings and Precautions (5.3, 5.6)].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.6 Lithium
                     
                        NSAIDs have produced elevations of plasma lithium levels and a reduction in renal lithium clearance. The mean minimum lithium concentration increased 15% and the renal clearance decreased by 20%. This effect has been attributed to inhibition of renal prostaglandin synthesis by the NSAID. Thus, when NSAIDs and lithium are administered concurrently, observe patients carefully for signs of lithium toxicity.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.7 Methotrexate
                     
                        NSAIDs have been reported to competitively inhibit methotrexate accumulation in rabbit kidney slices. This indicates that NSAIDs may enhance the toxicity of methotrexate. Use caution when NSAIDs are administered concomitantly with methotrexate.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.8 CYP2C9 Inhibitors or Inducers
                     
                        Diclofenac is metabolized by cytochrome P450 enzymes, predominantly by CYP2C9. Co‑administration of diclofenac with CYP2C9 inhibitors (e.g. voriconazole) may enhance the exposure and toxicity of diclofenac whereas co-administration with CYP2C9 inducers (e.g. rifampin) may lead to compromised efficacy of diclofenac. Use caution when dosing Dyloject with CYP2C9 inhibitors or inducers; a dosage adjustment may be warranted.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         