
               
               
               
                  CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGYSeveral investigators have reported on the appetite enhancing 
property of megestrol acetate and its possible use in cachexia. The precise 
mechanism by which megestrol acetate produces effects in anorexia and cachexia 
is unknown at the present time.
                  There are several analytical methods used to estimate megestrol acetate 
plasma concentrations, including gas chromatography-mass fragmentography 
(GC-MF), high pressure liquid chromatography (HPLC) and radioimmunoassay (RIA). 
The GC-MF and HPLC methods are specific for megestrol acetate and yield 
equivalent concentrations. The RIA method reacts to megestrol acetate 
metabolites and is, therefore, non-specific and indicates higher concentrations 
than the GC-MF and HPLC methods. Plasma concentrations are dependent, not only 
on the method used, but also on intestinal and hepatic inactivation of the drug, 
which may be affected by factors such as intestinal tract motility, intestinal 
bacteria, antibiotics administered, body weight, diet and liver function.
                  The major route of drug elimination in humans is urine. When radiolabeled 
megestrol acetate was administered to humans in doses of 4 mg to 90 mg, the 
urinary excretion within 10 days ranged from 56.5% to 78.4% (mean 66.4%) and 
fecal excretion ranged from 7.7% to 30.3% (mean 19.8%). The total recovered 
radioactivity varied between 83.1% and 94.7% (mean 86.2%). Megestrol acetate 
metabolites which were identified in urine constituted 5% to 8% of the dose 
administered. Respiratory excretion as labeled carbon dioxide and fat storage 
may have accounted for at least part of the radioactivity not found in urine and 
feces.
                  Plasma steady state pharmacokinetics of megestrol acetate were evaluated in 
10 adult, cachectic male patients with acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) 
and an involuntary weight loss greater than 10% of baseline. Patients received 
single oral doses of 800 mg/day of Megestrol Acetate Oral Suspension for 21 
days. Plasma concentration data obtained on day 21 were evaluated for up to 48 
hours past the last dose.
                  Mean (±1SD) peak plasma concentration (Cmax) of 
megestrol acetate was 753 (±539) ng/mL. Mean area under the concentration 
time-curve (AUC) was 10476 (±7788) ng x hr/mL. Median Tmax value was five hours. Seven of 10 patients gained weight in 
three weeks.
                  Additionally, 24 adult, asymptomatic HIV seropositive male subjects were 
dosed once daily with 750 mg of Megestrol Acetate Oral Suspension. The treatment 
was administered for 14 days. Mean Cmax and AUC values 
were 490 (±238) ng/mL and 6779 (±3048) hr x ng/mL, respectively. The median 
Tmax value was three hours. The mean Cmin value was 202 (±101) ng/mL. The mean percentage of 
fluctuation value was 107 (±40).
                  The effect of food on the bioavailability of Megestrol Acetate Oral 
Suspension has not been evaluated.
                  
                  DESCRIPTION OF CLINICAL STUDIESThe clinical efficacy of Megestrol Acetate Oral Suspension was 
assessed in two clinical trials. One was a multicenter, randomized, 
double-blind, placebo-controlled study comparing megestrol acetate (MA) at doses 
of 100 mg, 400 mg, and 800 mg per day versus placebo in AIDS patients with 
anorexia/cachexia and significant weight loss. Of the 270 patients entered on 
study, 195 met all inclusion/exclusion criteria, had at least two additional 
post baseline weight measurements over a 12-week period or had one post baseline 
weight measurement but dropped out for therapeutic failure. The percent of 
patients gaining five or more pounds at maximum weight gain in 12 study weeks 
was statistically significantly greater for the 800 mg (64%) and 400 mg (57%) 
MA-treated groups than for the placebo group (24%). Mean weight increased from 
baseline to last evaluation in 12 study weeks in the 800 mg MA-treated group by 
7.8 pounds, the 400 mg MA group by 4.2 pounds, the 100 mg MA group by 1.9 pounds 
and decreased in the placebo group by 1.6 pounds. Mean weight changes at 4, 8 
and 12 weeks for patients evaluable for efficacy in the two clinical trials are 
shown graphically. Changes in body composition during the 12 study weeks as 
measured by bioelectrical impedance analysis showed increases in non-water body 
weight in the MA-treated groups (see Clinical Studies 
Table). In addition, edema developed or worsened in only 3 patients.
                  Greater percentages of MA-treated patients in the 800 mg group (89%), the 400 
mg group (68%) and the 100 mg group (72%), than in the placebo group (50%), 
showed an improvement in appetite at last evaluation during the 12 study weeks. 
A statistically significant difference was observed between the 800 mg 
MA-treated group and the placebo group in the change in caloric intake from 
baseline to time of maximum weight change. Patients were asked to assess weight 
change, appetite, appearance, and overall perception of well-being in a 9 
question survey. At maximum weight change only the 800 mg MA-treated group gave 
responses that were statistically significantly more favorable to all questions 
when compared to the placebo-treated group. A dose response was noted in the 
survey with positive responses correlating with higher dose for all 
questions.
                  The second trial was a multicenter, randomized, double-blind, 
placebo-controlled study comparing megestrol acetate 800 mg/day versus placebo 
in AIDS patients with anorexia/cachexia and significant weight loss. Of the 100 
patients entered on study, 65 met all inclusion/exclusion criteria, had at least 
two additional post baseline weight measurements over a 12-week period or had 
one post baseline weight measurement but dropped out for therapeutic failure. 
Patients in the 800 mg MA-treated group had a statistically significantly larger 
increase in mean maximum weight change than patients in the placebo group. From 
baseline to study week 12, mean weight increased by 11.2 pounds in the 
MA-treated group and decreased 2.1 pounds in the placebo group. Changes in body 
composition as measured by bioelectrical impedance analysis showed increases in 
non-water weight in the MA-treated group (see Clinical Studies 
Table). No edema was reported in the MA-treated group. A greater 
percentage of MA-treated patients (67%) than placebo-treated patients (38%) 
showed an improvement in appetite at last evaluation during the 12 study weeks; 
this difference was statistically significant. There were no statistically 
significant differences between treatment groups in mean caloric change or in 
daily caloric intake at time to maximum weight change. In the same 9 question 
survey referenced in the first trial, patients’ assessments of weight change, 
appetite, appearance, and overall perception of well-being showed increases in 
mean scores in MA-treated patients as compared to the placebo group.
                  In both trials, patients tolerated the drug well and no statistically 
significant differences were seen between the treatment groups with regard to 
laboratory abnormalities, new opportunistic infections, lymphocyte counts, 
T4 counts, T8 counts, or skin 
reactivity tests (see  ADVERSE REACTIONS).
                  Presented below are the results of mean weight changes for patients evaluable 
for efficacy in Trials 1 and 2.
                  

                  
                     
                  
                  
                     

                  
               
               
               
                  
                     TRIAL GRAPHS
                     
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         