
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
                  As renal function may be reduced by Indomethacin for Injection, consider reducing the dosage of those medications that rely on adequate renal function for their elimination.
               
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           When used concomitantly with digoxin, monitor neonates for the development of digoxin toxicity. (7.1)
                           Monitor prothrombin time when indomethacin is added to anticoagulants. (7.2)
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 Digoxin

                     
                     
                        Because the half-life of digoxin (given frequently to pre-term infants with patent ductus arteriosus and associated cardiac failure) may be prolonged when given concomitantly with indomethacin, observe neonates receiving concomitant digoxin closely; frequent ECGs and serum digoxin levels may be required to prevent or detect digoxin toxicity early.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 Anticoagulants

                     
                     
                        Indomethacin usually does not influence the hypoprothrombinemia produced by anticoagulants.  When indomethacin is added to anticoagulants, monitor prothrombin time closely.  In post-marketing experience, bleeding has been reported in patients on concomitant treatment with anticoagulants and Indomethacin for Injection.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3 Furosemide

                     
                     
                        Therapy with indomethacin may blunt the natriuretic effect of furosemide.  This response has been attributed to inhibition of prostaglandin synthesis by non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs.  In a study of 19 premature infants with patent ductus arteriosus treated with either Indomethacin for Injection alone or a combination of Indomethacin for Injection and furosemide, results showed that neonates receiving both Indomethacin for Injection and furosemide had significantly higher urinary output, higher levels of sodium and chloride excretion, and higher glomerular filtration rates than did those receiving Indomethacin for Injection alone.  In this study, therapy with furosemide helped to maintain renal function in the premature infant when Indomethacin for Injection was added.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4 Aminoglycosides

                     
                     
                        In one study of premature infants treated with Indomethacin for Injection and also receiving either gentamicin or amikacin, both peak and trough levels of these aminoglycosides were significantly elevated.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.5 Drugs that Act on the Renin-Angiotensin System

                     
                     
                        In some patients with compromised renal function, the co-administration of an NSAID and an ACE inhibitor or angiotensin II antagonist may result in further deterioration of renal function, including possible acute renal failure, which is usually reversible.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         