
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  Penicillin V exerts a bactericidal action against penicillin-sensitive microorganisms during the stage of active multiplication. It acts through the inhibition of bisynthesis of cell wall mucopeptide. It is not active against the penicillinase-producing bacteria, which include many strains of staphylococci. The drug exerts high activity against staphylococci (except penicillinase-producing strains), streptococci (groups A, C, G, H, L and M) and pneumococci. Other organisms sensitive to penicillin V are , Clostridia, Leptospira and is extremely sensitive
                            in vitro
                     in vitro
                     Corynebacterium diphtheriae, Bacillus anthracis
                     Actinomyces bovis, Streptobacillus moniliformis, Listeria monocytogenes,
                     N. gonorrhoeae. Treponema pallidum
                     .
                  
                  The potassium salt of penicillin V has the distinct advantage over penicillin G in resistance to inactivation by gastric acid. It may be given with meals; however, blood levels are slightly higher when the drug is given on an empty stomach. Average blood levels are two to five times higher than the levels following the same dose of oral penicillin G and also show much less individual variation.
                  Once absorbed, penicillin V is about 80% bound to serum protein. Tissue levels are highest in the kidneys, with lesser amounts in the liver, skin, and intestines. Small amounts are found in all other body tissues and cerebrospinal fluid. The drug is excreted as rapidly as it is absorbed in individuals with normal kidney function; however, recovery of the drug from the urine indicates that only about 25% of the dose given is absorbed. In neonates, young infants, and individuals with impaired kidney function, excretion is considerably delayed.
               
               
            
         