
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           CNS Depressants: Increased risk of respiratory depression, hypotension, profound sedation, or coma. Possible additive central nervous system depression with central nervous system depressants. (7.1)
                           Muscle relaxants: Enhances the neuromuscular blocking action of skeletal muscle relaxants and produces an increased degree of respiratory depression. (7.2)
                           Mixed agonist/antagonist analgesics (i.e., pentazocine, nalbuphine, butorphanol, and buprenorphine): May reduce the analgesic effects and/or may precipitate withdrawal symptoms. (7.3)
                           Monoamine Oxidase Inhibitors (MAOIs): Use not recommended with or within 14 days of stopping MAOIs. (7.4)
                           The CYP3A4 enzyme plays a major role in the metabolism of oxycodone: drugs that inhibit CYP3A4 activity may cause decreased clearance of oxycodone which could lead to an increase in oxycodone plasma concentrations. (7.5)
                           Anticholinergics: Increased risk for urinary retention and severe constipation. (7.6)
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 Central Nervous System Depressants
                     
                        Other central nervous system (CNS) depressants including sedatives, hypnotics, general anesthetics, antiemetics, phenothiazines, other tranquilizers, and alcohol increase the risk of respiratory depression, hypotension, profound sedation, or coma. Use OXECTA with caution and in reduced dosages in patients taking these agents.
                        
                           Patients should not consume alcoholic beverages, or any medications containing alcohol while taking OXECTA.
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 Muscle Relaxants 
                     
                        OXECTA may enhance the neuromuscular blocking action of skeletal muscle relaxants and produce an increased degree of respiratory depression.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3 Mixed Agonist/Antagonist Opioid Analgesics
                     
                        Do not administer mixed agonist/antagonist analgesics (i.e., pentazocine, nalbuphine, butorphanol and buprenorphine) to patients who have received or are receiving a course of therapy with a pure opioid agonist analgesic such as oxycodone HCl. In these patients, mixed agonist/antagonist analgesics may reduce the analgesic effect of oxycodone HCl and/or may precipitate withdrawal symptoms. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4 Monoamine Oxidase Inhibitors (MAOIs)
                     
                        Monoamine oxidase inhibitors have been reported to intensify the effects of at least one opioid drug causing anxiety, confusion, and significant depression of respiration or coma. The use of OXECTA is not recommended for patients taking MAOIs or within 14 days of stopping such treatment.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.5 Agents Affecting Cytochrome P450 Enzymes
                     
                        
                           CYP3A4 Inhibitors
                        
                        A published study showed that the co-administration with voriconazole, a CYP3A4 inhibitor, significantly increased the plasma concentrations of oxycodone. Inhibition of CYP3A4 activity by its inhibitors, such as macrolide antibiotics (e.g., erythromycin), azole-antifungal agents (e.g., ketoconazole), and protease inhibitors (e.g., ritonavir), may prolong opioid effects. If co-administration is necessary, caution is advised when initiating therapy with, currently taking, or discontinuing CYP3A4 inhibitors. Evaluate these patients at frequent intervals and consider dose adjustments until stable drug effects are achieved [see CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY (12.3)].
                        
                           CYP3A4 Inducers
                        
                        A published study showed that the co-administration of rifampin, a drug metabolizing enzyme inducer, significantly decreased plasma oxycodone concentrations. Induction of CYP3A4 activity by its inducers, such as rifampin, carbamazepine, and phenytoin, may lead to a lack of efficacy or, possibly, development of an abstinence syndrome in a patient who had developed physical dependence to oxycodone. If co-administration is necessary, caution is advised when initiating therapy with, currently taking, or discontinuing CYP3A4 inducers. Evaluate these patients at frequent intervals and consider dose adjustments until stable drug effects are achieved [see CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY (12.3)].
                        
                           CYP2D6 Inhibitors
                        
                        Oxycodone is metabolized in part to oxymorphone via the cytochrome p450 isoenzyme CYP2D6. While this pathway may be blocked by a variety of drugs (e.g., certain cardiovascular drugs, including amiodarone and quinidine, and antidepressants), such blockade has not yet been shown to be of clinical significance with this agent. However, clinicians should be aware of this possible interaction.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.6 Anticholinergics
                     
                        Anticholinergics or other medications with anticholinergic activity when used concurrently with opioid analgesics may result in increased risk of urinary retention and/or severe constipation, which may lead to paralytic ileus.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         