
               
               
               
                  7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           Drugs metabolized by CYP2D6: Lower doses of these drugs may be required when used concomitantly with ONFI (7.1)
                           Strong or Moderate CYP2C19 Inhibitors: Dosage adjustment of ONFI may be necessary (7.2)
                           Alcohol: Increases blood levels of clobazam by about 50% (7.3)
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        7.1 Effect of ONFI on Other Drugs
                     
                     
                        
                           
                              Hormonal Contraceptives

                              
                           ONFI is a weak CYP3A4 inducer. As some hormonal contraceptives are metabolized by CYP3A4, their effectiveness may be diminished when given with ONFI. Additional non-hormonal forms of contraception are recommended when using ONFI [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3), Patient Counseling Information (17)].
                        
                           
                              Drugs Metabolized by CYP2D6

                              
                           ONFI inhibits CYP2D6. Dose adjustment of drugs metabolized by CYP2D6 may be necessary [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        7.2 Effect of Other Drugs on ONFI
                     
                     
                        
                           
                              Strong and moderate inhibitors of CYP2C19

                              
                           Strong and moderate inhibitors of CYP2C19 may result in increased exposure to N-desmethylclobazam, the active metabolite of clobazam. This may increase the risk of dose-related adverse reactions. Dosage adjustment of ONFI may be necessary when co-administered with strong CYP2C19 inhibitors (e.g., fluconazole, fluvoxamine, ticlopidine) or moderate CYP2C19 inhibitors (e.g., omeprazole) [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        7.3 CNS Depressants and Alcohol
                     
                     
                        Concomitant use of ONFI with other CNS depressants may increase the risk of sedation and somnolence [see Warnings and Precautions (5.2)].
                        Alcohol, as a CNS depressant, will interact with ONFI in a similar way and also increases clobazam's maximum plasma exposure by approximately 50%. Therefore, caution patients or their caregivers against simultaneous use with other CNS depressant drugs or alcohol, and caution that the effects of other CNS depressant drugs or alcohol may be potentiated [see Warnings and Precautions (5.2)].
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         