
               
               
               12  CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1  Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Tacrolimus binds to an intracellular protein, FKBP-12. A complex of tacrolimus-FKBP-12, calcium, calmodulin, and calcineurin (an ubiquitous mammalian intracellular enzyme) is then formed and the phosphatase activity of calcineurin inhibited. Such inhibition prevents the dephosphorylation and translocation of various factors such as the nuclear factor of activated T-cells (NF-AT) and nuclear factor kappa-light-chain-enhancer of activated B-cells (NF-κB). 
                        Tacrolimus inhibits the expression and/or production of several cytokines that include  interleukin (IL)-1 beta, IL-2, IL-3, IL-4, IL-5, IL-6, IL-8, IL-10, gamma interferon, tumor necrosis factor-alpha, and granulocyte macrophage colony stimulating factor. Tacrolimus also inhibits IL-2 receptor expression and nitric oxide release, induces apoptosis and production of transforming growth factor-beta that can lead to immunosuppressive activity. The net result is the inhibition of T-lymphocyte activation and proliferation as well as T-helper-cell-dependent B-cell response (i.e., immunosuppression).
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2  Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        
                           
                              Table 5
                            summarizes the pharmacokinetic (PK) parameters of tacrolimus following oral administration of once-daily ENVARSUS XR in healthy subjects and in kidney transplant patients, under fasted conditions. Whole blood tacrolimus concentrations in the pharmacokinetic studies were measured using validated HPLC/MS/MS assays.
                        


                        


In adult kidney transplant patients ≥ 6 months post-transplant switched to ENVARSUS XR® XR at 67% to 80% of the daily dose of tacrolimus immediate-release capsules, the steady state tacrolimus exposures (AUC24) and tacrolimus trough concentrations (C24) were comparable to the AUC24 and C24 measured prior to the switch. However, the mean Cmax estimate was 30% lower and the median Tmax was more prolonged (6 hours versus 2 hours) following administration of ENVARSUS XR as compared to that of tacrolimus immediate-release capsules. 
                        
                           Absorption
                        
                        Absorption of tacrolimus from the gastrointestinal tract after oral administration is incomplete and variable. In healthy subjects, the oral bioavailability of ENVARSUS XR was approximately 50% higher as compared with both tacrolimus immediate-release and extended-release formulations at steady state.  In healthy subjects who received single ENVARSUS XR doses ranging from 5 mg to 10 mg, the mean AUC and C24 of tacrolimus increased linearly and the elimination half-life did not change with increasing doses.
                        
                           Food Effects 
                        
                        The presence of a meal affects the absorption of tacrolimus; the rate and extent of absorption is greatest under fasted conditions. In 26 healthy subjects, administration of ENVARSUS XR following a high-fat breakfast reduced the systemic exposure (AUC) to tacrolimus by approximately 55% and the peak plasma concentration of tacrolimus (Cmax) by 22%, with no effect on the time to reach maximum plasma concentration (Tmax), compared to when ENVARSUS XR was administered under fasted conditions.
                        
                           Chronopharmacokinetic Effect
                        
                        In 26 healthy subjects, administration of ENVARSUS XR tablets in the evening resulted in a 15% lower AUC0-inf, and a  20% lower C24, as compared to morning dosing.
                        
                           Distribution
                        
                        The plasma protein binding of tacrolimus is approximately 99% and is independent of concentration over a range of 5-50 ng/mL. Tacrolimus is bound mainly to albumin and alpha-1-acid glycoprotein, and has a high level of association with erythrocytes. The distribution of tacrolimus between whole blood and plasma depends on several factors, such as hematocrit, temperature at the time of plasma separation, drug concentration, and plasma protein concentration. In a U.S. trial in which tacrolimus was administered as immediate-release formulation, the ratio of whole blood concentration to plasma concentration averaged 35 (range 12 to 67).
                        
                           Metabolism
                        
                        The desired pharmacological activity of tacrolimus is primarily due to the parent drug. Tacrolimus is extensively metabolized by the mixed-function oxidase system, primarily the cytochrome P-450 system 3A (CYP3A). A metabolic pathway leading to the formation of 8 possible metabolites has been proposed. Demethylation and hydroxylation were identified as the primary mechanisms of biotransformation in vitro. The major metabolite identified in incubations with human liver microsomes is 13-demethyl tacrolimus. In in vitro studies, a 31-demethyl metabolite has been reported to have the same activity as tacrolimus.
                        
                           Excretion
                        
                        In a mass balance study of orally administered radiolabeled tacrolimus to 6 healthy subjects, the mean recovery of the radiolabel was 94.9 ± 30.7%. Fecal elimination accounted for 92.6 ± 30.7% and urinary elimination accounted for 2.3 ± 1.1% of the total radiolabel administered. The elimination half-life based on radioactivity was 31.9 ± 10.5 hours, whereas it was 48.4 ± 12.3 hours based on tacrolimus concentrations. The mean clearance of radiolabel was 0.226 ± 0.116 L/hr/kg and the mean clearance of tacrolimus was 0.172 ± 0.088 L/hr/kg.
                        The elimination half-life of tacrolimus after oral administration of 2 mg ENVARSUS XR once-daily for 10 days was 31.0 ± 8.1 hours (mean ± SD) in 25 healthy subjects.
                        
                           Specific Populations
                        
                        
                           No dedicated pharmacokinetic studies in specific populations were conducted with ENVARSUS XR.
                        
                        
                           Renal Impairment
                        
                        Tacrolimus pharmacokinetics following a single administration of tacrolimus (administered as a continuous IV infusion) were determined in 12 patients (7 not on dialysis and 5 on dialysis, serum creatinine of 3.9±1.6 and 12.0±2.4 mg/dL, respectively) prior to their kidney transplant.  The mean clearance of tacrolimus in patients with renal dysfunction given IV tacrolimus was similar to that in healthy subjects given tacrolimus IV and in healthy subjects given oral tacrolimus immediate-release [see 
                                 Use in Specific Populations (8.6)
                              
                           ].
                        
                           Hepatic Impairment 
                        
                        Tacrolimus pharmacokinetics have been determined in 6 patients with mild hepatic impairment (mean Pugh score: 6.2) following single oral administration of tacrolimus immediate-release. The mean clearance of tacrolimus in patients with mild hepatic impairment was not substantially different from that in healthy subjects. Tacrolimus pharmacokinetics were studied in 6 patients with severe hepatic impairment (mean Pugh score: >10). The mean clearance was substantially lower in patients with severe hepatic impairment [see 
                                 Dosage and Administration (2.2),
                                  Use in Specific Populations (8.7)
                              
                           ].
                        
                           Race
                        
                        The pharmacokinetics of tacrolimus was studied following single oral administration of tacrolimus immediate-release (5 mg) in 10 African-American, 12 Latino-American, and 12 Caucasian healthy subjects:
                        
                           The mean (±SD) tacrolimus Cmax in African-Americans (23.6±12.1 ng/mL) was lower than in Caucasians (40.2±12.6 ng/mL) and Latino-Americans (36.2±15.8 ng/mL).
                           Mean AUC0-inf tended to be lower in African-Americans (203±115 ng•hr/mL) than Caucasians (344±186 ng•hr/mL) and Latino-Americans (274±150 ng•hr/mL).
                           The mean (±SD) absolute oral bioavailability (F) in African-Americans (12±4.5%) and Latino-Americans (14±7.4%) was lower than in Caucasians (19±5.8%).
                           There was no significant difference in mean terminal half-life among the three ethnic groups (range from approximately 25 to 30 hours) [see 
                                    Dosage and Administration (2.1),
                                     Use in Specific Populations (8.8)
                                 
                              ].
                        
                        
                           Gender
                        
                        A formal trial to evaluate the effect of gender on tacrolimus pharmacokinetics has not been conducted. In a sub-group analysis from two combined Phase 3 studies in kidney transplant recipients performed with ENVARSUS XR over one year of treatment, no gender-dependent differences in tacrolimus systemic exposures were observed.
                        
                           Drug Interaction Studies
                        
                        No drug-drug interaction studies were conducted specifically with ENVARSUS XR.  
                        Because tacrolimus is metabolized mainly by CYP3A enzymes, drugs or substances known to inhibit these enzymes and/or are known CYP3A substrates may increase tacrolimus whole blood concentrations. Drugs known to induce CYP3A enzymes may decrease tacrolimus whole blood concentrations [see 
                                 Warnings and Precautions (5.9),
                                  Drug Interactions (7.2)
                              ]. 
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         