
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Pegylated recombinant human interferon alfa-2a is an inducer of the innate antiviral immune response [see Microbiology (12.4)].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        PEGASYS stimulates the production of effector proteins such as serum neopterin and 2', 5'-oligoadenylate synthetase.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        Maximal serum concentrations (Cmax) and AUC increased in a nonlinear dose related manner following administration of 90 to 270 mcg of PEGASYS. Maximal serum concentrations (Cmax) occur between 72 to 96 hours post-dose.
                        Week 48 mean trough concentrations (16 ng/mL; range 4 to 28) at 168 hours post-dose are approximately 2-fold higher than week 1 mean trough concentrations (9 ng/mL; range 0 to 15). Steady-state serum levels are reached within 5 to 8 weeks of once weekly dosing. The peak to trough ratio at week 48 is approximately 2. The mean systemic clearance in healthy subjects given PEGASYS was 94 mL/h, which is approximately 100-fold lower than that for interferon alfa-2a (ROFERON®-A). The mean terminal half-life after subcutaneous dosing in subjects with chronic hepatitis C was 160 hours (range 84 to 353 hours) compared to 5 hours (range 3.7 to 8.5 hours) for ROFERON-A.
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Special Populations
                              
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Gender and Age
                                    
                                    PEGASYS administration yielded similar pharmacokinetics in male and female healthy subjects. The AUC was increased from 1295 to 1663 ng∙h/mL in subjects older than 62 years taking 180 mcg PEGASYS, but peak concentrations were similar (9 vs. 10 ng/mL) in those older and younger than 62 years.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Pediatric Patients
                                    
                                    In a population pharmacokinetics study, 14 children 2 to 8 years of age with CHC received PEGASYS based on their body surface area (BSA of the child × 180 mcg/1.73 m2). The clearance of PEGASYS in children was nearly 4-fold lower compared to the clearance reported in adults.
                                    Steady-state trough levels in children with the BSA-adjusted dosing were similar to trough levels observed in adults with 180 mcg fixed dosing. Time to reach the steady state in children is approximately 12 weeks, whereas in adults, steady state is reached within 5 to 8 weeks. In these children receiving the BSA adjusted dose, the mean exposure (AUC) during the dosing interval is predicted to be 25% to 70% higher than that observed in adults receiving 180 mcg fixed dosing.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Renal Impairment
                                    
                                    A clinical trial evaluated 50 CHC subjects with either moderate (creatinine clearance 30 to 50 mL/min) or severe (creatinine clearance less than 30 mL/min) renal impairment or end stage renal disease (ESRD) requiring chronic hemodialysis (HD). Subjects with moderate renal impairment receiving PEGASYS 180 mcg once weekly dose exhibited similar peginterferon alfa-2a plasma exposures compared to subjects with normal renal function (creatinine clearance greater than 80 mL/min) receiving the standard dose of PEGASYS. No PEGASYS dose adjustment is required for patients with mild or moderate renal impairment [see Dosage and Administration (2.5) and Use in Specific Populations (8.7)].
                                    For subjects with severe renal impairment, peginterferon alfa-2a apparent clearance was 43% lower as compared to subjects with normal renal function. A reduced dose of 135 mcg once weekly PEGASYS is recommended in patients with severe renal impairment. This dose may result in 30% higher peginterferon alfa-2a exposure compared to that of the recommended dose for patients with normal renal function. Signs and symptoms of interferon toxicity should be closely monitored in patients with severe renal impairment and the dose reduced to 90 mcg once weekly as appropriate [see Dosage and Administration (2.5) and Use in Specific Populations (8.7)].
                                    In 18 subjects with ESRD receiving chronic HD, PEGASYS was administered at a dose of 135 mcg once weekly. The apparent clearance of peginterferon alfa-2a was similar between subjects with ESRD and subjects with normal renal function. Despite a lower exposure to peginterferon alfa-2a with the 135 mcg dose, subjects with ESRD had a high rate of adverse events and discontinuations of PEGASYS in the trial. Therefore, a dose of 135 mcg once weekly should be used for patients with ESRD on HD. However, the potential for reduced efficacy and increased interferon toxicity in patients with ESRD receiving chronic HD should be closely monitored. The dose may be reduced to 90 mcg once weekly as appropriate [see Dosage and Administration (2.5) and Use in Specific Populations (8.7)].
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.4		Microbiology
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Mechanism of Action
                              
                              The biological activity of PEGASYS is derived from its recombinant human interferon α-2a moiety. Peginterferon α-2a binds to the human type 1 interferon receptor leading to receptor dimerization. Receptor dimerization activates multiple intracellular signal transduction pathways initially mediated by the JAK/STAT pathway. Given the diversity of cell types that respond to interferon α-2a, and the multiplicity of potential intracellular responses to interferon receptor activation, peginterferon α-2a is expected to have pleiotropic biological effects in the body.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Antiviral Activity in Cell Culture
                              
                              In the stable HCV cell culture model system (HCV replicon), PEG-IFN α-2a inhibited HCV RNA replication, with an EC50 value of 0.1-3 ng/mL. The combination of PEG-IFN α-2a and ribavirin was more effective at inhibiting HCV RNA replication than either agent alone.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Resistance
                              
                              Different HCV genotypes display considerable clinical variability in their response to PEG-IFN-α and ribavirin therapy. Viral genetic determinants associated with the variable response have not been definitively identified.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Cross-resistance
                              
                              Cross-resistance between IFN-α and ribavirin has not been observed.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         