
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           Drugs metabolized by CYP1A2: monitor for increased serum levels of theophylline and adjust dose accordingly (7.2)
                           Methadone: monitor for signs and symptoms of methadone toxicity (7.3)
                           Nucleoside analogues: closely monitor for toxicities. Reduce or discontinue the dose of PEGASYS or ribavirin or both should the events worsen (7.4) 
                           Zidovudine: monitor for worsening neutropenia and/or anemia with PEGASYS and/or ribavirin (7.4)
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 Drugs Metabolized by Cytochrome P450
                     
                        There was no effect on the pharmacokinetics of representative drugs metabolized by CYP 2C9, CYP 2C19, CYP 2D6 or CYP 3A4.
                        Treatment with PEGASYS once weekly for 4 weeks in healthy subjects was associated with an inhibition of P450 1A2 and a 25% increase in theophylline AUC.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 Theophylline
                     
                        Treatment with PEGASYS once weekly for 4 weeks in healthy subjects was associated with an inhibition of P450 1A2 and a 25% increase in theophylline AUC. Theophylline serum levels should be monitored and appropriate dose adjustments considered for patients given both theophylline and PEGASYS.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3 Methadone
                     
                        In a PK study of HCV subjects concomitantly receiving methadone, treatment with PEGASYS once weekly for 4 weeks was associated with methadone levels that were 10% to 15% higher than at baseline. The clinical significance of this finding is unknown; however, patients should be monitored for the signs and symptoms of methadone toxicity.
                        The pharmacokinetics of concomitant administration of methadone and PEGASYS were evaluated in 24 PEGASYS naïve chronic hepatitis C (CHC) subjects (15 male, 9 female) who received 180 mcg PEGASYS subcutaneously weekly. All subjects were on stable methadone maintenance therapy (median dose 95 mg, range 30 mg to 150 mg) prior to receiving PEGASYS. Mean methadone PK parameters were 10% to 15% higher after 4 weeks of PEGASYS treatment as compared to baseline. Methadone did not significantly alter the PK of PEGASYS as compared to a PK study of 6 chronic hepatitis C subjects not receiving methadone.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4 Nucleoside Analogues
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 NRTIs
                              
                              In Study 7 among the CHC/HIV coinfected cirrhotic subjects receiving NRTIs cases of hepatic decompensation (some fatal) were observed [see Warnings and Precautions (5.9)].
                              Patients receiving PEGASYS/ribavirin in combination with other HCV antiviral drugs and NRTIs should be closely monitored for treatment associated toxicities. Physicians should refer to prescribing information for other HCV antiviral drugs and the respective NRTIs for guidance regarding toxicity management. In addition, dose reduction or discontinuation of PEGASYS, ribavirin or both, should also be considered if worsening toxicities are observed [see Warnings and Precautions (5.3, 5.9) and Dosage and Administration (2.5)].
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Zidovudine
                              
                              In Study 7, subjects who were administered zidovudine in combination with PEGASYS/COPEGUS developed severe neutropenia (ANC less than 500 cells/mm3) and severe anemia (hemoglobin less than 8 g/dL) more frequently than similar subjects not receiving zidovudine (neutropenia 15% vs. 9%) (anemia 5% vs. 1%). Discontinuation of zidovudine should be considered as medically appropriate. Dose reduction or discontinuation of PEGASYS, ribavirin  or both should also be considered if worsening clinical toxicities are observed, including hepatic decompensation (e.g., Child-Pugh greater than 6).
                              Refer to the prescribing information for specific HCV antiviral drugs used in combination with PEGASYS for information on drug interaction potential.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         