


7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
For details of drug interactions, please refer to Clinical Pharmacology (12.3).12.3).



CNS-depressants: Enhanced CNS-depressant effects with combination use. Use with alcohol causes additive psychomotor impairment. (7.1, 12.3)7.1, Imipramine: Decreased alertness observed with combination use. (7.1, 12.3)7.1, Chlorpromazine: Impaired alertness and psychomotor performance observed with combination use. (7.1, 12.3)7.1, Rifampin: Combination use decreases exposure to, and effect of zolpidem. (7.2, 12.3)7.2, Ketoconazole: Combination use increases exposure to, and effect of zolpidem. (7.2, 12.3)7.2, CNS-depressants: Enhanced CNS-depressant effects with combination use. Use with alcohol causes additive psychomotor impairment. (7.1, 12.3)7.1, 






7.1 CNS-active drugs
Any drug with CNS-depressant effects could potentially enhance the CNS-depressant effects of zolpidem. Imipramine in combination with zolpidem produced an additive effect of decreased alertness. Similarly, chlorpromazine in combination with zolpidem produced an additive effect of decreased alertness and psychomotor performance. These drugs did not show any significant pharmacokinetic interaction.A study involving haloperidol and zolpidem revealed no effect of haloperidol on the pharmacokinetics or pharmacodynamics of zolpidem. The lack of a drug interaction following single-dose administration does not predict a lack following chronic administration. An additive effect on psychomotor performance between alcohol and oral zolpidem was demonstrated [see Warnings and Precautions: CNS depressant effects (5.5)]. Concomitant administration of zolpidem and sertraline increased zolpidem Cmax (43%) and decreased Tmax (53%), whether or not these changes alter the pharmacodynamic effect of zolpidem is unknown. [see Warnings and Precautions: CNS depressant effects (







7.2 Drugs that affect drug metabolism via cytochrome P450
Some compounds known to inhibit CYP3A may increase exposure to zolpidem. The effect of inhibitors of other P450 enzymes has not been carefully evaluated.Co-administration of multiple doses of rifampin and a single dose of zolpidem tartrate (20 mg) given 17 hours after the last dose of rifampin showed significant reductions of the AUC (73%), Cmax (58%), and T1/2 (36%) of zolpidem together with significant reductions in the pharmacodynamic effects of zolpidem tartrate. max (58%), and TCo-administration of a single dose of zolpidem tartrate with 4 doses of ketoconazole, a potent CYP3A4 inhibitor increased Cmax of zolpidem (30%) and the total AUC of zolpidem (70%) compared to zolpidem alone and prolonged the elimination half-life (30%) along with an increase in the pharmacodynamic effects of zolpidem. Consideration should be given to using a lower dose of zolpidem when ketoconazole and zolpidem are given together. Patients should be advised that use of Edluar with ketoconazole may enhance the sedative effects. max of zolpidem (30%) and the total AUC of zolpidem (70%) compared to zolpidem alone and prolonged the elimination half-life (30%) along with an increase in the pharmacodynamic effects of zolpidem. Consideration should be given to using a lower dose of zolpidem when ketoconazole and zolpidem are given together. Patients should be advised that use of Edluar with ketoconazole may enhance the sedative effects. 







7.3 Drug-laboratory test interactions
Zolpidem is not known to interfere with commonly employed clinical laboratory tests. In addition, clinical data indicate that zolpidem does not cross-react with benzodiazepines, opiates, barbiturates, cocaine, cannabinoids, or amphetamines in two standard urine drug screens. 




