
               
               
                12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY 
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                            Decitabine is believed to exert its antineoplastic effects after phosphorylation and direct incorporation into DNA and inhibition of DNA methyltransferase, causing hypomethylation of DNA and cellular differentiation or apoptosis.  Decitabine inhibits DNA methylation in vitro, which is achieved at concentrations that do not cause major suppression of DNA synthesis.  Decitabine-induced hypomethylation in neoplastic cells may restore normal function to genes that are critical for the control of cellular differentiation and proliferation.  In rapidly dividing cells, the cytotoxicity of decitabine may also be attributed to the formation of covalent adducts between DNA methyltransferase and decitabine incorporated into DNA.  Non-proliferating cells are relatively insensitive to decitabine.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                     
                            Decitabine has been shown to induce hypomethylation both in vitro and in vivo.  However, there have been no studies of decitabine-induced hypomethylation and pharmacokinetic parameters.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                            Pharmacokinetic parameters were evaluated in patients. Eleven patients received 20 mg/m2 infused over 1 hour intravenously (treatment Option 2). Fourteen patients received 15 mg/m2 infused over 3 hours (treatment Option 1). PK parameters are shown in Table 3.  Plasma concentration-time profiles after discontinuation of infusion showed a biexponential decline.  The CL of decitabine was higher following treatment Option 2.  Upon repeat doses there was no systemic accumulation of decitabine or any changes in PK parameters.  Population PK analysis (N=35) showed that the cumulative AUC per cycle for treatment Option 2 was 2.3-fold lower than the cumulative AUC per cycle following treatment Option 1.
                        


                        


    The exact route of elimination and metabolic fate of decitabine is not known in humans.  One of the pathways of elimination of decitabine appears to be deamination by cytidine deaminase found principally in the liver but also in granulocytes, intestinal epithelium and whole blood.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         