
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1	Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Obinutuzumab is a monoclonal antibody that targets the CD20 antigen expressed on the surface of pre B- and mature B-lymphocytes.  Upon binding to CD20, obinutuzumab mediates B-cell lysis through (1) engagement of immune effector cells, (2) by directly activating intracellular death signaling pathways (direct cell death), and/or (3) activation of the complement cascade.  The immune effector cell mechanisms include antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity (ADCC) and antibody-dependent cellular phagocytosis.
                        As an antibody with reduced fucose content, obinutuzumab induces greater ADCC activity than rituximab in vitro using human cancer cell lines.  Obinutuzumab also demonstrated an increased ability to induce direct cell death when compared to rituximab. Obinutuzumab binds to FcγRIII using purified proteins with a higher affinity than rituximab.  Obinutuzumab and rituximab bind with similar affinity to overlapping epitopes on CD20. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2	Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        In clinical trials in patients with CLL, GAZYVA caused CD19 B-cell depletion (defined as CD19 B-cell counts < 0.07 × 109/L).  Initial CD19 B-cell recovery was observed in some patients approximately 9 months after the last GAZYVA dose.  At 18 months of follow-up, some patients remain B-cell depleted. 
                        Although the depletion of B cells in the peripheral blood is a measurable pharmacodynamic effect, it is not directly correlated with the depletion of B cells in solid organs or in malignant deposits.  B-cell depletion has not been shown to be directly correlated to clinical response.
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Cardiac Electrophysiology
                              
                              The potential effects of GAZYVA on the QTc interval have not been studied.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        Based on a population pharmacokinetic (pop-PK) analysis, the geometric mean (CV%) volume of distribution of obinutuzumab at steady state is approximately 3.9 (21) L.
                        The elimination of obinutuzumab is comprised of a linear clearance pathway and a time-dependent non-linear clearance pathway.  As GAZYVA treatment progresses, the impact of the time-dependent pathway diminishes in a manner suggesting target-mediated drug disposition (TMDD).  Based on a pop-PK analysis, the geometric mean (CV%) terminal obinutuzumab clearance and half-life are approximately 0.09 (37%) L/day and 29.7 (35%) days, respectively.
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Specific Populations:
                              
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Age: Age did not affect the pharmacokinetics of GAZYVA.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Body Weight: Volume of distribution and steady-state clearance both increased with body weight; however, the expected change in exposure does not warrant a dose modification.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Renal Impairment: Based on the population pharmacokinetic analysis, a baseline creatinine clearance (CrCl) > 30 mL/min does not affect the pharmacokinetics of GAZYVA.  GAZYVA has not been studied in patients with a baseline CrCl < 30 mL/min.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Hepatic Impairment: GAZYVA has not been studied in patients with hepatic impairment.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         