
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Mechanism of Action/Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        Gaucher disease is characterized by a deficiency of
                                    β-glucocerebrosidase activity, resulting in
                                    accumulation of glucocerebroside in tissue macrophages which
                                    become engorged and are typically found in the liver, spleen,
                                    and bone marrow and occasionally in lung, kidney, and intestine.
                                    Secondary hematologic sequelae include severe anemia and
                                    thrombocytopenia in addition to the characteristic progressive
                                    hepatosplenomegaly, skeletal complications, including
                                    osteonecrosis and osteopenia with secondary pathological
                                    fractures. 
                              Cerezyme®
                            (imiglucerase for injection) catalyzes the hydrolysis
                                    of glucocerebroside to glucose and ceramide. In clinical trials,
                                        
                              Cerezyme
                            improved anemia and thrombocytopenia, reduced spleen
                                    and liver size, and decreased cachexia to a degree similar to
                                    that observed with Ceredase® (alglucerase
                                injection).
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        During one-hour intravenous infusions of four doses (7.5,
                                    15, 30, 60 U/kg) of 
                              Cerezyme®
                            (imiglucerase for injection), steady-state enzymatic
                                    activity was achieved by 30 minutes. Following infusion, plasma
                                    enzymatic activity declined rapidly with a half-life ranging
                                    from 3.6 to 10.4 minutes. Plasma clearance ranged from 9.8 to
                                    20.3 mL/min/kg (mean ± S.D., 14.5 ± 4.0
                                    mL/min/kg). The volume of distribution corrected for weight
                                    ranged from 0.09 to 0.15 L/kg (0.12 ± 0.02 L/kg). These
                                    variables do not appear to be influenced by dose or duration of
                                    infusion. However, only one or two patients were studied at each
                                    dose level and infusion rate. The pharmacokinetics of 
                              Cerezyme
                            do not appear to be different from placental-derived
                                    alglucerase (Ceredase®).
                        In patients who developed IgG antibody to 
                              Cerezyme
                           , an apparent effect on serum enzyme levels resulted
                                    in diminished volume of distribution and clearance and increased
                                    elimination half-life compared to patients without antibody (see
                                        
                              
                                 
                                                WARNINGS
                              
                           ).
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         