
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 Drug-Drug Interactions
                     
                        In patients with renal impairment, biguanides can cause lactic acidosis.  ULTRAVIST appears to increase the risk of biguanide induced lactic acidosis, possibly as a result of worsening renal function [see Warnings and Precautions (5.2)].
                        Patients on beta-blockers may be unresponsive to the usual doses of epinephrine used to treat allergic reactions. Because of the risk of hypersensitivity reactions, use caution when administering iodinated contrast agents to patients taking beta-blockers.
                        Interleukins are associated with an increased prevalence of delayed hypersensitivity reactions after iodinated contrast agent administration. These reactions include fever, chills, nausea, vomiting, pruritus, rash, diarrhea, hypotension, edema, and oliguria.
                        Renal toxicity has been reported in a few patients with liver dysfunction who were given an oral cholecystographic agent followed by intravascular contrast agents. Administration of any intravascular contrast agent should therefore be postponed in patients who have recently received a cholecystographic contrast agent.
                        
                           Do not mix other drugs with ULTRAVIST Injection 
                           [see How Supplied/Storage and Handling (
                           
                              16)].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 Drug-Laboratory Test Interactions
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Thyroid Function Tests:
                           
                              The results of protein bound iodine and radioactive iodine uptake studies, which depend on iodine estimation, will not accurately reflect thyroid function for at least 16 days following administration of iodinated contrast agents. However, thyroid function tests which do not depend on iodine estimations, for example, T3 resin uptake and total or free thyroxine (T4) assays are not affected.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Laboratory Assay of Coagulation Parameters, Fibrinolysis and Complement System:
                           
                              The effect of iopromide on coagulation factors in in vitro assays increased with the administered dose. Coagulation, fibrinolysis and complement activation were evaluated with standard citrated human plasma in the following assays: thrombin time, thrombin coagulase time, calcium thromboplastin time, partial thromboplastin time, plasminogen, thrombin, alpha-2 antiplasmin and factor XIIa activity. Thrombin inhibition was almost complete. Data on reversibility are not available. The thrombin time increased from approximately 20 seconds at an iopromide concentration of 10 mg I/mL, up to 100 seconds at an iopromide concentration of 70 mg I/mL.
                              The PTT increased from approximately 50 seconds at an iopromide concentration of 10 mg I/mL, up to approximately 100 seconds at an iopromide concentration of 70 mg I/mL. A similar increase was noted in the thrombin coagulase time. Lesser effects were noted in the calcium thromboplastin time. Coagulation time increased from 13.5 to 23 seconds at the highest iopromide concentration of 70 mg I/mL. The Hageman factor split products decreased by about 20% over the range of 10 to 70 mg I/mL of iopromide. Plasminogen was relatively stable. There was no evidence of activation of fibrinolysis. The complement alternate pathway was activated. Factor B conversion increased in a dose dependent manner. The duration of these effects was not studied.
                              
                                 In vitro studies with human blood showed that iopromide had a slight effect on coagulation and fibrinolysis. No Factor XIIa formation could be demonstrated. The complement alternate pathway also can be activated.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         