
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Tbo-filgrastim is a human granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF) produced by recombinant DNA technology.  Tbo-filgrastim binds to G-CSF receptors and stimulates proliferation of neutrophils. G-CSF is known to stimulate differentiation commitment and some end-cell functional activation, which increases neutrophil counts and activity.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        In the clinical trials of patients with cancer, the time to the ANCmax was between 3 to 5 days and returned to baseline by 21 days following completion of chemotherapy.  In the healthy volunteer trials, doubling the tbo-filgrastim subcutaneous dose from 5 to 10 mcg/kg resulted in a 16%-19% increase in the ANCmax and a 33%-36% increase in the area under the effect curve for ANC.
                        
                           Cardiac Electrophysiology
                        
                        At the maximum recommended intravenous dose of 5 μg/kg, tbo-filgrastim did not prolong the QT interval to any clinically relevant extent.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        In healthy subjects, the absolute bioavailability of 5 mcg/kg subcutaneous tbo-filgrastim was 33%. Increasing the dose of tbo-filgrastim from 5 to 10 mcg/kg in these healthy subjects resulted in an approximately 200% increase in both the maximum concentration (Cmax) and the area under the curve (AUC0-48h) of the drug.
                        In the clinical trials of patients with cancer, the AUC and Cmax were greater and more variable compared to healthy volunteers receiving the same dose of tbo-filgrastim subcutaneously. The median time to maximum concentration was between 4 to 6 hours and the median elimination half-life was between 3.2 to 3.8 hours. Accumulation was not observed after repeated dosing.
                        
                           Pharmacokinetics in Specific Populations
                        
                        
                           
                              Age:
                            Not evaluated.
                        
                           
                              Gender:
                            No gender-related differences were observed.
                        
                           
                              Renal Impairment:
                            Mild renal impairment (creatinine clearance 60 - 89 mL/min) had no effect on tbo-filgrastim pharmacokinetics (N=11). The pharmacokinetic profile in patients with moderate and severe renal impairment has not been assessed.
                        
                           
                              Hepatic Impairment:
                            The pharmacokinetic profile in patients with hepatic impairment has not been assessed.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         