
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        
                           
                        
                        

                        Following oral administration, terbinafine is well absorbed (>70%) and the bioavailability of terbinafine hydrochloride tablets as a result of first-pass metabolism is approximately 40%. Peak plasma concentrations of 1 mcg/mL appear within 2 h after a single 250 mg dose; the AUC (area under the curve) is approximately 4.56 mcg·h/mL. An increase in the AUC of terbinafine of less than 20% is observed when terbinafine hydrochloride is administered with food. No clinically relevant age-dependent changes in steady-state plasma concentrations of terbinafine have been reported. In patients with renal impairment (creatinine clearance ≤ 50 mL/min) or hepatic cirrhosis, the clearance of terbinafine is decreased by approximately 50% compared to normal volunteers. No effect of gender on the blood levels of terbinafine was detected in clinical trials. In plasma, terbinafine is >99% bound to plasma proteins and there are no specific binding sites. At steady-state, in comparison to a single dose, the peak concentration of terbinafine is 25% higher and plasma AUC increases by a factor of 2.5; the increase in plasma AUC is consistent with an effective half-life of ~36 hours. Terbinafine is distributed to the sebum and skin. A terminal half-life of 200 to 400 h may represent the slow elimination of terbinafine from tissues such as skin and adipose. Prior to excretion, terbinafine is extensively metabolized. No metabolites have been identified that have antifungal activity similar to terbinafine. Approximately 70% of the administered dose is eliminated in the urine.   
                        

                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Microbiology
                     
                        

                        Terbinafine hydrochloride is a synthetic allylamine derivative. Terbinafine hydrochloride is hypothesized to act by inhibiting squalene epoxidase, thus blocking the biosynthesis of ergosterol, an essential component of fungal cell membranes. 
                        
                           In vitro
                        
                        , mammalian squalene epoxidase is only inhibited at higher (4000 fold) concentrations than is needed for inhibition of the dermatophyte enzyme. Depending on the concentration of the drug and the fungal species test 
                        
                           in vitro
                        
                        , terbinafine hydrochloride may be fungicidal. However, the clinical significance of 
                        
                           in vitro
                        
                         data is unknown.
                        

                         
                        

                        Terbinafine has been shown to be active against most strains of the following microorganisms both 
                        
                           in vitro
                        
                         and in clinical infections as described in the 
                        
                           
                              INDICATIONS AND USAGE
                           
                        
                         section:
                        

                         
                        

                        
                           Trichophyton mentagrophytes
                        
                        

                        
                           Trichophyton rubrum
                        
                        

                        

                        The following 
                        
                           in vitro 
                        
                        data are available, but their clinical significance is unknown. 
                        
                           In vitro
                        
                        , terbinafine exhibits satisfactory MIC’s against most strains of the following microorganisms; however, the safety and efficacy of terbinafine in treating clinical infections due to these microorganisms have not been established in adequate and well-controlled clinical trials:
                        

                         
                        

                        
                           Candida albicans
Epidermophyton floccosum
Scopulariopsis brevicaulis
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     CLINICAL STUDIES
                     
                        
                           
                        
                        

                        The efficacy of terbinafine hydrochloride tablets in the treatment of onychomycosis is illustrated by the response of patients with toenail and/or fingernail infections who participated in three US/Canadian placebo-controlled clinical trials.
                        

                        

                        Results of the first toenail study, as assessed at week 48 (12 weeks of treatment with 36 weeks follow-up after completion of therapy), demonstrated mycological cure, defined as simultaneous occurrence of negative KOH plus negative culture, in 70% of patients. Fifty-nine percent (59%) of patients experienced effective treatment (mycological cure plus 0% nail involvement or >5 mm of new unaffected nail growth); 38% of patients demonstrated mycological cure plus clinical cure (0% nail involvement).
                        

                        

                        In a second toenail study of dermatophytic onychomycosis, in which non-dermatophytes were also cultured, similar efficacy against the dermatophytes was demonstrated. The pathogenic role of the non-dermatophytes cultured in the presence of dermatophytic onychomycosis has not been established. The clinical significance of this association is unknown.
                        

                        

                        Results of the fingernail study, as assessed at week 24 (6 weeks of treatment with 18 weeks follow-up after completion of therapy), demonstrated mycological cure in 79% of patients, effective treatment in 75% of the patients, and mycological cure plus clinical cure in 59% of the patients.
                        

                        

                        The mean time to overall success was approximately 10 months for the first toenail study and 4 months for the fingernail study. In the first toenail study, for patients evaluated at least six months after achieving clinical cure and at least one year after completing terbinafine hydrochloride therapy, the clinical relapse rate was approximately 15%.
                        

                     
                     
                  
               
            
         