
               
               
               12  CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1  Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Varithena™ is a drug/device combination product that generates injectable foam. The injectable foam is composed of a liquid and gas phase, both of which are necessary to have its therapeutic effect.  Varithena™ is intended to act as follows: (1) the foam displaces blood from the vein to be treated, and (2) the polidocanol  then scleroses the endothelium.
                        The active pharmaceutical ingredient of Varithena™ is polidocanol, a non-ionic surfactant sclerosing agent.  The hydrophobic pole of the polidocanol molecule attaches to the lipid cell membrane of the venous endothelium, resulting in disruption of the osmotic barrier, destruction of the venous endothelium, and vasospasm.  Following exposure to polidocanol, the interior surface of the vein becomes thrombogenic, which leads to thrombus formation and venous occlusion.  The occluded vein is eventually replaced by fibrous connective tissue. Polidocanol is deactivated upon contact with blood, thus limiting the sclerosant action to the endothelium near the site of injection.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2  Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        The active pharmaceutical ingredient in Varithena™  is polidocanol.  Polidocanol has a concentration dependent damaging effect on the endothelium of blood vessels.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3  Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        The pharmacokinetics of Varithena™ (as a weighted sum of 4 oligomers: E5, E9, E12 and E14) were evaluated at two concentrations (1% and 2%) randomly assigned within gender in 20 patients with GSV incompetence.
                        When administered as an intravenous injectable foam as two fixed 5 mL doses separated by 10 minutes, polidocanol was rapidly detected in plasma, reaching maximum concentration of drug in the body after dosing (Cmax) within 15 minutes of the first injection and within 5 minutes of receiving the second injection of Varithena™ 1% or Varithena™ 2%.  The mean volume of distribution (Vd) of polidocanol ranged from 35 to 82 L.
                        Mean systemic clearance (CL) of polidocanol ranged from 0.2 to 0.4 L/min. The clearance of E5 was significantly greater than that of longer oligomers.  Mean terminal elimination half-life (t1/2) ranged from 102 to 153 minutes, with most plasma samples below the limit of quantitation (BLQ) at the end of the 8-hour collection period. The increase in plasma polidocanol concentrations was less than proportional with increasing Varithena™ concentration.  Weight-normalized data demonstrated no consistent differences in Cmax or AUC between males and females.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         