
               
               
               
                  12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
                  
                  12.1 Mechanism Of ActionMorphine sulfate, a pure opioid agonist, is relatively selective 
for the mu receptor, although it can interact with other opioid receptors at 
higher doses. In addition to analgesia, the widely diverse effects of morphine 
sulfate include analgesia, dysphoria, euphoria, somnolence, respiratory 
depression, diminished gastrointestinal motility, altered circulatory dynamics, 
histamine release, physical dependence, and alterations of the endocrine and 
autonomic nervous systems.
                  Morphine produces both its therapeutic and its adverse effects by interaction 
with one or more classes of specific opioid receptors located throughout the 
body. Morphine acts as a pure agonist, binding with and activating opioid 
receptors at sites in the peri-aqueductal and peri-ventricular grey matter, the 
ventro-medial medulla and the spinal cord to produce analgesia.
                  
                     
                        Effects on the Central Nervous 
System
                     
                  
                  The principal actions of therapeutic value of morphine are analgesia and 
sedation (i.e., sleepiness and anxiolysis). Specific CNS opiate receptors and 
endogenous compounds with morphine-like activity have been identified throughout 
the brain and spinal cord and are likely to play a role in the expression of 
analgesic effects. In addition, when morphine binds to mu-opioid receptors, it 
results in positive subjective effects, such as drug liking, euphoria, and high. 
Morphine produces respiratory depression by direct action on brainstem 
respiratory centers. The mechanism of respiratory depression involves a 
reduction in the responsiveness of the brainstem respiratory centers to 
increases in carbon dioxide tension, and to electrical stimulation. Morphine 
depresses the cough reflex by direct effect on the cough center in the medulla. 
Antitussive effects may occur with doses lower than those usually required for 
analgesia. Morphine causes miosis, even in total darkness, and little tolerance 
develops to this effect. Pinpoint pupils are a sign of opioid overdose but are 
not pathognomonic (e.g., pontine lesions of hemorrhagic or ischemic origins may 
produce similar findings). Marked mydriasis rather than miosis may be seen with 
worsening hypoxia in the setting of EMBEDA overdose [see OVERDOSAGE 
(10)].
                  
                     
                        Effects on the Gastrointestinal 
Tract and Other Smooth Muscle
                     
                  
                  Gastric, biliary, and pancreatic secretions are decreased by morphine. 
Morphine causes a reduction in motility associated with an increase in tone in 
the antrum of the stomach and duodenum. Digestion of food in the small intestine 
is delayed and propulsive contractions are decreased. Propulsive peristaltic 
waves in the colon are decreased, while tone is increased to the point of spasm. 
The end result is constipation. Morphine can cause a marked increase in biliary 
tract pressure as a result of spasm of the sphincter of Oddi.
                  
                     
                        Effects on the Cardiovascular 
System
                     
                  
                  Morphine produces peripheral vasodilation which may result in orthostatic 
hypotension or syncope. Release of histamine may be induced by morphine and can 
contribute to opioid-induced hypotension. Manifestations of histamine release 
and/or peripheral vasodilation may include pruritus, flushing, red eyes and 
sweating.
                  
                     
                        Mechanism of Action of 
Naltrexone
                     
                  
                  Naltrexone is a pure, centrally acting mu-opioid antagonist that reverses the 
subjective and analgesic effects of mu-opioid receptor agonists by competitively 
binding at mu-opioid receptors.
                  
                  
                  12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        Plasma Level-Analgesia 
Relationships
                     
                  
                  In any particular patient, both analgesic effects and plasma morphine 
concentrations are related to the morphine dose.
                  While plasma morphine-efficacy relationships can be demonstrated in 
non-tolerant individuals, they are influenced by a wide variety of factors and 
are not generally useful as a guide to the clinical use of morphine. The 
effective dose in opioid-tolerant patients may be 10-50 times as great (or 
greater) than the appropriate dose for opioid-naïve individuals. Dosages of 
morphine should be chosen and must be titrated on the basis of clinical 
evaluation of the patient and the balance between therapeutic and adverse 
effects.
                  For any fixed dose and dosing interval, EMBEDA will have, at steady-state, a 
lower Cmax and a higher Cmin than 
conventional immediate-release morphine.
                  The pharmacodynamic effect of naltrexone in the setting of crushed EMBEDA was 
examined in two clinical trials. In a randomized double-blind, triple-dummy, 
four-way cross-over study, 32 non-dependent recreational opioid users received 
120 mg of EMBEDA whole and crushed, 120 mg of immediate-release morphine sulfate 
and placebo. Overall, 87.5% of subjects had some degree of reduced drug liking 
after receiving crushed EMBEDA, while 12.5% had no reduction in drug liking. 
There was considerable individual variability in the degree of reduction in drug 
liking, ranging between 10 and 50%. Similarly, 69% of subjects showed some 
degree of a decrease in euphoria with crushed EMBEDA compared to IR morphine and 
31% of subjects did not report a reduction in euphoria. There was similar 
individual variability in the degree of reduction in euphoria. 
                  A randomized double-blind, placebo-controlled, three-way cross-over trial in 
28 non-dependent recreational opioid-users was performed using 30 mg of IV 
morphine alone and 30 mg of IV morphine in combination with 1.2 mg of IV 
naltrexone to simulate parenteral use of crushed EMBEDA. The combination of 
morphine with naltrexone resulted in 71% of subjects reporting a reduction in 
euphoria compared to morphine alone. Note that the intravenous injection of 
crushed EMBEDA may result in serious injury and death due to a morphine overdose 
or an embolic event. Intravenous injection of crushed EMBEDA may preciptitate a 
severe withdrawal syndrome in opioid-dependent patients. 
                  The clinical significance of the degree of reduction in drug liking and 
euphoria reported in these studies has not yet been established. There is no 
evidence that the naltrexone in EMBEDA reduces the abuse liability of 
EMBEDA.
                  
                  
                  12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     Absorption
                  
                  EMBEDA Capsules contain extended-release pellets of morphine sulfate that 
release morphine slowly compared to an oral morphine solution. Following the 
administration of oral morphine solution, approximately 50% of the morphine 
absorbed reaches the systemic circulation within 30 minutes. However, following 
the administration of an equal amount of EMBEDA to healthy volunteers, this 
occurs, on average, after 8 hours. As with most forms of oral morphine, because 
of pre-systemic elimination, only about 20 to 40% of the administered dose 
reaches the systemic circulation. 
                  EMBEDA is bioequivalent to a similar morphine sulfate extended release 
capsules product with regard to rate and extent of plasma morphine absorption. 
The median time to peak plasma morphine levels (Tmax) was 
shorter for EMBEDA (7.5 hrs) compared to KADIAN® (10 
hrs). Dose-related increase in steady-state pre-dose plasma concentrations of 
morphine were noted following multiple dose administration of EMBEDA in 
patients. 
                  
                     Food effect: While concurrent administration of 
high fat food decreases the rate and extent of morphine absorption from EMBEDA, 
the total bioavailability is not affected. Co-administration of a high-fat meal 
with EMBEDA did not compromise sequestration of naltrexone.
                  When taken as directed, the sequestered naltrexone in EMBEDA is not 
consistently absorbed into systemic circulation following single dose 
administration. In some subjects, a limited number (~2%) of blood samples had 
low and highly variable plasma naltrexone levels (median = 7.74 pg/mL, range 
4.05-132 pg/mL) following single dose administration of 60 – 120 mg EMBEDA 
compared to oral naltrexone solution. In patients titrated up to 60 – 80 mg BID 
EMBEDA, naltrexone levels (4-25.5 pg/mL) were detected in 13 out of 67 patients 
at steady-state. In a long-term safety study where an average dose of EMBEDA was 
up to 860 mg administered twice a day for 12 months, 11.0% of blood samples at 
pre-dose timepoints at steady-state had detectable plasma naltrexone 
concentrations ranging from 4.03 to 145 pg/mL.
                  Compared to 2.4 mg naltrexone oral solution, which produced mean (SD) 
naltrexone plasma levels of 689 (+ 429 pg/mL) and 
mean (SD) 6β-naltrexol plasma levels of 3920 (+ 
1350 pg/mL), administration of intact 60 mg EMBEDA produced no naltrexone plasma 
levels and mean (SD) 6β-naltrexol plasma levels of 16.7 (+ 13.5 pg/mL). Trough levels of plasma naltrexone and 
6-β-naltrexol did not accumulate upon repeated administration of EMBEDA. 
                  Tampering with the EMBEDA formulation by crushing or chewing the pellets, 
results in the rapid release and absorption of both morphine and naltrexone 
comparable to an oral solution. This has not been shown to reduce the abuse 
liability of EMBEDA.
                  
                     Distribution
                  
                  Once absorbed, morphine is distributed to skeletal muscle, kidneys, liver, 
intestinal tract, lungs, spleen, and brain. The volume of distribution of 
morphine is approximately 3 to 4 L/kg. Morphine is 30 to 35% reversibly bound to 
plasma proteins. Although the primary site of action of morphine is in the CNS, 
only small quantities pass the blood brain barrier. Morphine also crosses the 
placental membranes [see USE IN SPECIFIC 
POPULATIONS (8.1)] and has been found in breast milk [see 
                           USE IN SPECIFIC 
POPULATIONS (8.3)
                        ].
                  
                     Metabolism
                  
                  Major pathways of morphine metabolism include glucuronidation and sulfation 
in the liver to produce including morphine-3-glucuronide, M3G (about 50%) and 
morphine-6-glucuronide, M6G (about 5 to 15%) or morphine-3-etheral sulfate. A 
small fraction (less than 5%) of morphine is demethylated. M3G has no 
significant contribution to the analgesic activity. Although M6G does not 
readily cross the blood-brain barrier, it has been shown to have opioid agonist 
and analgesic activity in humans.
                  Naltrexone is extensively metabolized into 6-β-naltrexol. 
                  
                     Excretion
                  
                  Approximately 10% of morphine dose is excreted unchanged in the urine. 
Elimination of morphine is primarily via hepatic metabolism to glucuronide 
metabolites M3G and M6G (55 to 65%) which are then renally excreted. A small 
amount of the glucuronide metabolites is excreted in the bile and there is some 
minor enterohepatic cycling. 
                  The mean adult plasma clearance is about 20-30 mL/minute/kg. The effective 
half-life of morphine after IV administration is reported to be approximately 
2.0 hours. The terminal elimination half-life of morphine following single dose 
EMBEDA administration is approximately 29 hours.
                  
                     Special Populations
                  
                  
                     Geriatric: Pharmacokinetics of EMBEDA have not 
been investigated in elderly patients (greater than 65 years) although such patients were 
included in clinical studies. However, in a long-term open label safety study, 
the pre-dose plasma morphine concentrations after dose normalization were 
similar for subjects less than 65 years and those greater than or equal to 65 years of age [see USE IN 
SPECIFIC POPULATIONS (8.5)].
                  
                  
                     Pediatric: Pharmacokinetics of EMBEDA were not 
evaluated in pediatric population. 
                  
                     Gender: No meaningful differences were noted 
between male and female patients in the analysis of pharmacokinetic data of 
morphine from clinical studies.
                  
                     Race: Pharmacokinetic differences due to race 
may exist. Additionally, Chinese subjects given intravenous morphine in one 
study had a higher clearance when compared to Caucasian subjects (1852 + 116 mL/min versus 1495 + 
80 mL/min).
                  
                     Hepatic Failure: The pharmacokinetics of 
morphine was found to be significantly altered in individuals with alcoholic 
cirrhosis. The clearance was found to decrease with a corresponding increase in 
half-life. The morphine-3-glucuronide (M3G) and morphine-6-glucuronide (M6G) to 
morphine plasma AUC ratios also decreased in these patients indicating a 
decrease in metabolic activity.
                  
                     Renal Insufficiency: The pharmacokinetics of 
morphine is altered in renal failure patients. AUC is increased and clearance is 
decreased. The metabolites, M3G and M6G, accumulate several fold in renal 
failure patients compared with healthy subjects.
                  
                     Drug Interaction/Alcohol Interaction: As such 
additive pharmacodynamic effects may be expected when EMBEDA is used in 
conjunction with alcohol, other opioids, or illicit drugs that cause central 
nervous system depression. Additionally, a pharmacokinetic drug interaction is 
noted with concomitant administration of 40% alcohol and EMBEDA, where an 
average 2-fold (range 1.4- to 5-fold increase) higher Cmax of morphine was noted compared to EMBEDA consumed with 
water
               
               
            
         