
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                            Concomitant use of ZORVOLEX and aspirin is not generally recommended because of the potential of increased adverse effects including increased GI bleeding. (7.1)
                            Concomitant use of ZORVOLEX and anticoagulants have a risk of serious GI bleeding higher than users of either drug alone. (7.2)
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1	Aspirin
                     
                        When administered with aspirin, the protein binding of ZORVOLEX is reduced. The clinical significance of this interaction is not known; however, as with other NSAIDs, concomitant administration of ZORVOLEX and aspirin is not generally recommended because of the potential of increased GI adverse reactions [see Warnings and Precautions (5.1, 5.2)
                           ].
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2	Anticoagulants
                     
                        The effects of anticoagulants, such as warfarin and NSAIDs on GI bleeding, are synergistic, such that users of both drugs together have a risk of serious GI bleeding higher than that with use of either drug alone [see Warnings and Precautions (5.2)
                           ].
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3	ACE-inhibitors
                     
                        NSAIDs may diminish the antihypertensive effect of angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors [see Warnings and Precautions (5.4)
                           ].
                        This interaction should be given consideration in patients taking NSAIDs concomitantly with ACE-inhibitors.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4	Diuretics
                     
                        Clinical studies, as well as post-marketing observations, have shown that NSAIDs can reduce the natriuretic effect of furosemide and thiazides in some patients [see Warnings and Precautions (5.4)
                           ]. This response has been attributed to inhibition of renal prostaglandin synthesis. During concomitant therapy with ZORVOLEX and these diuretics, observe patients closely for signs of renal failure, as well as to assure diuretic efficacy [see Warnings and Precautions (5.6)
                           ].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.5	Lithium
                     
                        NSAIDs have produced an elevation of plasma lithium levels and a reduction in renal lithium clearance. The mean minimum lithium concentration increased 15% and the renal clearance was decreased by approximately 20%. These effects have been attributed to inhibition of renal prostaglandin synthesis by the NSAID. Thus, when NSAIDs and lithium are administered concurrently, observe patients carefully for signs of lithium toxicity.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.6	Methotrexate
                     
                        NSAIDs have been reported to competitively inhibit methotrexate accumulation in rabbit kidney slices. This indicates that NSAIDs may enhance the toxicity of methotrexate. Use caution when NSAIDs are administered concomitantly with methotrexate.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.7	Cyclosporine
                     
                        NSAIDs may affect renal prostaglandins and increase the toxicity of cyclosporine. Therefore, concomitant therapy with NSAIDs may increase cyclosporine's nephrotoxicity. Use caution when NSAIDs are administered concomitantly with cyclosporine.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.8	Inhibitors or Substrates of Cytochrome P450 2C9 Other Considerations
                     
                        Diclofenac is metabolized predominantly by cytochrome P450 2C9. Co-administration of diclofenac with another drug known to be metabolized by, or which inhibits, cytochrome P450 2C9 may unpredictably affect the pharmacokinetics of diclofenac or the co-administered drug. Caution should be used to evaluate each patient's medical history when consideration is given to prescribing diclofenac [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)
                           ].
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         