
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Methylphenidate HCl is a central nervous system (CNS) stimulant.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        Methylphenidate is a racemic mixture comprised of the d- and l-isomers. The d-isomer is more pharmacologically active than the l-isomer. Methylphenidate is thought to block the reuptake of norepinephrine and dopamine into the presynaptic neuron and increase the release of these monoamines into the extraneuronal space.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Absorption
                              
                              Following a single, 60 mg oral dose of QUILLIVANT XR in 28 healthy adult subjects in a crossover study under fasting conditions, d-methylphenidate (d-MPH) mean (± SD) peak plasma concentrations of 13.6 (± 5.8) ng/mL occurred at a median time of 5.0 hours after dosing (Figure 2). The relative bioavailability of QUILLIVANT XR compared to Methylphenidate IR oral solution (2×30 mg, q6h) is 95%.
                              
                                 Figure 2. Mean d-Methylphenidate Plasma Concentration-Time Profiles  
                              
                              
                                 
                              
                              The single dose pharmacokinetics of d-MPH under fed conditions are summarized (Table 3) from studies in children and adolescents with ADHD, and healthy adults following an oral dose of 60 mg QUILLIVANT XR.
                              


                           



                           
                           
                              
                                 Figure 2
                                 
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Food Effects
                              
                              In a study in adult volunteers to investigate the effects of a high-fat meal on the bioavailability of QUILLIVANT XR at a dose of 60 mg, the presence of food reduced the time to peak concentration by approximately 1 hour (fed: 4 hours vs. fasted: 5 hours). Overall, a high-fat meal increased the average Cmax of QUILLIVANT XR by about 28% and the AUC by about 19%. These changes are not considered clinically significant.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Elimination
                              
                              Following a single 60 mg oral dose of QUILLIVANT XR in 28 healthy adult subjects under fasting conditions, the mean plasma terminal elimination half-life of d-methylphenidate was 5.6 (± 0.8) hours.
                              
                                 Metabolism
                              
                              In humans, methylphenidate is metabolized primarily via deesterification to alpha-phenyl-piperidine acetic acid (PPAA). The metabolite has little or no pharmacologic activity.
                              
                                 Excretion
                              
                              After oral dosing of radiolabeled methylphenidate in humans, about 90% of the radioactivity was recovered in urine. The main urinary metabolite was PPAA, accounting for approximately 80% of the dose.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Gender
                              
                              There is insufficient experience with the use of QUILLIVANT XR to detect gender variations in pharmacokinetics.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Race
                              
                              There is insufficient experience with the use of QUILLIVANT XR to detect ethnic variations in pharmacokinetics.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Age
                              
                              The pharmacokinetics of methylphenidate after QUILLIVANT XR administration were studied in pediatric patients with ADHD between 9 and 15 years of age. After a single oral dose of 60 mg QUILLIVANT XR, plasma concentrations of methylphenidate in children (9–12 years old; n=3) were approximately twice the concentrations observed in adults. The plasma concentrations in adolescent patients (13–15 years old; n=4) were similar to those in adults.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Renal Insufficiency
                              
                              There is no experience with the use of QUILLIVANT XR in patients with renal insufficiency. After oral administration of radiolabeled methylphenidate in humans, methylphenidate was extensively metabolized and approximately 80% of the radioactivity was excreted in the urine in the form of PPAA. Since renal clearance is not an important route of methylphenidate clearance, renal insufficiency is expected to have little effect on the pharmacokinetics of QUILLIVANT XR.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Hepatic Insufficiency
                              
                              There is no experience with the use of QUILLIVANT XR in patients with hepatic insufficiency.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         