
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        The mechanism of action of ranolazine's antianginal effects has not been determined.  Ranolazine has anti-ischemic and antianginal effects that do not depend upon reductions in heart rate or blood pressure.  It does not affect the rate-pressure product, a measure of myocardial work, at maximal exercise.  Ranolazine at therapeutic levels can inhibit the cardiac late sodium current (I ).  However, the relationship of this inhibition to angina symptoms is uncertain.
                                    Na
                        
                        The QT prolongation effect of ranolazine on the surface electrocardiogram is the result of inhibition of I , which prolongs the ventricular action potential.
                                    Kr
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Hemodynamic Effects
                              
                              Patients with chronic angina treated with RANEXA in controlled clinical studies had minimal changes in mean heart rate (< 2 bpm) and systolic blood pressure (< 3 mm Hg).  Similar results were observed in subgroups of patients with CHF NYHA Class I or II, diabetes, or reactive airway disease, and in elderly patients.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Electrocardiographic Effects
                              
                              Dose and plasma concentration-related increases in the QTc interval reductions in T wave amplitude, and, in some cases, notched T waves, have been observed in patients treated with RANEXA.  These effects are believed to be caused by ranolazine and not by its metabolites.  The relationship between the change in QTc and ranolazine plasma concentrations is linear, with a slope of about 2.6 msec/1000 ng/mL, through exposures corresponding to doses several-fold higher than the maximum recommended dose of 1000 mg twice daily.  The variable blood levels attained after a given dose of ranolazine give a wide range of effects on QTc.  At T following repeat dosing at 1000 mg twice daily, the mean change in QTc is about 6 msec, but in the 5% of the population with the highest plasma concentrations, the prolongation of QTc is at least 15 msec.  In cirrhotic subjects with mild or moderate hepatic impairment, the relationship between plasma level of ranolazine and QTc is much steeper .
                                            [see ],
                                                Warnings and Precautions (5.1)
                                 
                                 max
                                 [see ]
                                                Contraindications (4)
                                 
                              
                              Age, weight, gender, race, heart rate, congestive heart failure, diabetes, and renal impairment did not alter the slope of the QTc-concentration relationship of ranolazine.
                              No proarrhythmic effects were observed on 7-day Holter recordings in 3,162 acute coronary syndrome patients treated with RANEXA.  There was a significantly lower incidence of arrhythmias (ventricular tachycardia, bradycardia, supraventricular tachycardia, and new atrial fibrillation) in patients treated with RANEXA (80%) versus placebo (87%), including ventricular tachycardia ≥ 3 beats (52% versus 61%).  However, this difference in arrhythmias did not lead to a reduction in mortality, a reduction in arrhythmia hospitalization, or a reduction in arrhythmia symptoms.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        Ranolazine is extensively metabolized in the gut and liver and its absorption is highly variable.  For example, at a dose of 1000 mg twice daily, the mean steady-state C was 2600 ng/mL with 95% confidence limits of 400 and 6100 ng/mL.  The pharmacokinetics of the (+) R- and (-) S-enantiomers of ranolazine are similar in healthy volunteers.  The apparent terminal half-life of ranolazine is 7 hours.  Steady state is generally achieved within 3 days of twice-daily dosing with RANEXA.  At steady state over the dose range of 500 to 1000 mg twice daily, C and AUC increase slightly more than proportionally to dose, 2.2- and 2.4-fold, respectively.  With twice-daily dosing, the trough:peak ratio of the ranolazine plasma concentration is 0.3 to 0.6.  The pharmacokinetics of ranolazine is unaffected by age, gender, or food.
                                    max
                           max
                           0–τ
                        
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Absorption and Distribution
                              
                              After oral administration of RANEXA, peak plasma concentrations of ranolazine are reached between 2 and 5 hours.  After oral administration of C-ranolazine as a solution, 73% of the dose is systemically available as ranolazine or metabolites.  The bioavailability of ranolazine from RANEXA tablets relative to that from a solution of ranolazine is 76%.  Because ranolazine is a substrate of P-gp, inhibitors of P-gp may increase the absorption of ranolazine.
                                            14
                              
                              Food (high-fat breakfast) has no important effect on the C and AUC of ranolazine.  Therefore, RANEXA may be taken without regard to meals.  Over the concentration range of 0.25 to 10 µg/mL, ranolazine is approximately 62% bound to human plasma proteins.
                                            max
                              
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Metabolism and Excretion
                              
                              Ranolazine is metabolized mainly by CYP3A and, to a lesser extent, by CYP2D6.  Following a single oral dose of ranolazine solution, approximately 75% of the dose is excreted in urine and 25% in feces.  Ranolazine is metabolized rapidly and extensively in the liver and intestine; less than 5% is excreted unchanged in urine and feces.  The pharmacologic activity of the metabolites has not been well characterized.  After dosing to steady state with 500 mg to 1500 mg twice daily, the four most abundant metabolites in plasma have AUC values ranging from about 5 to 33% that of ranolazine, and display apparent half-lives ranging from 6 to 22 hours.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Drug Interactions
                              
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Effect of other drugs on ranolazine
                                    
                                    data indicate that ranolazine is a substrate of CYP3A and, to a lesser degree, of CYP2D6. Ranolazine is also a substrate of P-glycoprotein.
                                                    In vitro
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                       
                                       
                                          
                                             Strong CYP3A Inhibitors
                                          
                                          Plasma levels of ranolazine with RANEXA 1000 mg twice daily are increased by 220% when coadministered with ketoconazole 200 mg twice daily
                                                            [see ].
                                                                Contraindications (4)
                                             
                                          
                                       
                                       
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                       
                                       
                                          
                                             Moderate CYP3A Inhibitors
                                          
                                          Plasma levels of ranolazine with RANEXA 1000 mg twice daily are increased by 50 to 130% by diltiazem 180 to 360 mg, respectively. Plasma levels of ranolazine with RANEXA 750 mg twice daily are increased by 100% by verapamil 120 mg three times daily
                                                            [see ].
                                                                Drug Interactions (7.1)
                                             
                                          
                                       
                                       
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                       
                                       
                                          
                                             Weak CYP3A Inhibitors
                                          
                                          The weak CYP3A inhibitors simvastatin (20 mg once daily) and cimetidine (400 mg three times daily) do not increase the exposure to ranolazine in healthy volunteers.
                                       
                                       
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                       
                                       
                                          
                                             CYP3A Inducers
                                          
                                          Rifampin 600 mg once daily decreases the plasma concentrations of ranolazine (1000 mg twice daily) by approximately 95%
                                                            [see ].
                                                                Contraindications (4)
                                             
                                          
                                       
                                       
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                       
                                       
                                          
                                             CYP2D6 Inhibitors
                                          
                                          Paroxetine 20 mg once daily increased ranolazine concentrations by 20% in healthy volunteers receiving RANEXA 1000 mg twice daily. No dose adjustment of RANEXA is required in patients treated with CYP2D6 inhibitors.
                                       
                                       
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                       
                                       
                                          
                                             Digoxin
                                          
                                          Plasma concentrations of ranolazine are not significantly altered by concomitant digoxin at 0.125 mg once daily.
                                       
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Effect of ranolazine on other drugs
                                    
                                    ranolazine and its O-demethylated metabolite are weak inhibitors of CYP3A and moderate inhibitors of CYP2D6 and P-gp. ranolazine is an inhibitor of OCT2.
                                                    In vitro
                                       In vitro
                                    
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       CYP3A Substrates
                                    
                                    The plasma levels of simvastatin, a CYP3A substrate, and its active metabolite are increased by 100% in healthy volunteers receiving 80 mg once daily and RANEXA 1000 mg twice daily . Mean exposure to atorvastatin (80 mg daily) is increased by 40% following co-administration with RANEXA (1000 mg twice daily) in healthy volunteers. However, in one subject the exposure to atorvastatin and metabolites was increased by ~400% in the presence of RANEXA
                                                    [see ]
                                                        Drug Interactions (7.2)
                                       
                                       .
                                    
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Diltiazem
                                    
                                    The pharmacokinetics of diltiazem is not affected by ranolazine in healthy volunteers receiving diltiazem 60 mg three times daily and RANEXA 1000 mg twice daily.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       P-gp Substrates
                                    
                                    Ranolazine increases digoxin concentrations by 50% in healthy volunteers receiving RANEXA 1000 mg twice daily and digoxin 0.125 mg once daily
                                                    [see ].
                                                        Drug Interactions (7.2)
                                       
                                    
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       CYP2D6 Substrates
                                    
                                    RANEXA 750 mg twice daily increases the plasma concentrations of a single dose of immediate release metoprolol (100 mg), a CYP2D6 substrate, by 80% in extensive CYP2D6 metabolizers with no need for dose adjustment of metoprolol. In extensive metabolizers of dextromethorphan, a substrate of CYP2D6, ranolazine inhibits partially the formation of the main metabolite dextrorphan.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       OCT2 Substrates
                                    
                                    In subjects with type 2 diabetes mellitus, the exposure to metformin is increased by 40% and 80% following administration of ranolazine 500 mg twice daily and 1000 mg twice daily, respectively. If co-administered with RANEXA 1000 mg twice daily, do not exceed metformin doses of 1700 mg/day
                                                    [see ].
                                                        Drug Interactions (7.2)
                                       
                                    
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         