
                     
                     
                     
                        Drug Interactions:
                     
                     
                        1.  Because dopamine is metabolized by monoamine oxidase (MAO), inhibition of this enzyme prolongs and potentiates the effect of dopamine. Patients who have been treated with 
                              MAO inhibitors
                            within two to three weeks prior to the administration of dopamine HCl should receive initial doses of dopamine HCl no greater than one-tenth (1/10) of the usual dose.
                        2.  Concurrent administration of dopamine HCl and 
                              diuretic agents 
                           may produce an additive or potentiating effect on urine flow.
                        3.  
                              Tricyclic antidepressants
                            may potentiate the pressor response to adrenergic agents.
                        4.  Cardiac effects of dopamine are antagonized by 
                              beta-adrenergic blocking agents
                           , such as propranolol and metroprolol. The peripheral vasoconstriction caused by high doses of dopamine HCl is antagonized by
                               alpha-adrenergic blocking agents
                           . Dopamine-induced renal and mesenteric vasodilation is not antagonized by either alpha- or beta-adrenergic blocking agents.
                        5.
                                Haloperidol 
                           appears to have strong central antidopaminergic properties.  Haloperidol and haloperidol-like drugs suppress the dopaminergic renal and mesenteric vasodilation induced at low rates of dopamine infusion.

                           
6.  
                              Cyclopropane or halogenated hydrocarbon anesthetics
                            increase cardiac autonomic irritability and may sensitize the myocardium to the action of certain intravenously administered catecholamines, such as dopamine. The interaction appears to be related both to pressor activity and to the beta-adrenergic stimulating properties of these catecholamines, and may produce ventricular arrhythmias.  Therefore, EXTREME CAUTION should be exercised when administering dopamine HCl to patients receiving cyclopropane or halogenated hydrocarbon anesthetics. It has been reported that results of studies in animals indicated that dopamine-induced ventricular arrhythmias during anesthesia can be reversed by propranolol.
                        7.  The concomitant use of vasopressors, vasoconstricting agents and some 
                              oxytocic drugs
                            may result in severe persistent hypertension.  See Labor and Delivery below. 
                        8.  Administration of 
                              phenytoin
                            to patients receiving dopamine HCl has been reported to lead to hypotension and bradycardia. It is suggested that in patients receiving dopamine HCl, alternatives to phenytoin should be used if anticonvulsant therapy is needed.
                     
                     
                  
               