
               
               
               
                  7     DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
               
                  
                     
                        Strong-moderate CYP3A4 inhibitors (e.g., cyclosporine, ketoconazole, erythromycin, verapamil) and CYP3A4 inducers (e.g., rifampin) may affect everolimus concentrations. (7.1) Consider Zortress dose adjustment (5.14)
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1     Interactions with Strong Inhibitors or Inducers of CYP3A4 and P-glycoprotein
                     
                        Everolimus is mainly metabolized by CYP3A4 in the liver and to some extent in the intestinal wall and is a substrate for the multidrug efflux pump, P-glycoprotein (P-gp). Therefore, absorption and subsequent elimination of systemically absorbed everolimus may be influenced by medicinal products that affect CYP3A4 and/or P-gp. Concurrent treatment with strong inhibitors (e.g., ketoconazole, itraconazole, voriconazole, clarithromycin, telithromycin, ritonavir, boceprevir, telaprevir) and inducers (e.g., rifampin, rifabutin) of CYP3A4 is not recommended. Inhibitors of P-gp (e.g., digoxin, cyclosporine) may decrease the efflux of everolimus from intestinal cells and increase everolimus blood concentrations. In vitro, everolimus was a competitive inhibitor of CYP3A4 and of  CYP2D6, potentially increasing the concentrations of medicinal products eliminated by these enzymes. Thus, caution should be exercised when co-administering Zortress with CYP3A4 and CYP2D6 substrates with a narrow therapeutic index. [See Therapeutic Drug Monitoring (2.3)]  
                        All in vivo interaction studies were conducted without concomitant cyclosporine. Pharmacokinetic interactions between Zortress and concomitantly administered drugs are discussed below. Drug interaction studies have not been conducted with drugs other than those described below.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2     Cyclosporine (CYP3A4/P-gp Inhibitor and CYP3A4 Substrate)
                     
                        The steady-state Cmax and AUC estimates of everolimus were significantly increased by co-administration of single dose cyclosporine. [See Clinical Pharmacology (12.5)] Dose adjustment of Zortress might be needed if the cyclosporine dose is altered. [See Dosage and Administration (2.3)] Zortress had a clinically minor influence on cyclosporine pharmacokinetics in transplant patients receiving cyclosporine (Neoral). 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3     Ketoconazole and Other Strong CYP3A4 Inhibitors
                     
                        Multiple-dose ketoconazole administration to healthy volunteers significantly increased single dose estimates of everolimus Cmax, AUC, and half-life. It is recommended that strong inhibitors of CYP3A4 (e.g., ketoconazole, itraconazole, voriconazole, clarithromycin, telithromycin, ritonavir, boceprevir, telaprevir) should not be co-administered with Zortress.  [See 
                           Warnings and Precautions (
                           5.14
                           ), and 
                           Clinical 
                           Pharmaco
                           logy (12.5)] 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4     Erythromycin (Moderate CYP3A4 Inhibitor)
                     
                        Multiple-dose erythromycin administration to healthy volunteers significantly increased single dose estimates of everolimus Cmax, AUC, and half-life. If erythromycin is co-administered, everolimus blood concentrations should be monitored and a dose adjustment made as necessary. [See Clinical Pharmaco
                           logy (12.5)]
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.5     Verapamil (CYP3A4 and P-gp Substrate)
                     
                        Multiple-dose verapamil administration to healthy volunteers significantly increased single dose estimates of everolimus Cmax and AUC. Everolimus half-life was not changed. If verapamil is co-administered, everolimus blood concentrations should be monitored and a dose adjustment made as necessary. [See Clinical Pharmacology (12.5)]
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.6     Atorvastatin (CYP3A4 substrate) and Pravastatin (P-gp substrate)
                     
                        Single-dose administration of Zortress with either atorvastatin or pravastatin to healthy subjects did not influence the pharmacokinetics of atorvastatin, pravastatin and everolimus, as well as total HMG-CoA reductase bioreactivity in plasma to a clinically relevant extent. However, these results cannot be extrapolated to other HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors. Patients should be monitored for the development of rhabdomyolysis and other adverse reactions as described in the respective labeling for these products. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.7     Simvastatin and Lovastatin
                     
                        Due to an interaction with cyclosporine, clinical studies of Zortress with cyclosporine conducted in kidney transplant patients strongly discouraged patients with receiving HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors such as simvastatin and lovastatin. [See Warnings and Precautions (5.11)]
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.8     Rifampin (Strong CYP3A4/P-gp Inducers)
                     
                        Pretreatment of healthy subjects with multiple-dose rifampin followed by a single dose of Zortress increased everolimus clearance and decreased the everolimus Cmax and AUC estimates. Combination with rifampin is not recommended. [See Warnings and Precautions (5.14), Clinical Pharmacology (12.5)]
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.9     Midazolam (CYP3A4/5 substrate) 
                     
                        Single-dose administration of midazolam to healthy volunteers following administration of multiple-dose Zortress indicated that everolimus is a weak inhibitor of CYP3A4/5. Dose adjustment of midazolam or other CYP3A4/5 substrates is not necessary when Zortress is coadministered with midazolam or other CYP3A4/5 substrates. [See Clinical Pharmacology (12.5)]
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.10     Other Possible Interactions
                     
                        Moderate inhibitors of CYP3A4 and P-gp may increase everolimus blood concentrations (e.g., fluconazole; macrolide antibiotics; nicardipine, diltiazem; nelfinavir, indinavir, amprenavir). Inducers of CYP3A4 may increase the metabolism of everolimus and decrease everolimus blood concentrations (e.g., St. John’s Wort [Hypericum perforatum]; anticonvulsants: carbamazepine, phenobarbital, phenytoin; efavirenz, nevirapine).
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.11     Octreotide
                     
                        Coadministration of everolimus and depot octreotide increased octreotide Cmin by approximately 50%. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.12     Tacrolimus
                     
                        There is little to no pharmacokinetic interaction of tacrolimus on everolimus, and consequently, dose adjustment of Zortress is not necessary when Zortress is co-administered with tacrolimus.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         