
               
               
               
                  12     CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
                   
               
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1     Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Everolimus inhibits antigenic and interleukin (IL-2 and IL-15) stimulated activation and proliferation of T and B lymphocytes. 
                        In cells, everolimus binds to a cytoplasmic protein, the FK506 Binding Protein-12 (FKBP-12), to form an immunosuppressive complex (everolimus: FKBP-12) that binds to and inhibits the mammalian Target Of Rapamycin (mTOR), a key regulatory kinase. In the presence of everolimus phosphorylation of p70 S6 ribosomal protein kinase (p70S6K), a substrate of mTOR, is inhibited. Consequently, phosphorylation of the ribosomal S6 protein and subsequent protein synthesis and cell proliferation are inhibited. The everolimus: FKBP-12 complex has no effect on calcineurin activity.  
                        In rats and nonhuman primate models, everolimus effectively reduces kidney allograft rejection resulting in prolonged graft survival.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3     Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        Everolimus pharmacokinetics have been characterized after oral administration of single and multiple doses to adult kidney transplant patients, hepatically-impaired patients, and healthy subjects.
                        
                           Absorption
                        
                        After oral dosing, peak everolimus concentrations occur 1 to 2 hours post dose. Over the dose range of 0.5 mg to 2 mg twice daily, everolimus Cmax and AUC are dose proportional in transplant patients at steady-state.
                        
                           Food Effect
                        
                        In 24 healthy subjects, a high-fat breakfast (44.5 g fat) reduced everolimus Cmax by 60%, delayed Tmax by a median 1.3 hours, and reduced AUC by 16% compared with a fasting administration. To minimize variability, everolimus should be taken consistently with or without food. [See Dosage and Administration (2.6)]
                        
                           Distribution
                        
                        The blood-to-plasma ratio of everolimus is concentration dependent ranging from 17% to 73% over the range of 5 ng/mL to 5000 ng/mL. Plasma protein binding is approximately 74% in healthy subjects and in patients with moderate hepatic impairment. The apparent distribution volume associated with the terminal phase (Vz/F) from a single-dose pharmacokinetic study in maintenance kidney transplant patients is 342 to 107 L (range 128 to 589 L).
                        
                           Metabolism
                        
                        Everolimus is a substrate of CYP3A4 and P-gp. Following oral administration, everolimus is the main circulating component in human blood. Six main metabolites of everolimus have been detected in human blood, including three monohydroxylated metabolites, two hydrolytic ring-opened products, and a phosphatidylcholine conjugate of everolimus. These metabolites were also identified in animal species used in toxicity studies, and showed approximately 100-times less activity than everolimus itself.
                        
                           Excretion
                        
                        After a single dose of radiolabeled everolimus was given to transplant patients receiving cyclosporine, the majority (80%) of radioactivity was recovered from the feces and only a minor amount (5%) was excreted in urine. Parent drug was not detected in urine and feces. 
                        
                           Pharmacokinetics in Kidney Transplant Patients
                        
                        Steady-state is reached by Day 4 with an accumulation in blood concentrations of 2- to 3-fold compared with the exposure after the first dose. Table 4 below provides a summary of the steady-state pharmacokinetic parameters.
                        


                        


The half-life estimates from 12 maintenance renal transplant patients who received single doses of everolimus capsules at 0.75 mg or 2.5 mg with their maintenance cyclosporine regimen indicate that the pharmacokinetics of everolimus are linear over the clinically-relevant dose range.  Results indicate the half-life of everolimus in maintenance renal transplant patients receiving single doses of 0.75 mg or 2.5 mg Zortress during steady-state cyclosporine treatment was 30 ± 11 hours (range 19 to 53 hours).
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.5     Drug-Drug Interactions
                     
                        Everolimus is known to be a substrate for both cytochrome CYP3A4 and P-gp. The pharmacokinetic interaction between everolimus and concomitantly administered drugs is discussed below. Drug interaction studies have not been conducted with drugs other than those described below. [See Warnings and Precautions (5.14), Drug Interactions (7)]
                        
                           Cyclosporine (CYP3A4/P-gp Inhibitor and CYP3A4 Substrate): Zortress should be taken concomitantly with cyclosporine in kidney transplant patients.  Everolimus concentrations may decrease when doses of cyclosporine are reduced, unless the Zortress dose is increased. [See Dosage and Administration (2.1), Drug Interactions (7.2)]
                        In a single-dose study in healthy subjects, cyclosporine (Neoral) administered at a dose of 175 mg increased everolimus AUC by 168% (range, 46% to 365%) and Cmax by 82% (range, 25% to 158%) when administered with 2 mg Zortress compared with administration of Zortress alone. [See Drug Interactions (7.2)]
                        
                           Ketoconazole and Other Strong CYP3A4 Inhibitors:  Multiple-dose administration of 200 mg ketoconazole twice daily for 5 days to 12 healthy volunteers significantly increased everolimus Cmax, AUC, and half-life by 3.9-fold, 15-fold, and 89%, respectively, when co-administered with 2 mg Zortress. It is recommended that strong inhibitors of CYP3A4 (e.g., ketoconazole, itraconazole, voriconazole, clarithromycin, telithromycin, ritonavir, boceprevir, telaprevir)  should not be co-administered with Zortress. [See Warnings and Precautions (5.14), Drug Interactions (7.3)] 
                        
                           Erythromycin
                            (Moderate CYP3A4 Inhibitor)
                           : Multiple-dose administration of 500 mg erythromycin 3 times daily for 5 days to 16 healthy volunteers significantly increased everolimus Cmax, AUC, and half-life by 2.0-fold, 4.4-fold, and 39%, respectively, when co-administered with 2 mg Zortress. If erythromycin is co-administered, everolimus blood concentrations should be monitored and a dose adjustment made as necessary. [See Drug Interactions (7.4)]
                        
                           Verapamil (CYP3A4 Inhibitor and P-gp Substrate)
                           : Multiple-dose administration of 80 mg verapamil 3 times daily for 5 days to 16 healthy volunteers significantly increased everolimus Cmax 
                            and AUC by 2.3-fold and 3.5-fold, respectively, when co-administered with 2 mg Zortress. Everolimus half-life was not changed. If verapamil is co-administered, everolimus blood concentrations should be monitored and a dose adjustment made as necessary. [See 
                           Drug Interactions (7.5)]
                        
                           Atorvastatin (CYP3A4 Substrate) and Pravastat
                           i
                           n
                            
                           (P-gp Substrate): Following administration of a single dose of 2 mg Zortress to 12 healthy subjects, the concomitant administration of a single oral dose administration of atorvastatin 20 mg or pravastatin 20 mg only slightly decreased everolimus Cmax and AUC by 9% and 10%, respectively.  There was no apparent change in the mean T1/2 or median Tmax.  In the same study, the concomitant Zortress dose slightly increased the mean Cmax of atorvastatin by 11% and slightly decreased the AUC by 7%. The concomitant Zortress dose decreased the mean Cmax and AUC of pravastatin by 10% and 5%, respectively. No dosage adjustments are needed for concomitant administration of Zortress and atorvastatin and pravastatin. [See 
                           Drug Interactions (7.6)]    
                        
                           Midazolam  (CYP3A4/5 Substrate): In 25 healthy male subjects, co-administration of a single dose of midazolam 4 mg oral solution with steady-state everolimus (10 mg daily dose for 5 days) resulted in a 25% increase in midazolam Cmax and a 30% increase in midazolam AUC; whereas, the terminal half-life of midazolam and the metabolic AUC-ratio (1-hydroxymidazolam/midazolam) were not affected. [See Drug Interactions (7.9)]
                        
                           Rifampin (Strong CYP3A4 and P-gp Inducer): Pretreatment of 12 healthy subjects with multiple-dose rifampin (600 mg once-daily for 8 days) followed by a single dose of 4 mg Zortress increased everolimus clearance nearly 3-fold, and decreased Cmax by 58% and AUC by 63%. Combination with rifampin is not recommended. [See Drug Interactions (7.8)]
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.6     Specific Populations
                     
                        
                           Hepatic Impairment
                        
                        Relative to the AUC of everolimus in subjects with normal hepatic function, the average AUC in 6 patients with mild hepatic impairment (Child-Pugh Class A) was 1.6-fold higher following administration of a 10 mg single-dose. In 2 independently studied groups of 8 and 9 patients with moderate hepatic impairment (Child-Pugh Class B) the average AUC was 2.1-fold and 3.3-fold higher following administration of a 2 mg or a 10 mg single-dose, respectively; and in 6 patients with severe hepatic impairment (Child-Pugh Class C) the average AUC was 3.6-fold higher following administration of a 10 mg single-dose. For patients with mild hepatic impairment (Child-Pugh Class A), the dose should be reduced by approximately one-third of the normally recommended daily dose. For patients with moderate or severe hepatic impairment (Child-Pugh B or C), the initial daily dose should be reduced to approximately one-half of the normally recommended daily dose. Further dose adjustment and/or dose titration should be made if a patient’s whole blood trough concentration of everolimus, as measured by an LC/MS/MS assay, is not within the target trough concentration range of 3 to 8 ng/mL. [See Dosage and Administration (2.7)]
                        
                           Renal Impairment
                        
                        No pharmacokinetic studies in patients with renal impairment were conducted. Post-transplant renal function (creatinine clearance range 11 to 107 mL/min) did not affect the pharmacokinetics of everolimus, therefore, no dosage adjustments are needed in patients with renal impairment.
                        
                           Pediatrics
                        
                        The safety and efficacy of Zortress has not been established in pediatric patients.
                        
                           Geriatrics
                        
                        A limited reduction in everolimus oral CL of 0.33% per year was estimated in adults (age range studied was 16 to 70 years). There is no evidence to suggest that elderly patients will require a different dosage recommendation from younger adult patients.
                        
                           Race
                        
                        Based on analysis of population pharmacokinetics, oral clearance (CL/F) is, on average, 20% higher in black transplant patients.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.7     Everolimus Whole Blood Concentrations Observed in Kidney and in Liver Transplant Patients
                     
                        
                           Everolimus in Kidney Transplantation
                        
                        Based on exposure-efficacy and exposure-safety analyses of clinical trials and using an LC/MS/MS assay method, kidney transplant patients achieving everolimus whole blood trough concentrations ≥3.0 ng/mL have been found to have a lower incidence of treated biopsy-proven acute rejection compared with patients whose trough concentrations were below 3.0 ng/mL. Patients who attained everolimus trough concentrations within the range of 6 to 12 ng/mL had similar efficacy and more adverse reactions than patients who attained lower trough concentrations between 3 to 8 ng/mL. [See 
                           Dosage and Administration (2.3)] 
                        In the kidney clinical trial [See Clinical Studies (14.1)], everolimus whole blood trough concentrations were measured  at Days 3, 7, and 14 and Months 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 7, 9, and 12. The proportion of patients receiving 0.75 mg twice daily Zortress treatment regimen who had everolimus whole blood trough concentrations within the protocol specified target range of 3 to 8 ng/mL at Days 3, 7, and 14 were 55%, 71% and 69%, respectively. Approximately 80% of patients had everolimus whole blood trough concentrations within the 3 to 8 ng/mL target range by Month 1 and remained stable within range through Month 12. The median everolimus trough concentration for the 0.75 mg twice daily treatment group was between 3 and 8 ng/mL throughout the study duration.
                        
                           Everolimus in Liver Transplantation 
                        
                        In the liver clinical trial [See Clinical Studies (14.2)] Zortress dosing was initiated after 30 days following transplantation. Whole blood trough everolimus concentrations were measured within 5 days after first dose, followed by weekly intervals for 3 to 4 weeks, and then monthly thereafter. Approximately 49%, 37%, and 18% of patients, respectively, were below 3 ng/mL at 1, 2, and 4 weeks after initiation of Zortress dosing. The majority of patients (approximately 70% to 80%) had everolimus trough blood concentrations within the target range of 3 to 8 ng/mL after Month 2 through Month 12.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.8     Cyclosporine Concentrations Observed in Kidney Transplant Patients
                     
                        In the kidney transplant clinical trial [See Clinical Studies (14.1)], the target cyclosporine whole blood trough concentration for the Zortress treatment arm of 0.75 mg twice daily were 100 to 200 ng/mL through Month 1 post-transplant, 75 to 150 ng/mL at Months 2 and 3 post-transplant, 50 to 100 ng/mL at Month 4 post-transplant, and 25 to 50 ng/mL from Month 6 through Month 12 post-transplant. Table 5 below provides a summary of the observed cyclosporine whole blood trough concentrations during the study.
                        


                     



                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.9     Tacrolimus Concentrations in Liver Transplant 
                     
                        In the liver transplant clinical trial [See Clinical Studies (14.2)], the target tacrolimus whole blood trough concentrations were greater than or equal to 8 ng/mL in the first 30 days post-transplant. The protocol required that patients had a tacrolimus trough concentration of at least 8 ng/mL in the week prior to initiation of Zortress. Zortress was initiated after 30 days post-transplant. At that time, the target tacrolimus trough concentrations were reduced to 3 to 5 ng/mL. Table 6 below provides a summary of the tacrolimus whole blood trough concentrations observed during the study.
                        


