
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
                  No specific drug-drug interactionstudies were performed. Risedronate is not metabolized and does not induce orinhibit hepatic microsomal drug-metabolizing enzymes (for example, CytochromeP450).
               
               
               
                  
                     
                        Calcium, antacids, or oral medications containing divalent cations interfere with the absorption of risedronate sodium (7.1).
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 Calcium Supplements/Antacids
                     
                        Coadministration of risedronate sodium and calcium,antacids, or oral medications containing divalent cations will interfere withthe absorption of risedronate sodium.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 Hormone Replacement Therapy
                     
                        One study of about 500 earlypostmenopausal women has been conducted to date in which treatment with risedronate sodium 5 mg daily plusestrogen replacement therapy was compared to estrogen replacement therapyalone. Exposure to study drugs was approximately 12 to 18 months and theprimary endpoint was change in BMD. If considered appropriate, risedronate sodium may be usedconcomitantly with hormone replacement therapy.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3 Aspirin/Nonsteroidal Anti-Inflammatory Drugs
                     
                        Of over 5,700 patients enrolled in the risedronate sodium Phase 3 osteoporosis studies, aspirin use was reported by 31% of patients, 24% of whom were regular users (3 or more days per week). Forty-eight percent of patients reported NSAID use, 21% of whom were regular users. Among regular aspirin or NSAID users, the incidence of upper gastrointestinal adverse experiences in placebo-treated patients (24.8%) was similar to that in risedronate sodium-treated patients (24.5%).
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4 H2 Blockers and Proton Pump Inhibitors (PPIs)
                     
                        Of over 5,700 patients enrolled in the risedronate sodium Phase 3 osteoporosis studies, 21% used H2 blockers and/or PPIs. Among these patients, the incidence of upper gastrointestinal adverse experiences in the placebo-treated patients was similar to that in risedronate sodium-treated patients.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         