
               
               
               7	DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
                  This section describes clinically relevant drug interactions with VIREAD. Drug interactions studies are described elsewhere in the labeling [See Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)]. 
                  
               
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           Didanosine: Coadministration increases didanosine concentrations. Use with caution and monitor for evidence of didanosine toxicity (e.g., pancreatitis, neuropathy). Consider dose reductions or discontinuations of didanosine if warranted. (7.1)
                           Atazanavir: Coadministration decreases atazanavir concentrations and increases tenofovir concentrations. Use atazanavir with VIREAD only with additional ritonavir; monitor for evidence of tenofovir toxicity. (7.2)
                           Lopinavir/ritonavir: Coadministration increases tenofovir concentrations. Monitor for evidence of tenofovir toxicity. (7.3)
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1	Didanosine
                     
                        Coadministration of VIREAD and didanosine should be undertaken with caution and patients receiving this combination should be monitored closely for didanosine-associated adverse reactions. Didanosine should be discontinued in patients who develop didanosine-associated adverse reactions.
                        When administered with VIREAD, Cmax and AUC of didanosine (administered as either the buffered or enteric-coated formulation) increased significantly [See Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)]. The mechanism of this interaction is unknown. Higher didanosine concentrations could potentiate didanosine-associated adverse reactions, including pancreatitis and neuropathy. Suppression of CD4+ cell counts has been observed in patients receiving tenofovir disoproxil fumarate (tenofovir DF) with didanosine 400 mg daily. 
                        In adults weighing >60 kg, the didanosine dose should be reduced to 250 mg when it is coadministered with VIREAD. Data are not available to recommend a dose adjustment of didanosine for patients weighing <60 kg. When coadministered, VIREAD and didanosine EC may be taken under fasted conditions or with a light meal (<400 kcal, 20% fat). Coadministration of didanosine buffered tablet formulation with VIREAD should be under fasted conditions. 
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2	Atazanavir 
                     
                        Atazanavir has been shown to increase tenofovir concentrations [See Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)]. The mechanism of this interaction is unknown. Patients receiving atazanavir and VIREAD should be monitored for VIREAD-associated adverse reactions. VIREAD should be discontinued in patients who develop VIREAD-associated adverse reactions.
                        VIREAD decreases the AUC and Cmin of atazanavir [See Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)]. When coadministered with VIREAD, it is recommended that atazanavir 300 mg is given with ritonavir 100 mg. Atazanavir without ritonavir should not be coadministered with VIREAD.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3	Lopinavir/Ritonavir
                     
                        Lopinavir/ritonavir has been shown to increase tenofovir concentrations [See Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)]. The mechanism of this interaction is unknown. Patients receiving lopinavir/ritonavir and VIREAD should be monitored for VIREAD-associated adverse reactions. VIREAD should be discontinued in patients who develop VIREAD-associated adverse reactions.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4	Drugs Affecting Renal Function
                     
                        Since tenofovir is primarily eliminated by the kidneys [See Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)], coadministration of VIREAD with drugs that reduce renal function or compete for active tubular secretion may increase serum concentrations of tenofovir and/or increase the concentrations of other renally eliminated drugs. Some examples include, but are not limited to cidofovir, acyclovir, valacyclovir, ganciclovir, and valganciclovir. Drugs that decrease renal function may also increase serum concentrations of tenofovir.
                        In the treatment of chronic hepatitis B, VIREAD should not be administered in combination with HEPSERA (adefovir dipivoxil).
                     
                  
               
            
         