
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  
                  Microbiology

                     

                  
                  Dicloxacillin exerts a bactericidal action against 
penicillin-susceptible microorganisms during the state of active multiplication. 
All penicillins inhibit the biosynthesis of the bacterial cell wall.
                  The drugs in this class are highly resistant to inactivation by 
staphylococcal penicillinase and are active against penicillinase-producing and 
nonpenicillinase-producing strains of Staphylococcus aureus. 
The penicillinase- resistant penicillins are active in vitro against a variety of other bacteria.
                  
                     

                  
                  
                  
                  
                  Susceptibility Plate Testing
                  Quantitative methods of susceptibility testing that require 
measurements of zone diameters or minimal inhibitory concentrations (MICs) give 
the most precise estimates of antibiotic susceptibility. One such procedure has 
been recommended for use with discs to test susceptibility to this class of 
drugs. Interpretations correlate diameters on the disc test with MIC values.
                  A penicillinase-resistant class disc may be used to determine microbial 
susceptibility to dicloxacillin.
                  
                     TABLE I shows the interpretation of test results for 
penicillinase-resistant penicillins using the FDA Standard Disc Test Method 
(formerly Bauer-Kirby-Sherris-Turck method) of disc bacteriological 
susceptibility testing for staphylococci with a disc containing 5 micrograms of 
methicillin sodium.
                  With this procedure, a report from a laboratory of “susceptible” indicates 
that the infecting organism is likely to respond to therapy. A report of 
“resistant” indicates that the infecting organism is not likely to respond to 
therapy. A report of “intermediate” susceptibility suggests that the organism 
might be susceptible if high doses of the antibiotic are used, or if the 
infection is confined to tissues and fluids (e.g., urine) in which high 
antibiotic levels are attained.
                  In general, all staphylococci should be tested against the penicillin G disc 
and against the methicillin disc. Routine methods of antibiotic susceptibility 
testing may fail to detect strains of organisms resistant to the 
penicillinase-resistant penicillins. For this reason, the use of large inocula 
and 48 hour incubation periods may be necessary to obtain accurate 
susceptibility studies with these antibiotics. Bacterial strains which are 
resistant to one of the penicillinase-resistant penicillins should be considered 
resistant to all of the drugs in the class.
                  
                  


                  




                  
                  Pharmacokinetics
                  Methicillin sodium is readily destroyed by gastric acidity and 
must be administered by intramuscular or intravenous injection. The isoxazolyl 
penicillins (cloxacillin, dicloxacillin and oxacillin) and nafcillin are more 
acid-resistant and may be administered orally.
                  Absorption of the isoxazolyl penicillins after oral administration is rapid 
but incomplete; peak blood levels are achieved in 1-1.5 hours. In one study, 
after ingestion of a single 500 mg oral dose, peak serum concentrations range 
from 5-7 micrograms/milliliter for oxacillin, from 7.5-14.4 mcg/mL for 
cloxacillin and from 10-17 mcg/mL for dicloxacillin.
                  Oral absorption of cloxacillin, dicloxacillin, oxacillin and nafcillin is 
delayed when the drugs are administered after meals.
                  Once absorbed, the penicillinase-resistant penicillins bind to serum protein, 
mainly albumin. The degree of protein binding reported varies with the method of 
study and the investigator (see TABLE II).
                  
                  


                  




                  The penicillinase-resistant penicillins vary in the extent to which they are 
distributed in the body fluids. With normal doses, insignificant concentrations 
are found in the cerebrospinal fluid and aqueous humor. All the drugs in this 
class are found in therapeutic concentrations in the pleural, bile and amniotic 
fluids.
                  The penicillinase-resistant penicillins are rapidly excreted, primarily as 
unchanged drug in the urine by glomerular filtration and active tubular 
secretion. The elimination half-life for dicloxacillin is about 0.7 hour. 
Nonrenal elimination includes hepatic inactivation and excretion in bile.
               
               
            
         