
               
               
               7	DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
                  No drug interaction studies were conducted with DUAVEE. Results from in vitro and in vivo studies and clinical studies conducted with the conjugated estrogens or bazedoxifene components of DUAVEE are noted below:
               
               
               
                  
                     
                        No drug interaction studies were conducted with DUAVEE. Estrogens are metabolized partially by CYP3A4. Concomitant use of DUAVEE with CYP3A4 inhibitors may increase the exposure of conjugated estrogens and thereby may increase the risk of endometrial hyperplasia (7.1).
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1	Cytochrome P450 (CYP)
                     
                        
                           In vitro and in vivo studies have shown that estrogens are metabolized partially by cytochrome P450 3A4 (CYP3A4). Therefore, inducers or inhibitors of CYP3A4 may affect estrogen drug metabolism. Inducers of CYP3A4, such as St. John's Wort (Hypericum perforatum) preparations, phenobarbital, carbamazepine, and rifampin, may reduce plasma concentrations of estrogens, possibly resulting in a decrease in therapeutic effects and/or changes in the uterine bleeding profile.
                        Inhibitors of CYP3A4, such as erythromycin, clarithromycin, ketoconazole, itraconazole, ritonavir and grapefruit juice, may increase the exposure of conjugated estrogens resulting in an increased risk of endometrial hyperplasia. Therefore, for chronically administered CYP3A4 inhibitors (>30 days) concurrently administered with DUAVEE, adequate diagnostic measures, including directed or random endometrial sampling when indicated by signs and symptoms of endometrial hyperplasia, should be undertaken to rule out malignancy in postmenopausal women with undiagnosed persistent or recurring abnormal genital bleeding.
                        Bazedoxifene undergoes little or no cytochrome P450 (CYP)-mediated metabolism. Bazedoxifene does not induce or inhibit the activities of major CYP isoenzymes. In vitro data suggest that bazedoxifene is unlikely to interact with co-administered drugs via CYP-mediated metabolism.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2	Uridine Diphosphate Glucuronosyltransferase (UGT)
                     
                        Bazedoxifene undergoes metabolism by UGT enzymes in the intestinal tract and liver. The metabolism of bazedoxifene may be increased by concomitant use of substances known to induce UGTs, such as rifampin, phenobarbital, carbamazepine, and phenytoin. A reduction in bazedoxifene exposure may be associated with an increase risk of endometrial hyperplasia. Adequate diagnostic measures, including directed or random endometrial sampling when indicated, should be undertaken to rule out malignancy in postmenopausal women with undiagnosed persistent or recurring abnormal genital bleeding.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3	Atorvastatin
                     
                        Concomitant administration of bazedoxifene (40 mg daily) and atorvastatin (20 mg, single-dose) to healthy postmenopausal women did not affect the pharmacokinetics of bazedoxifene, atorvastatin or its active metabolites.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         