
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                  
                  The mechanism of trazodone’s antidepressant action is not fully understood, but is thought to be related to its potentiation of serotonergic activity in the CNS.
                  
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                  
                  Preclinical studies have shown that trazodone selectively inhibits neuronal reuptake of serotonin and acts as an antagonist at 5-HT-2A/2C serotonin receptors.
                  Trazodone is not a monoamine oxidase inhibitor and, unlike amphetamine-type drugs, does not stimulate the central nervous system.
                  Trazodone antagonizes alpha 1-adrenergic receptors, a property which may be associated with postural hypotension.
                  
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                  
                  
                     Absorption
                  
                  In humans, trazodone hydrochloride is well absorbed after oral administration without selective localization in any tissue. When trazodone hydrochloride is taken shortly after ingestion of food, there may be an increase in the amount of drug absorbed, a decrease in maximum concentration and a lengthening in the time to maximum concentration. Peak plasma levels occur approximately one hour after dosing when trazodone hydrochloride is taken on an empty stomach or 2 hours after dosing when taken with food.
                  
                     Metabolism
                  
                  
                     In vitro studies in human liver microsomes show that trazodone is metabolized, via oxidative cleavage, to an active metabolite, m-chlorophenylpiperazine (mCPP) by CYP3A4. Other metabolic pathways that may be involved in the metabolism of trazodone have not been well characterized. Trazodone is extensively metabolized; less than 1% of an oral dose is excreted unchanged in the urine.
                  
                     Elimination
                  
                  In some patients trazodone may accumulate in the plasma.
                  
                     Protein Binding
                  
                  Trazodone is 89 to 95% protein bound in vitro at concentrations attained with therapeutic doses in humans.
               
               
            
         