
               
               
               PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     NIACIN
                     
                        Niacin, or vitamin B3, is a water-soluble vitamin absorbed in the stomach and upper small intestine, and refers to both nicotinic acid and niacinamide. Niacin circulates in the plasma as nicotinic acid and nicotinamide. It is biosynthetically converted into nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD+) and the phosphorylated dinucleotide nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NADP+). NAD and NADP are coenzymes in a wide variety of enzymatic oxidation-reduction reactions. The antioxidant enzyme glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) maintains the level of NADPH which is important for glutathione production. However, G6PD activity has been shown to be low in some acne patients.22 
                           DermaNIC™ provides niacin as Quadracin™ which contains:
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           NICOTINAMIDE
                           
                              Nicotinamide is the amide derivative of nicotinic acid, and is provided as niacinamide. In vivo, nicotinamide is incorporate into nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD) and nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NADP). Nicotinamide has been shown to have anti-inflammatory activities, and has been shown to inhibit lipopolysaccharide-induced TNF-alpha in a number of animal studies. It is thought that this inhibition of TNF-alpha is mediated via inhibition, at the gene transcription level, of NF-Kappa B, which in turn inhibits TNF-alpha. Nicotinamide has also been shown to decrease the production of IL-12 and TNF-alpha in cultures of whole blood from prediabetic and diabetic subjects and also in healthy subjects.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           NICOTINIC ACID
                           
                              Nicotinic acid is an essential dietary constituent, the lack of which leads to pellagra, a condition characterized by an erythematous skin eruption as well as gastrointestinal and neurological symptoms. Nicotinic acid is converted to nicotinamide in vivo. Recent studies suggest that nicotinic acid may inhibit vascular oxidative stress, redox-sensitive genes and monocyte adhesion to human aortic endothelial cells; implying that nicotinic acid inhibits vascular inflammation and has antiatherosclerotic properties independent of, and in addition to, its lipid-modulating effects. Studies have shown that the cutaneous vasodilation nicotinic acid induces - resulting in the so-called "niacin flush" that is harmless but causes some patients discomfort and prevents them from continuing to use nicotinic acid, likely subsides after a couple of doses and/or continued use. Also included in this formulation are two niacin derivative conjugates: 1) INOSITOL NICOTINATE - Inositol nicotinate is a conjugated derivative of nicotinic acid that appears to be slowly metabolized, and therefore is less likely to cause flushing while still delivering the nicotinic acid moiety with the added benefit of inositol; and 2) CHROMIUM POLYNICOTINATE - Chromium polynicotinate is another nicotinic acid derivative conjugate that delivers the nicotinic acid moiety with the added benefit of chromium.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     ZINC
                     
                        The zinc in this product is supplied as Zinc-NACx®, which also provides the glutathione precursor n-acetyl-cysteine (NAC). Zinc plays a role in the folate cycle via the zinc metalloenzyme betaine homocysteine methyl transferase (BHMT). In addition, the antioxidant enzyme superoxide dismutase (SOD) requires zinc as a cofactor. Zinc acts on inflammatory cells, especially granulocytes.2  Studies show that oxidative stress exists in acne patients.21  Zinc levels have been reported to be low in patients with acne.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         