
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Calcitonin-salmon is a calcitonin receptor agonist. Calcitonin-salmon acts primarily on bone, but direct renal effects and actions on the gastrointestinal tract are also recognized. Calcitonin-salmon appears to have actions essentially identical to calcitonins of mammalian origin, but its potency per mg is greater and it has a longer duration of action.
                        The actions of calcitonin on bone and its role in normal human bone physiology are still not completely elucidated, although calcitonin receptors have been discovered in osteoclasts and osteoblasts.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        The information below, describing the clinical pharmacology of calcitonin, has been derived from studies with injectable calcitonin-salmon. The mean bioavailability of calcitonin-salmon nasal spray is approximately 3% of the injectable calcitonin-salmon in healthy subjects and, therefore, the conclusions concerning the clinical pharmacology of this preparation may be different.
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Bone
                              
                              Single injections of calcitonin-salmon caused a marked transient inhibition of the ongoing bone resorptive process. With prolonged use, there is a persistent, smaller decrease in the rate of bone resorption. Histologically, this is associated with a decreased number of osteoclasts and an apparent decrease in their resorptive activity.
                              In healthy adults, who have a relatively low rate of bone resorption, the administration of exogenous calcitonin-salmon results in decreases in serum calcium within the limits of the normal range. In healthy children and in patients whose bone resorption is more rapid, decreases in serum calcium are more pronounced in response to calcitonin-salmon.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Kidney
                              
                              Studies with injectable calcitonin-salmon show increases in the excretion of filtered phosphate, calcium, and sodium by decreasing their tubular reabsorption. Comparable studies have not been conducted with Fortical nasal spray.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Gastrointestinal Tract
                              
                              Some evidence from studies with injectable preparations suggests that calcitonin-salmon may have effects on the gastrointestinal tract. Short-term administration of injectable calcitonin-salmon results in marked transient decreases in the volume and acidity of gastric juice and in the volume and the trypsin and amylase content of pancreatic juice. Whether these effects continue to be elicited after each injection of calcitonin-salmon during chronic therapy has not been investigated. These studies have not been conducted with Fortical nasal spray.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Calcium Homeostasis
                              
                              In two clinical studies designed to evaluate the pharmacodynamic response to calcitonin-salmon nasal spray, administration of 100-1600 International Units to healthy volunteers resulted in rapid and sustained small decreases within the normal range for both total serum calcium and serum ionized calcium. Single doses of calcitonin-salmon greater than 400 International Units did not produce any further biological response to the drug.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        The pharmacokinetic properties of Fortical nasal spray after multiple dose administration were shown to be similar to that of a commercially available calcitonin-salmon product in healthy volunteers. Fortical nasal spray is absorbed rapidly by the nasal mucosa. In healthy volunteers approximately 3% (range 0.3%-30.6%) of a nasally administered dose is bioavailable compared to the same dose administered by intramuscular injection. Peak plasma concentrations of drug appear approximately 10 minutes after nasal administration. The terminal half-life (t1/2) of calcitonin-salmon is calculated to be about 23 minutes. There is no accumulation of the drug on repeated nasal administration at 10 hour intervals for up to 15 days. Absorption of Fortical nasal spray has not been studied in postmenopausal women.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         