
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  

                  

                  Pharmacokinetics
The pharmacokinetics of
            stavudine have been evaluated in HIV-infected adult and pediatric patients
            (Tables 1 to 3). Peak plasma concentrations (Cmax) and
            area under the plasma concentration-time curve (AUC) increased in proportion to
            dose after both single and multiple doses ranging from 0.03 to 4 mg/kg. There
            was no significant accumulation of stavudine with repeated administration every
            6, 8, or 12 hours.
 
Absorption
 
Following oral administration,
            stavudine is rapidly absorbed, with peak plasma concentrations occurring within
            1 hour after dosing. The systemic exposure to stavudine is the sameas capsules
            or solution. Steady-state pharmacokinetic parameters of stavudine in
            HIV-infected adults are shown in Table 1. 

                  


                  



Distribution
 
Binding of stavudine to
            serum proteins was negligible over the concentration range of 0.01 to 11.4
            mcg/mL. Stavudine distributes equally between red blood cells and plasma. Volume
            of distribution is shown in Table 2.
 
Metabolism

                  
Metabolism plays
            a limited role in the clearance of stavudine. Unchanged stavudine was the major
            drug-related component circulating in plasma after an 80 mg dose of 14C-stavudine, while metabolites constituted minor components
            of the circulating radioactivity. Minor metabolites include oxidized stavudine,
            glucuronide conjugates of stavudine and its oxidized metabolite, and an N-acetylcysteine conjugate of the ribose after glycosidic
            cleavage, suggesting that thymine is also a metabolite of
            stavudine.
 
Elimination
 
Following an 80 mg dose of 14C-stavudine to healthy subjects, approximately 95% and 3% of
            the total radioactivity was recovered in urine and feces, respectively.
            Radioactivity due to parent drug in urine and feces was 73.7% and 62%,
            respectively. The mean terminal elimination half-life is approximately 2.3 hours
            following single oral doses. Mean renal clearance of the parent compound is
            approximately 272 mL/min, accounting for approximately 67% of the apparent oral
            clearance.

                  
In HIV-infected patients, renal elimination of unchanged drug
            accounts for about 40% of the overall clearance regardless of the route of
            administration (Table 2). The mean renal clearance was about twice the average
            endogenous creatinine clearance, indicating active tubular secretion in addition
            to glomerular filtration.

                  


                  



                  
                  Special Populations

                  

                  
Pediatric
 
For
            pharmacokinetic properties of stavudine in pediatric patients see Table 3.

                  

Renal Impairment




                  
Data from two
            studies in adults indicated that the apparent oral clearance of stavudine
            decreased and the terminal elimination half-life increased as creatinine
            clearance decreased (see Table 4). Cmax and Tmax were not significantly altered by renal impairment. The
            mean ± SD hemodialysis clearance value of stavudine was 120 ± 18 mL/min (n=12);
            the mean ± SD percentage of the stavudine dose recovered in the dialysate, timed
            to occur between 2 to 6 hours post-dose, was 31 ± 5%. Based on these
            observations, it is recommended that stavudine dosage be modified in patients
            with reduced creatinine clearance and in patients receiving maintenance
            hemodialysis (see 
                     
                DOSAGE AND
                ADMINISTRATION
              
                  ).

                  

Hepatic Impairment




                  
Stavudine
            pharmacokinetics were not altered in five non-HIV-infected patients with hepatic
            impairment secondary to cirrhosis (Child-Pugh classification B or C) following
            the administration of a single 40 mg dose.

                  
Geriatric

                  
Stavudine
            pharmacokinetics have not been studied in patients less then 65 years of age. (See
            
                     
                PRECAUTIONS: Geriatric
                Use
              .
            )

                  
Gender

                  
A population pharmacokinetic analysis of
            data collected during a controlled clinical study in HIV-infected patients
            showed no clinically important differences between males (n=291) and females
            (n=27).

                  
Race

                  
A population pharmacokinetic analysis of data
            collected during a controlled clinical study in HIV-infected patients showed no
            clinically important differences between races (n=233 Caucasian, 39
            African-American, 41 Hispanic, 1 Asian, and 4 other).

                  

                  

                  

                  

               
               
            
         