
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        12.1     Mechanism of Action
                     
                     
                        Esomeprazole is a proton pump inhibitor that suppresses gastric acid secretion by specific inhibition of the H+/K+-ATPase in the gastric parietal cell. The S- and R-isomers of omeprazole are protonated and converted in the acidic compartment of the parietal cell forming the active inhibitor, the achiral sulphenamide. By acting specifically on the proton pump, esomeprazole blocks the final step in acid production, thus reducing gastric acidity. This effect is dose-related up to a daily dose of 20 to 40 mg and leads to inhibition of gastric acid secretion.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                     
                     
                        
                           Antisecretory Activity
                        
                        The effect of esomeprazole magnesium on intragastric pH was determined in patients with symptomatic gastroesophageal reflux disease in two separate studies. In the first study of 36 patients, 44.6 mg of esomeprazole magnesium (equivalent to 40 mg of esomeprazole) and 22.3 mg of esomeprazole magnesium (equivalent to 20 mg of esomeprazole) were administered over 5 days. The results are shown in Table 3:
                        


                        


In a second study, the effect on intragastric pH of esomeprazole magnesium 44.6 mg administered once daily over a five-day period was similar to the first study, (% time with pH >4 was 68% or 16.3 hours).
                        
                           Serum Gastrin Effects
                        
                        The effect of esomeprazole magnesium on serum gastrin concentrations was evaluated in approximately 2,700 patients in clinical trials up to 8 weeks and in over 1,300 patients for up to 6 to 12 months. The mean fasting gastrin level increased in a dose-related manner. This increase reached a plateau within two to three months of therapy and returned to baseline levels within four weeks after discontinuation of therapy.
                        Increased gastrin causes enterochromaffin-like cell hyperplasia and increased serum Chromogranin A (CgA) levels. The increased CgA levels may cause false positive results in diagnostic investigations for neuroendocrine tumors.
                        
                           Enterochromaffin-like (ECL) Cell Effects
                        
                        In 24-month carcinogenicity studies of omeprazole in rats, a dose-related significant occurrence of gastric ECL cell carcinoid tumors and ECL cell hyperplasia was observed in both male and female animals [see Nonclinical Toxicology (13.1)
                           ]. Carcinoid tumors have also been observed in rats subjected to fundectomy or long-term treatment with other proton pump inhibitors or high doses of H2-receptor antagonists.
                        Human gastric biopsy specimens have been obtained from more than 3,000 patients treated with omeprazole in long-term clinical trials. The incidence of ECL cell hyperplasia in these studies increased with time; however, no case of ECL cell carcinoids, dysplasia, or neoplasia has been found in these patients.
                        In over 1,000 patients treated with esomeprazole magnesium (10, 20, or 40 mg/day) up to 6 to 12 months, the prevalence of ECL cell hyperplasia increased with time and dose. No patient developed ECL cell carcinoids, dysplasia, or neoplasia in the gastric mucosa.
                        
                           Endocrine Effects
                        
                        Esomeprazole magnesium had no effect on thyroid function when given in oral doses of 22.3 mg or 44.6 mg for 4 weeks. Other effects of esomeprazole on the endocrine system were assessed using omeprazole studies. Omeprazole given in oral doses of 30 or 40 mg for 2 to 4 weeks had no effect on carbohydrate metabolism, circulating levels of parathyroid hormone, cortisol, estradiol, testosterone, prolactin, cholecystokinin, or secretin.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                     
                        
                           Absorption
                        
                        Following single oral administration of esomeprazole strontium delayed-release capsules 49.3 mg (equivalent to 40 mg of esomeprazole) in 36 healthy adults under fasting conditions, the peak plasma concentrations (Cmax) of esomeprazole occurred at approximately 1.7 hours post-dose. Mean esomeprazole Cmax and area under the plasma concentration‑time curve (AUC) were comparable to those for esomeprazole magnesium delayed-release capsules 44.6 mg (equivalent to 40 mg of esomeprazole). In a study using esomeprazole magnesium delayed-release capsules, esomeprazole Cmax increased proportionally when the dose was increased, and there was a three‑fold increase in esomeprazole AUC when the dose was increased from 22.3 mg (equivalent to 20 mg of esomeprazole) to 44.6 mg. Systemic bioavailability will increase following multiple dosing and esomeprazole AUC is expected to increase to approximately 2.6‑fold after once daily dosing of esomeprazole strontium delayed-release capsules 49.3 mg for 5 days. 
                        In one single dose study in 39 healthy adult subjects under fasting conditions, the capsule contents of esomeprazole strontium delayed-release capsules 49.3 mg were sprinkled onto one tablespoon of applesauce, mean esomeprazole Cmax and AUC were comparable to those for esomeprazole magnesium delayed-release capsules 44.6 mg administered under the same conditions. In a food-effect study, the AUC after administration of a single 49.3 mg dose of esomeprazole strontium delayed-release capsules decreased by 52% after a high fat meal compared to fasting conditions. Esomeprazole strontium delayed-release capsules should be taken at least one hour before meals.
                        


                        



                           Distribution
                        
                        Esomeprazole is 97% bound to plasma proteins. Plasma protein binding is constant over the concentration range of 2 to 20 μmol/L. The apparent volume of distribution at steady-state in healthy volunteers is approximately 16 L.
                        
                           Metabolism
                        
                        Esomeprazole is extensively metabolized in the liver by the cytochrome P450 (CYP) enzyme system. The metabolites of esomeprazole lack antisecretory activity. The major part of esomeprazole’s metabolism is dependent upon the CYP2C19 isoenzyme, which forms the hydroxy and desmethyl metabolites. The remaining amount is dependent on CYP3A4 which forms the sulphone metabolite. CYP2C19 isoenzyme exhibits polymorphism in the metabolism of esomeprazole, since some 3% of Caucasians and 15 to 20% of Asians lack CYP2C19 and are termed Poor Metabolizers. At steady state, the ratio of AUC in Poor Metabolizers to AUC in the rest of the population (Extensive Metabolizers) is approximately 2.
                        Following administration of equimolar doses, the S- and R-isomers are metabolized differently by the liver, resulting in higher plasma levels of the S- than of the R-isomer.
                        
                           Excretion
                        
                        The plasma elimination half-life of esomeprazole is approximately 1 to 1.5 hours. Less than 1% of parent drug is excreted in the urine. Approximately 80% of an oral dose of esomeprazole is excreted as inactive metabolites in the urine, and the remainder is found as inactive metabolites in the feces.
                        
                           Combination Therapy with Antimicrobials
                        
                        Esomeprazole magnesium 44.6 mg once daily was given in combination with clarithromycin 500 mg twice daily and amoxicillin 1000 mg twice daily for 7 days to 17 healthy male and female subjects. The mean steady-state AUC and Cmax of esomeprazole increased by 70% and 18%, respectively, during triple combination therapy compared to treatment with esomeprazole alone. The observed increase in esomeprazole exposure during coadministration with clarithromycin and amoxicillin is not expected to produce significant safety concerns.
                        The pharmacokinetic parameters for clarithromycin and amoxicillin were similar during triple combination therapy and administration of each drug alone. However, the mean AUC and Cmax for 14-hydroxyclarithromycin increased by 19% and 22%, respectively, during triple combination therapy compared to treatment with clarithromycin alone. This increase in exposure to 14-hydroxyclarithromycin is not considered to be clinically significant.
                        
                           Concomitant Use with Clopidogrel 
                        
                        Results from a crossover study in healthy subjects have shown a pharmacokinetic interaction between clopidogrel (300 mg loading dose/75 mg daily maintenance dose) and esomeprazole magnesium 44.6 mg p.o. once daily) when co-administered for 30 days. Exposure to the active metabolite of clopidogrel was reduced by 35% to 40% over this time period. Pharmacodynamic parameters were also measured and demonstrated that the change in inhibition of platelet aggregation was related to the change in the exposure to clopidogrel active metabolite.
                        
                           Special Populations
                        
                        
                           Geriatric
                        
                        The esomeprazole AUC and Cmax values were slightly higher (25% and 18%, respectively) in the elderly as compared to younger subjects after administration of esomeprazole magnesium to steady state. Dosage adjustment based on age is not necessary.
                        
                           Gender
                        
                        The esomeprazole AUC and Cmax values were slightly higher (13%) in females than in males after administration of esomeprazole magnesium to steady state. Dosage adjustment based on gender is not necessary.
                        
                           Hepatic Insufficiency
                        
                        The steady state pharmacokinetics of esomeprazole obtained after administration of esomeprazole magnesium 44.6 mg once daily to 4 patients each with mild (Child Pugh A), moderate (Child Pugh Class B), and severe (Child Pugh Class C) liver insufficiency were compared to those obtained in 36 male and female GERD patients with normal liver function. In patients with mild and moderate hepatic insufficiency, the esomeprazole AUCs were within the range that could be expected in patients with normal liver function. In patients with severe hepatic insufficiency the AUCs were 2 to 3 times higher than in the patients with normal liver function. No dosage adjustment is recommended for patients with mild to moderate hepatic insufficiency (Child Pugh Classes A and B). However, in patients with severe hepatic insufficiency (Child Pugh Class C) esomeprazole strontium dose of 24.65 mg once daily should not be exceeded [see Dosage and Administration (2)
                           ].
                        
                           Renal Insufficiency
                        
                        The pharmacokinetics of esomeprazole in patients with renal impairment are not expected to be altered relative to healthy volunteers as less than 1% of esomeprazole is excreted unchanged in urine. In a study with a different strontium product and dose in patients with mild to moderate renal impairment, strontium clearance was reduced with the decrease in creatinine clearance. The pharmacokinetics of strontium in patients with severe renal impairment has not been characterized [see Use in Specific Populations (8.6)
                           ].
                        
                           Other pharmacokinetic observations
                        
                        Coadministration of oral contraceptives, diazepam, phenytoin, or quinidine did not seem to change the pharmacokinetic profile of esomeprazole.
                        Studies evaluating concomitant administration of esomeprazole magnesium and either naproxen (non-selective NSAID) or rofecoxib (COX-2 selective NSAID) did not identify any clinically relevant changes in the pharmacokinetic profiles of esomeprazole or these NSAIDs.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        12.4 Microbiology
                     
                     
                        Esomeprazole, amoxicillin, and clarithromycin triple therapy has been shown to be active against most strains of Helicobacter pylori (H. pylori) in vitro and in clinical infections [see Indications and Usage (1) and Clinical Studies (14)
                           ].
                        
                           Helicobacter pylori: Susceptibility testing of H. pylori isolates was performed for amoxicillin and clarithromycin using agar dilution methodology, and minimum inhibitory concentrations (MICs) were determined.
                        
                           Pretreatment Resistance: Clarithromycin pretreatment resistance rate (MIC ≥1 mcg/mL) to H. pylori was 15% (66/445) at baseline in all treatment groups combined. A total of >99% (394/395) of patients had H. pylori isolates that were considered to be susceptible (MIC ≤0.25 mcg/mL) to amoxicillin at baseline. One patient had a baseline H. pylori isolate with an amoxicillin MIC = 0.5 mcg/mL.
                        
                           Clarithromycin Susceptibility Test Results and Clinical/Bacteriologic Outcomes: The baseline H. pylori clarithromycin susceptibility results and the H. pylori eradication results at the Day 38 visit are shown in Table 5:
                        


                        


Patients not eradicated of H. pylori following esomeprazole magnesium/amoxicillin/clarithromycin triple therapy will likely have clarithromycin resistant H. pylori isolates. Therefore, clarithromycin susceptibility testing should be done, when possible. Patients with clarithromycin resistant H. pylori should not be re-treated with a clarithromycin-containing regimen.
                        
                           Amoxicillin Susceptibility Test Results and Clinical/Bacteriological Outcomes:
                        
                        In the esomeprazole magnesium/amoxicillin/clarithromycin clinical trials, 83% (176/212) of the patients in the esomeprazole magnesium/amoxicillin/clarithromycin treatment group who had pretreatment amoxicillin susceptible MICs (≤0.25 mcg/mL) were eradicated of H. pylori, and 17% (36/212) were not eradicated of H. pylori. Of the 36 patients who were not eradicated of H. pylori on triple therapy, 16 had no post-treatment susceptibility test results and 20 had post-treatment H. pylori isolates with amoxicillin susceptible MICs. Fifteen of the patients who were not eradicated of H. pylori on triple therapy also had post-treatment H. pylori isolates with clarithromycin resistant MICs. There were no patients with H. pylori isolates who developed treatment emergent resistance to amoxicillin.
                        
                           Susceptibility Test for Helicobacter pylori: For susceptibility testing information about Helicobacter pylori, see Microbiology section in prescribing information for clarithromycin and amoxicillin.
                        
                           Effects on Gastrointestinal Microbial Ecology: Decreased gastric acidity due to any means, including proton pump inhibitors, increases gastric counts of bacteria normally present in the gastrointestinal tract. Treatment with proton pump inhibitors may lead to slightly increased risk of gastrointestinal infections such as Salmonella and Campylobacter and possibly Clostridium difficile in hospitalized patients.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         