
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
                  
                     See also Contraindications (4), Warnings and Precautions (5.1),  Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)
                  
               
               
               
                  
                     
                        Coadministration of KALETRA can alter the plasma concentrations of other drugs and other drugs may alter the plasma concentrations of lopinavir. The potential for drug-drug interactions must be considered prior to and during therapy. (4, 5.1, 7, 12.3)
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 Potential for KALETRA to Affect Other Drugs
                     
                        Lopinavir/ritonavir is an inhibitor of CYP3A and may increase plasma concentrations of agents that are primarily metabolized by CYP3A.  Agents that are extensively metabolized by CYP3A and have high first pass metabolism appear to be the most susceptible to large increases in AUC (> 3-fold) when co-administered with KALETRA. Thus, co-administration of KALETRA with drugs highly dependent on CYP3A for clearance and for which elevated plasma concentrations are associated with serious and/or life-threatening events is contraindicated. Co-administration with other CYP3A substrates may require a dose adjustment or additional monitoring as shown in Table 9.
                        Additionally, KALETRA induces glucuronidation.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 Potential For Other Drugs To Affect Lopinavir
                     
                        Lopinavir/ritonavir is a CYP3A substrate; therefore, drugs that induce CYP3A may decrease lopinavir plasma concentrations and reduce KALETRA’s therapeutic effect.  Although not observed in the KALETRA/ketoconazole drug interaction study, co-administration of KALETRA and other drugs that inhibit CYP3A may increase lopinavir plasma concentrations.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3 Established and Other Potentially Significant Drug Interactions
                     
                        Table 9 provides a listing of established or potentially clinically significant drug interactions. Alteration in dose or regimen may be recommended based on drug interaction studies or predicted interaction [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3) for magnitude of interaction].
                        


                     



                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4 Drugs with No Observed or Predicted Interactions with KALETRA  
                     
                        Drug interaction studies reveal no clinically significant interaction between KALETRA and desipramine (CYP2D6 probe), pravastatin, stavudine, lamivudine, omeprazole or ranitidine.
                        Based on known metabolic profiles, clinically significant drug interactions are not expected between KALETRA and fluvastatin, dapsone, trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole, azithromycin, erythromycin, or fluconazole.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         