
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  
Hydrochlorothiazide blocks the reabsorption of sodium and chloride ions, and it thereby increases the quantity of sodi­um traversing the distal tubule and the volume of water excret­ed. A portion of the additional sodium presented to the distal tubule is exchanged there for potassium and hydrogen ions. With continued use of hydro­chlorothiazide and depletion of sodium, compensatory mecha­nisms tend to increase this exchange and may produce excessive loss of potassium, hydrogen and chloride ions. Hydrochlorothiazide also decreases the excretion of cal­cium and uric acid, may increase the excretion of iodide and may reduce glomerular fil­tration rate. Metabolic toxicities associated with excessive elec­trolyte changes caused by hydrochlorothiazide have been shown to be dose-related.
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Pharmacokinetics and Metabolism
                     
                        
Hydrochlorothiazide is well absorbed (65% to 75%) fol­lowing oral administration. Absorption of hydrochlorothi­azide is reduced in patients with congestive heart failure.
 
Peak plasma concentrations are observed within 1 to 5 hours of dosing, and range from 70 to 490 ng/mL follow­ing oral doses of 12.5 to 100 mg. Plasma concentra­tions are linearly related to the administered dose. Concen­trations of hydrochlorothiazide are 1.6 to 1.8 times higher in whole blood than in plasma. Binding to serum proteins has been reported to be approxi­mately 40% to 68%. The plas­ma elimination half-life has been reported to be 6 to 15 hours. Hydrochlorothiazide is eliminated primarily by renal pathways. Following oral doses of 12.5 to 100 mg, 55% to 77% of the administered dose appears in urine and greater than 95% of the absorbed dose is excreted in urine as unchanged drug. In patients with renal disease, plasma con­centrations of hydrochlorothi­azide are increased and the elimination half-life is pro­longed.

                        
When hydrochloro­thiazide is adminis­tered with food, its bioavailabil­ity is reduced by 10%, the max­imum plasma concentration is reduced by 20%, and the time to maximum concentration increases from 1.6 to 2.9 hours.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        
Acute antihypertensive effects of thi­azides are thought to result from a reduction in blood vol­ume and cardiac output, sec­ondary to a natriuretic effect, although a direct vasodilatory mechanism has also been pro­posed. With chronic adminis­tration, plasma volume returns toward normal, but peripheral vascular resistance is de­creased. The exact mechanism of the antihypertensive effect of hydrochlorothiazide is not known.

                        
Thiazides do not affect normal blood pressure. Onset of action occurs within 2 hours of dos­ing, peak effect is observed at about 4 hours, and activity per­sists for up to 24 hours.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Clinical Studies
                     
                        
In an 87 patient 4-week double-blind, placebo-controlled, parallel group trial, patients who received hydrochloro­thiazide had reductions in seated systolic and diastolic blood pressure that were significantly greater than those seen in patients who received placebo. In published placebo-controlled trials com­paring 12.5 mg of hydrochlorothiazide to 25 mg, the 12.5 mg dose preserved most of the placebo-corrected blood pressure reduction seen with 25 mg.
                     
                  
               
            
         