
               
               
               
                  12  CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        12.1  
                        Mechanism of Action
                     
                     
                        The local mechanism by which continuously released LNG provides contraception has not been conclusively demonstrated. Studies of LNG-releasing IUSs suggest several mechanisms for pregnancy prevention: prevention of fertilization due to the thickening of the cervical mucus, which inhibits sperm passage through the cervix, and inhibition of sperm mobility and function (capacitation), and alteration of the endometrium.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        12.2  
                        Pharmacodynamics
                     
                     
                        LILETTA has mainly local progestogenic effects in the uterine cavity and cervix.  High local concentrations of LNG lead to morphological changes including stromal pseudodecidualization, glandular atrophy, a leukocytic infiltration, and a decrease in glandular and stromal mitoses. Changes in the uterine endometrium may lead to alterations in the menstrual bleeding pattern [see Warnings and Precautions 
                           (
                           
                              5.8
                           
                           )].  
                        In clinical trials with other LNG-releasing IUSs, ovulation was inhibited in some women but most cycles were ovulatory. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        12.3  
                        Pharmacokinetics
                     
                     
                        
                           Absorption
                        
                        Low doses of LNG are administered into the uterine cavity with the LILETTA intrauterine delivery system. The initial in vivo release rate is 18.6 μg/day and decreases to 16.3 μg/day at 1 year, 14.3 μg/day at 2 years, and 12.6 μg/day after 3 years.
                        In the phase 3 study, systemic LNG concentrations were assessed in a subset of subjects through Month 30 and in all subjects at Month 36. Plasma LNG concentrations following insertion of LILETTA are shown in Table 4.
                        


                        



                           Distribution
                        
                        The apparent volume of distribution of LNG at steady-state following oral administration is reported to be approximately 1.8 L/kg. It is about 98.9% protein-bound, principally to sex hormone binding globulin (SHBG) and, to a lesser extent, serum albumin.
                        
                           Metabolism
                        
                        Following absorption, LNG is conjugated at the 17β-OH position to form sulfate conjugates and, to a lesser extent, glucuronide conjugates in serum. Significant amounts of conjugated and unconjugated 3α, 5β-tetrahydrolevonorgestrel are also present in serum, along with much smaller amounts of 3α, 5α-tetrahydrolevonorgestrel and 16β-hydroxylevonorgestrel. LNG and its phase I metabolites are excreted primarily as glucuronide conjugates. Metabolic clearance rates may differ among individuals by several-fold, and this may account in part for wide individual variations in LNG concentrations seen in individuals using LNG–containing contraceptive products. In vitro studies have demonstrated that oxidative metabolism of LNG is catalyzed by CYP enzymes, especially CYP3A4.
                        
                           Excretion
                        
                        About 45% of LNG and its metabolites are excreted in the urine and about 32% are excreted in feces, mostly as glucuronide conjugates. The elimination half-life of LNG after a single oral administration is approximately 13.9 ± 3.2 hours.
                        
                           Specific Populations
                        
                        Pediatric: Safety and efficacy of LILETTA have been established in females of reproductive age. The LILETTA clinical trial included 11 subjects aged 16 to 17 years; no pregnancies occurred in these subjects.   
                        Race: The LILETTA clinical trial included 199 (13%) Black/African American subjects and 226 (15%) subjects of Hispanic ethnicity. Race does not appear to affect LNG concentrations following LILETTA insertion.
                        Obesity: The LILETTA clinical trial included overweight (24%), obese (24%), and morbidly obese (5%) women.  LNG systemic exposure decreased with increasing body weight; however, there was no apparent effect of body mass index (BMI) or body weight on contraceptive efficacy.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         