
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                        
                     
                  Orally administered erythromycin base and its salts are readily absorbed in the microbiologically active form. Interindividual variations in the absorption of erythromycin are, however, observed, and some patients do not achieve optimal serum levels. Erythromycin is largely bound to plasma proteins. After absorption, erythromycin diffuses readily into most body fluids. In the absence of meningeal inflammation, low concentrations are normally achieved in the spinal fluid but the passage of the drug across the blood-brain barrier increases in meningitis. Erythromycin crosses the placental barrier, but fetal plasma levels are low. The drug is excreted in human milk. Erythromycin is not removed by peritoneal dialysis or hemodialysis.

                  
Orally administered ERYTHROCIN STEARATE tablets are readily and reliably absorbed. Optimal serum levels of erythromycin are reached when the drug is taken in the fasting state or immediately before meals.

                  

                  Microbiology
                        

                     
                  Erythromycin acts by inhibition of protein synthesis by binding 50 S ribosomal subunits of susceptible organisms. It does not affect nucleic acid synthesis. Antagonism has been demonstrated in vitro between erythromycin and clindamycin, lincomycin, and chloramphenicol.
Many strains of Haemophilus influenzae are resistant to erythromycin alone, but are susceptible to erythromycin and sulfonamides used concomitantly.
Staphylococci resistant to erythromycin may emerge during a course of erythromycin therapy. Erythromycin has been shown to be active against most strains of the following microorganisms, both in vitro and in clinical infections as described in theINDICATIONS AND USAGEsection.

                  
                  
Gram-positive organisms
Corynebacterium diphtheriae
Corynebacterium minutissimum
Listeria monocytogenes
Staphylococcus aureus (resistant organisms may emerge during treatment)
Streptococcus pneumoniae
Streptococcus pyogenes

                  
Gram-negative organisms
Bordetella pertussis
Legionella pneumophila
Neisseria gonorrhoeae

                  
Other microorganisms
Chlamydia trachomatis
Entamoeba histolytica
Mycoplasma pneumoniae
Treponema pallidum
Ureaplasma urealyticum
The following in vitro data are available,
                     but their clinical significance is unknown.

                     
                  Erythromycin exhibits in vitro minimal inhibitory concentrations (MIC's) of 0.5or less against most (

                  
Gram-positive organisms
Viridans group streptococci

                  
Gram-negative organisms
Moraxella catarrhalis

                  
Susceptibility Tests
Dilution Techniques
Quantitative methods are used to determine antimicrobial minimum inhibitory concentrations (MIC's). These MIC's provide estimates of the susceptibility of bacteria to antimicrobial compounds. The MIC's should be determined using a standardized procedure. Standardized procedures are based on a dilution method1 (broth or agar) or equivalent with standardized inoculum concentrations and standardized concentrations of erythromycin powder. The MIC values should be interpreted according to the following criteria:

                  
MIC (Interpretation0.5Susceptible (S)1-4Intermediate (I)8Resistant (R)
Standardized susceptibility test procedures require the use of laboratory control microorganisms to control the technical aspects of the laboratory procedures. Standard erythromycin powder should provide the following MIC values:

                  
MicroorganismMIC (S. aureus ATCC 292130.12-0.5E. faecalis ATCC 292121-4
Diffusion Techniques
Quantitative methods that require measurement of zone diameters also provide reproducible estimates of the susceptibility of bacteria to antimicrobial compounds. One such standardized procedure2 requires the use of standardized inoculum concentrations. This procedure uses paper disks impregnated with 15-erythromycin to test the susceptibility of microorganisms to erythromycin.
Reports from the laboratory providing results of the standard single-disk susceptibility test with a 15-erythromycin disk should be interpreted according to the following criteria:

                  
Zone Diameter (mm)Interpretation23Susceptible (S)14-22Intermediate (I)13Resistant (R)Interpretation should be as stated above for results using dilution techniques. Interpretation involves correlation of the diameter obtained in the disk test with the MIC for erythromycin.
As with standardized dilution techniques, diffusion methods require the use of laboratory control microorganisms that are used to control the technical aspects of the laboratory procedures. For the diffusion technique, the 15-erythromycin disk should provide the following zone diameters in these laboratory test quality control strains:

                  
MicroorganismZone Diameter (mm)S. aureus ATCC 25923

               
               
            
         