
               
               
               DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
                  

                  

                  
                     Hypotension - Patients on Diuretic Therapy: 
Patients on diuretics and especially those in whom diuretic therapy was 
recently instituted, may occasionally experience an excessive reduction of blood 
pressure after initiation of therapy with lisinopril. The possibility of 
hypotensive effects with lisinopril can be minimized by either discontinuing the 
diuretic or increasing the salt intake prior to initiation of treatment with 
lisinopril. If it is necessary to continue the diuretic, initiate therapy with 
lisinopril at a dose of 5 mg daily, and provide close medical supervision after 
the initial dose until blood pressure has stabilized. (See 
                        WARNINGS
                      and 
                        DOSAGE AND 
ADMINISTRATION
                     .) When a diuretic is added to the therapy of a patient 
receiving lisinopril an additional antihypertensive effect is usually observed. 
Studies with ACE inhibitors in combination with diuretics indicate that the dose 
of the ACE inhibitor can be reduced when it is given with a diuretic. (See 
                        DOSAGE AND 
ADMINISTRATION
                     .)
                  
                     Antidiabetics: Epidemiological studies have 
suggested that concomitant administration of ACE inhibitors and antidiabetic 
medicines (insulins, oral hypoglycemic agents) may cause an increased 
blood-glucose-lowering effect with risk of hypoglycemia. This phenomenon 
appeared to be more likely to occur during the first weeks of combined treatment 
and in patients with renal impairment. In diabetic patients treated with oral 
antidiabetic agents or insulin, glycemic control should be closely monitored for 
hypoglycemia, especially during the first month of treatment with an ACE 
inhibitor.
                  
                     Non-steroidal Anti-inflammatory Agents: In some 
patients with compromised renal function who are being treated with 
non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, the co-administration of lisinopril may 
result in further deterioration of renal function. These effects are usually 
reversible. In a study in 36 patients with mild to moderate hypertension where 
the antihypertensive effects of lisinopril alone were compared to lisinopril 
given concomitantly with indomethacin, the use of indomethacin was associated 
with a reduced effect, although the difference between the two regimens was not 
significant.
                  
                     Other Agents: Lisinopril has been used 
concomitantly with nitrates and/or digoxin without evidence of clinically 
significant adverse interactions. This included post myocardial infarction 
patients who were receiving intravenous or transdermal nitroglycerin. No 
clinically important pharmacokinetic interactions occurred when lisinopril was 
used concomitantly with propranolol or hydrochlorothiazide. The presence of food 
in the stomach does not alter the bioavailability of lisinopril.
                  
                     Agents Increasing Serum Potassium: Lisinopril 
attenuates potassium loss caused by thiazide-type diuretics. Use of lisinopril 
with potassium-sparing diuretics (e.g., spironolactone, triamterene or 
amiloride), potassium supplements, or potassium-containing salt substitutes may 
lead to significant increases in serum potassium. Therefore, if concomitant use 
of these agents is indicated because of demonstrated hypokalemia, they should be 
used with caution and with frequent monitoring of serum potassium. 
Potassium-sparing agents should generally not be used in patients with heart 
failure who are receiving lisinopril.
                  
                     Lithium: Lithium toxicity has been reported in 
patients receiving lithium concomitantly with drugs which cause elimination of 
sodium, including ACE inhibitors. Lithium toxicity was usually reversible upon 
discontinuation of lithium and the ACE inhibitor. It is recommended that serum 
lithium levels be monitored frequently if lisinopril is administered 
concomitantly with lithium.
                  
                     Gold: Nitritoid reactions (symptoms include facial 
flushing, nausea, vomiting and hypotension) have been reported rarely in 
patients on therapy with injectable gold (sodium aurothiomalate) and concomitant 
ACE inhibitor therapy including lisinopril.
                  
                  
                  Carcinogenesis, Mutagenesis, Impairment of 
FertilityThere was no evidence of a tumorigenic effect when lisinopril was 
administered for 105 weeks to male and female rats at doses up to 90 mg/kg/day 
(about 56 or 9 times* the maximum recommended daily human 
dose, based on body weight and body surface area, respectively). There was no 
evidence of carcinogenicity when lisinopril was administered for 92 weeks to 
(male and female) mice at doses up to 135 mg/kg/day (about 84 times* the maximum recommended daily human dose). This dose was 6.8 
times the maximum human dose based on body surface area in mice.
                  
                     * Calculations assume a human weight of 50 kg and 
human body surface area of 1.62 m2.
                  Lisinopril was not mutagenic in the Ames microbial mutagen test with or 
without metabolic activation. It was also negative in a forward mutation assay 
using Chinese hamster lung cells. Lisinopril did not produce single strand DNA 
breaks in an in vitro alkaline elution rat hepatocyte 
assay. In addition, lisinopril did not produce increases in chromosomal 
aberrations in an in vitro test in Chinese hamster 
ovary cells or in an in vivo study in mouse bone 
marrow.
                  There were no adverse effects on reproductive performance in male and female 
rats treated with up to 300 mg/kg/day of lisinopril. This dose is 188 times and 
30 times the maximum human dose when based on mg/kg and mg/m2, respectively.
                  

               
               
            
         