
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        The mechanism of action of pimecrolimus in atopic dermatitis is not known. While the following have been observed, the clinical significance of these observations in atopic dermatitis is not known. It has been demonstrated that pimecrolimus binds with high affinity to macrophilin-12 (FKBP-12) and inhibits the calcium-dependent phosphatase, calcineurin. As a consequence, it inhibits T cell activation by blocking the transcription of early cytokines. In particular, pimecrolimus inhibits at nanomolar concentrations Interleukin-2 and interferon gamma (Th1-type) and Interleukin-4 and Interleukin-10 (Th2-type) cytokine synthesis in human T-cells. In addition, pimecrolimus prevents the release of inflammatory cytokines and mediators from mast cells in vitro after stimulation by antigen/IgE.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        
                           Absorption
                        
                        In adult subjects (n=52) being treated for atopic dermatitis [13%-62% Body Surface Area (BSA) involvement] for periods up to a year, a maximum pimecrolimus concentration of 1.4 ng/mL was observed among those subjects with detectable blood levels. In the majority of samples in adult (91%; 1,244/1,362) subjects, blood concentrations of pimecrolimus were below 0.5 ng/mL. Data on blood levels of pimecrolimus measured in pediatric subjects are described in Use in Specific Populations (8.4).
                        
                           Distribution
                        
                        Laboratory in vitro plasma protein binding studies using equilibrium gel filtration have shown that 99.5% of pimecrolimus in plasma is bound to proteins over the pimecrolimus concentration range of 2-100 ng/mL tested. The major fraction of pimecrolimus in plasma appears to be bound to various lipoproteins. As with other topical calcineurin inhibitors, it is not known whether pimecrolimus is absorbed into cutaneous lymphatic vessels or in regional lymph nodes.
                        
                           Metabolism
                        
                        Following the administration of a single oral radiolabeled dose of pimecrolimus numerous circulating O-demethylation metabolites were seen. Studies with human liver microsomes indicate that pimecrolimus is metabolized in vitro by the CYP3A sub-family of metabolizing enzymes. No evidence of skin mediated drug metabolism was identified in vivo using the minipig or in vitro using stripped human skin.
                        
                           Elimination
                        
                        Based on the results of the aforementioned radiolabeled study, following a single oral dose of pimecrolimus ~81% of the administered radioactivity was recovered, primarily in the feces (78.4%) as metabolites. Less than 1% of the radioactivity found in the feces was due to unchanged pimecrolimus.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         