
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              •Co-administration with probenecid is not recommended. (7.1)
                           
                              •Concomitant use of Amoxicillin and Clavulanate Potassium Extended Release Tablets and oral anticoagulants may increase the prolongation of prothrombin time. (7.2)
                           
                              •Coadministration with allopurinol increases the risk of rash. (7.3)
                           
                              •Amoxicillin and Clavulanate Potassium Extended Release Tablets may reduce efficacy of oral contraceptives. (7.4)
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 Probenecid
                     
                        Probenecid decreases the renal tubular secretion of amoxicillin. Concurrent use with Amoxicillin and Clavulanate Potassium Extended Release Tablets may result in increased and prolonged blood levels of amoxicillin. Coadministration of probenecid is not recommended.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 Oral Anticoagulants
                     
                        Abnormal prolongation of prothrombin time (increased international normalized ratio [INR]) has been reported in patients receiving amoxicillin and oral anticoagulants. Appropriate monitoring should be undertaken when anticoagulants are prescribed concurrently. Adjustments in the dose of oral anticoagulants may be necessary to maintain the desired level of anticoagulation.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3 Allopurinol
                     
                        The concurrent administration of allopurinol and amoxicillin substantially increases the incidence of rashes in patients receiving both drugs as compared to patients receiving amoxicillin alone. It is not known whether this potentiation of amoxicillin rashes is due to allopurinol or the hyperuricemia present in these patients. In controlled clinical trials of Amoxicillin and Clavulanate Potassium Extended Release Tablets, 25 patients received concomitant allopurinol and Amoxicillin and Clavulanate Potassium Extended Release Tablets. No rashes were reported in these patients. However, this sample size is too small to allow for any conclusions to be drawn regarding the risk of rashes with concomitant Amoxicillin and Clavulanate Potassium Extended Release Tablets and allopurinol use.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4 Oral Contraceptives
                     
                        Amoxicillin and Clavulanate Potassium Extended Release Tablets may affect intestinal flora, leading to lower estrogen reabsorption and reduced efficacy of combined oral estrogen/progesterone contraceptives.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.5 Effects on Laboratory Tests
                     
                        High urine concentrations of amoxicillin may result in false-positive reactions when testing for the presence of glucose in urine using CLINITEST®, Benedict’s Solution, or Fehling’s Solution. Since this effect may also occur with Amoxicillin and Clavulanate Potassium, it is recommended that glucose tests based on enzymatic glucose oxidase reactions be used.
                        Following administration of amoxicillin to pregnant women, a transient decrease in plasma concentration of total conjugated estriol, estriol-glucuronide, conjugated estrone, and estradiol has been noted
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         