
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Corticosteroids play a role in cellular signaling, immune function, inflammation and protein regulation; however, the precise mechanism of action in psoriasis is unknown.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        Vasoconstrictor studies performed with Topicort® Topical Spray in healthy subjects indicate that it is in the high to super-high range of potency as compared with other topical corticosteroids.
                        The potential for hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis suppression was evaluated in a study of 24 adult subjects with moderate to severe plaque psoriasis. Topicort® Topical Spray was applied twice a day for 28 days. Twenty-one subjects had evaluable serum cortisol levels. The proportion of subjects demonstrating HPA axis suppression was 8.3% (1 out of 12) in subjects having psoriasis involvement of 10-15% of body surface area (BSA), and 22.2% (2 out of 9) in subjects having psoriasis involvement of > 15% of their BSA. In this study HPA axis suppression was defined as serum cortisol level ≤18 mcg/dL 30-min post cosyntropin stimulation. In the 2 subjects with available follow-up values, suppression reversed 28 days after the end of treatment.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        The extent of percutaneous absorption of topical corticosteroids is determined by many factors including the vehicle, the integrity of the epidermal barrier, and the use of occlusive dressings.
                        Topical corticosteroids can be absorbed from normal intact skin. Inflammation and/or other disease processes in the skin increase percutaneous absorption. Occlusive dressings substantially increase the percutaneous absorption of topical corticosteroids. Once absorbed through the skin, topical corticosteroids are handled through pharmacokinetic pathways similar to systemically administered corticosteroids. Corticosteroids are bound to plasma proteins in varying degrees. Corticosteroids are metabolized primarily in the liver and are then excreted by the kidneys. Some of the topical corticosteroids and their metabolites are also excreted into the bile.
                        Plasma concentrations of desoximetasone were measured at two single random time points in the HPA axis suppression trial in 24 subjects with psoriasis [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.2)
                           ]. The mean (% Coefficient of Variation) concentration of desoximetasone was 449 pg/mL (86%) at Day 14 and 678 pg/mL (135%) at Day 28. The concentration time profile following application of Topicort® Topical Spray is not known.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         