
                     
                     
                     Drug Interactions
                     
                        Propafenone is metabolized by CYP2D6 (major pathway) and CYP1A2 and CYP3A4. Drugs that inhibit CYP2D6 (such as desipramine, paroxetine, ritonavir, sertraline), CYP1A2 (such as amiodarone), and CYP3A4 (such as ketaconazole, ritonavir, saquinavir, erythromycin, and grapefruit juice) can be expected to cause increased plasma levels of propafenone. Appropriate monitoring is recommended when propafenone ER capsules are used together with such drugs. In addition, propafenone is an inhibitor of CYP2D6. Coadministration of propafenone with drugs metabolized by CYP2D6 (such as desipramine, imipramine, haloperidol, venlafaxine) might lead to increased plasma concentrations of these drugs. The effect of propafenone on the P-Glycoprotein transporter has not been studied. 
                        
                           
                              Quinidine: 
                           Small doses of quinidine completely inhibit the CYP2D6 hydroxylation metabolic pathway, making all patients, in effect, slow metabolizers (see CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY). Concomitant administration of quinidine (50 mg TID) with 150 mg immediate release propafenone TID decreased the clearance of propafenone by 60% in EM, making them PM. Steady state plasma concentrations increased by more than 2-fold for propafenone, and decreased 50% for 5-OH-propafenone. A 100 mg dose of quinidine increased steady state con­centrations of propafenone 3-fold. Concomitant use of propafenone and quinidine is not recommended.
                        
                           
                              Digoxin:
                           Concomitant use of propafenone and digoxin increased steady state serum digoxin exposure (AUC) in patients by 60 to 270%, and decreased the clearance of digoxin by 31 to 67%. Plasma digoxin levels of patients receiving propafenone should be monitored and digoxin dosage adjusted as needed. 
                        
                           
                              Lidocaine: 
                           No significant effects on the pharmacokinetics of propafenone or lidocaine have been seen following their concomitant use in patients. However, concomitant use of propafenone and lido­caine have been reported to increase the risks of central nervous sys­tem side effects of lidocaine. 
                        
                           
                              Beta-Antagonists: 
                           Concomitant use of propafenone and propranolol in healthy subjects increased propranolol plasma concentrations at steady state by 113%. In 4 patients, administration of metoprolol with propafenone increased the metoprolol plasma concentrations at steady state by 100-400%. The pharmacokinetics of propafenone was not affected by the coadministration of either propranolol or metopro­lol. In clinical trials using propafenone immediate release tablets, patients who were receiving beta-blockers concurrently did not expe­rience an increased incidence of side effects. 
                        
                           
                              Warfarin: 
                           The concomitant administration of propafenone and warfarin increased warfarin plasma concentrations at steady state by 39% in healthy volunteers and prolonged the prothrombin time in patients taking warfarin. Adjustment of the warfarin dose should be guided by monitoring of the prothrombin time.
                        
                           
                              Cimetidine: 
                           Concomitant administration of propafenone immediate release tablets and cimetidine in 12 healthy subjects resulted in a 20% increase in steady state plasma concentrations of propafenone.
                        
                           
                              Rifampin: 
                           Concomitant administration of rifampin and propafenone in extensive metabolizers decreased the plasma concentrations of propafenone by 67% with a corresponding decrease of 5OH-propafenone by 65%. The concentrations of norpropafenone increased by 30%. In poor metabolizers, there was a 50% decrease in propafenone plasma concentrations and increased the AUC and Cmax of norpropafenone by 74 and 20%, respectively. Urinary excretion of propafenone and its metabolites decreased significantly. Similar results were noted in elderly patients: Both the AUC and Cmax propafenone decreased by 84%, with a corresponding decrease in AUC and Cmax of 5OH-propafenone by 69 and 57%.
                        
                           
                              Fluoxetine: 
                           Concomitant administration of propafenone and fluoxetine in extensive metabolizers increased the S propafenone Cmax and AUC by 39 and 50% and the R propafenone Cmax and AUC by 71 and 50%.
                        
                           
                              Amiodarone:
                           Concomitant administration of propafenone and amiodarone can affect conduction and repolarization and is not recommended. 
                     
                     
                  
               