
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  
                      IBUPROFEN tablets contain ibuprofen which possesses analgesic and antipyretic activities. Its mode of action, like that of other NSAIDs, is not completely understood, but may be related to prostaglandin synthetase inhibition.
                      In clinical studies in patients with rheumatoid arthritis and osteoarthritis, IBUPROFEN tablets have been shown to be comparable to aspirin in controlling pain and inflammation and to be associated with a statistically significant reduction in the milder gastrointestinal side effects (see 
                  
                     
                        ADVERSE REACTIONS
                     
                  
                  ). IBUPROFEN tablets may be well tolerated in some patients who have had gastrointestinal side effects with aspirin, but these patients when treated with IBUPROFEN tablets should be carefully followed for signs and symptoms of gastrointestinal ulceration and bleeding. Although it is not definitely known whether IBUPROFEN tablets causes less peptic ulceration than aspirin, in one study involving 885 patients with rheumatoid arthritis treated for up to one year, there were no reports of gastric ulceration with IBUPROFEN tablets whereas frank ulceration was reported in 13 patients in the aspirin group (statistically significant p<.001).
                      Gastroscopic studies at varying doses show an increased tendency toward gastric irritation at higher doses. However, at comparable doses, gastric irritation is approximately half that seen with aspirin. Studies using 51Cr-tagged red cells indicate that fecal blood loss associated with IBUPROFEN tablets in doses up to 2400 mg daily did not exceed the normal range, and was significantly less than that seen in aspirin-treated patients.
                      In clinical studies in patients with rheumatoid arthritis, IBUPROFEN tablets have been shown to be comparable to indomethacin in controlling the signs and symptoms of disease activity and to be associated with a statistically significant reduction of the milder gastrointestinal (see 
                  
                     
                        ADVERSE REACTIONS
                     
                  
                  ) and CNS side effects.
                      IBUPROFEN tablets may be used in combination with gold salts and/or corticosteroids.
                  Controlled studies have demonstrated that IBUPROFEN tablets are a more effective analgesic than propoxyphene for the relief of episiotomy pain, pain following dental extraction procedures, and for the relief of the symptoms of primary dysmenorrhea.
                      In patients with primary dysmenorrhea, IBUPROFEN tablets have been shown to reduce elevated levels of prostaglandin activity in the menstrual fluid and to reduce resting and active intrauterine pressure, as well as the frequency of uterine contractions. The probable mechanism of action is to inhibit prostaglandin synthesis rather than simply to provide analgesia.
                      The ibuprofen in IBUPROFEN tablets is rapidly absorbed. Peak serum ibuprofen levels are generally attained one to two hours after administration. With single doses up to 800 mg, a linear relationship exists between amount of drug administered and the integrated area under the serum drug concentration vs time curve. Above 800 mg, however, the area under the curve increases less than proportional to increases in dose. There is no evidence of drug accumulation or enzyme induction.
                      The administration of IBUPROFEN tablets either under fasting conditions or immediately before meals yields quite similar serum ibuprofen concentration-time profiles. When IBUPROFEN tablets are administered immediately after a meal, there is a reduction in the rate of absorption but no appreciable decrease in the extent of absorption. The bioavailability of the drug is minimally altered by the presence of food.
                      A bioavailability study has shown that there was no interference with the absorption of ibuprofen when IBUPROFEN tablets were given in conjunction with an antacid containing both aluminum hydroxide and magnesium hydroxide.
                      Ibuprofen is rapidly metabolized and eliminated in the urine. The excretion of ibuprofen is virtually complete 24 hours after the last dose. The serum half-life is 1.8 to 2.0 hours.
                      Studies have shown that following ingestion of the drug, 45% to 79% of the dose was recovered in the urine within 24 hours as metabolite A (25%), (+)-2-[p-(2hydroxymethyl-propyl) phenyl] propionic acid and metabolite B (37%), (+)-2-[p-(2carboxypropyl)phenyl] propionic acid; the percentages of free and conjugated ibuprofen were approximately 1% and 14%, respectively.
                  
 

               
               
            
         