
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Photosensitization following application of LEVULAN KERASTICK Topical Solution occurs through the metabolic conversion of aminolevulinic acid to protoporphyrin IX (PpIX), a photosensitizer, which accumulates in the skin to which LEVULAN KERASTICK Topical Solution has been applied.  When exposed to light of appropriate wavelength and energy, the accumulated photoactive porphyrins produce a photodynamic reaction, resulting in a cytotoxic process dependent upon the simultaneous presence of oxygen.  The absorption of light results in an excited state of porphyrin molecules, and subsequent spin transfer from photoreactive porphyrins to molecular oxygen generates singlet oxygen, which can further react to form superoxide and hydroxyl radicals.  LEVULAN KERASTICK Photodynamic Therapy of actinic keratoses is the combination of photosensitization by topical application of LEVULAN KERASTICK Topical Solution to the lesions and subsequent illumination with the BLU-U Blue Light Photodynamic Therapy Illuminator (BLU-U).
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        ALA does not exhibit fluorescence, while PpIX has a high fluorescence yield.  Time-dependent changes in surface fluorescence have been used to determine PpIX accumulation and clearance in actinic keratoses and perilesional skin after application of LEVULAN KERASTICK Topical Solution in 12 patients.  Peak fluorescence intensity was reached in 11 ± 1 hr in actinic keratoses and 12 ± 1 hr in perilesional skin.  The mean clearance half-life of fluorescence for lesions was 30 ± 10 hr and 28 ± 6 hr for perilesional skin. The fluorescence in perilesional skin was similar to that in actinic keratoses.  Therefore, LEVULAN KERASTICK Topical Solution should only be applied to the affected skin.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        In a human pharmacokinetic study (N=6) using a 128 mg dose of sterile intravenous ALA HCl and oral ALA HCl (equivalent to 100 mg ALA) in which plasma ALA and PpIX were measured, the mean half-life of ALA was 0.70 ± 0.18 h after the oral dose and 0.83 ± 0.05 h after the intravenous dose. The oral bioavailability of ALA was 50-60% with a mean Cmax of 4.65 ± 0.94 µg/mL. PpIX concentrations were low and were detectable only in 42% of the plasma samples. PpIX concentrations in plasma were quite low relative to ALA plasma concentrations, and were below the level of detection (10 ng/mL) after 10 to 12 hours.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         