
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  When Ketoconazole Cream 2% was applied dermally to intact or 
abraded skin of Beagle dogs for 28 consecutive days at a dose of 80 mg, there 
were no detectable plasma levels using an assay method having a lower detection 
limit of 2 ng/ml.
                  After a single topical application to the chest, back and arms of normal 
volunteers, systemic absorption of ketoconazole was not detected at the 5 ng/ml 
level in blood over a 72-hour period.
                  Two dermal irritancy studies, a human sensitization test, a phototoxicity 
study and a photoallergy study conducted in 38 male and 62 female volunteers 
showed no contact sensitization of the delayed hypersensitivity type, no 
irritation, no phototoxicity and no photoallergenic potential due to 
Ketoconazole Cream 2%.
                  
                  
                     Microbiology: Ketoconazole is a broad 
spectrum synthetic antifungal agent which inhibits the in 
vitro growth of the following common dermatophytes and yeasts by altering 
the permeability of the cell membrane: dermatophytes: Trichophyton rubrum, T. mentagrophytes, T. tonsurans, Microsporum 
canis, M. audouini, M. gypseum and Epidermophyton floccosum; yeasts: 
Candida albicans, Malassezia ovale (Pityrosporum 
ovale) and C. tropicalis; and the organism 
responsible for tinea versicolor, Malassezia furfur 
(Pityrosporum orbiculare). Only those organisms listed in the INDICATIONS 
AND USAGE Section have been proven to be clinically affected. Development of 
resistance to ketoconazole has not been reported.
                  
                  
                     Mode of Action:
                     In 
vitro studies suggest that ketoconazole impairs the synthesis of 
ergosterol, which is a vital component of fungal cell membranes. It is 
postulated that the therapeutic effect of ketoconazole in seborrheic dermatitis 
is due to the reduction of M. ovale, but this has not yet been proven.
               
               
            
         