
               
               
               
                  12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
                  12.1 Mechanism of ActionCRESTOR is a selective and competitive inhibitor of HMG-CoA 
reductase, the rate-limiting enzyme that converts 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl 
coenzyme A to mevalonate, a precursor of cholesterol. In 
vivo studies in animals, and in vitro studies 
in cultured animal and human cells have shown rosuvastatin to have a high uptake 
into, and selectivity for, action in the liver, the target organ for cholesterol 
lowering. In in vivo and in 
vitro studies, rosuvastatin produces its lipid-modifying effects in two 
ways. First, it increases the number of hepatic LDL receptors on the 
cell-surface to enhance uptake and catabolism of LDL. Second, rosuvastatin 
inhibits hepatic synthesis of VLDL, which reduces the total number of VLDL and 
LDL particles.
                  
                  
                  12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        
                           
                              Absorption:
                            In 
clinical pharmacology studies in man, peak plasma concentrations of rosuvastatin 
were reached 3 to 5 hours following oral dosing. Both Cmax 
and AUC increased in approximate proportion to CRESTOR dose. The absolute 
bioavailability of rosuvastatin is approximately 20%. 
                        Administration of CRESTOR with food did not affect the AUC of rosuvastatin. 

                        The AUC of rosuvastatin does not differ following evening or morning drug 
administration.
                     
                     
                        
                           
                              Distribution:
                            
Mean volume of distribution at steady-state of rosuvastatin is approximately 134 
liters. Rosuvastatin is 88% bound to plasma proteins, mostly albumin. This 
binding is reversible and independent of plasma concentrations.
                     
                     
                        
                           
                              Metabolism:
                            
Rosuvastatin is not extensively metabolized; approximately 10% of a radiolabeled 
dose is recovered as metabolite. The major metabolite is N-desmethyl 
rosuvastatin, which is formed principally by cytochrome P450 2C9, and in vitro studies have demonstrated that N-desmethyl 
rosuvastatin has approximately one-sixth to one-half the HMG-CoA reductase 
inhibitory activity of the parent compound. Overall, greater than 90% of active 
plasma HMG-CoA reductase inhibitory activity is accounted for by the parent 
compound.
                     
                     
                        
                           
                              Excretion:
                            
Following oral administration, rosuvastatin and its metabolites are primarily 
excreted in the feces (90%). The elimination half-life (t1/2) of rosuvastatin is approximately 19 hours. 
                        After an intravenous dose, approximately 28% of total body clearance was via 
the renal route, and 72% by the hepatic route.
                     
                     
                        
                           
                              Race:
                            A 
population pharmacokinetic analysis revealed no clinically relevant differences 
in pharmacokinetics among Caucasian, Hispanic, and Black or Afro-Caribbean 
groups. However, pharmacokinetic studies, including one conducted in the US, 
have demonstrated an approximate 2-fold elevation in median exposure (AUC and 
Cmax) in Asian subjects when compared with a Caucasian 
control group.
                     
                     
                        
                           
                              Gender:
                            There 
were no differences in plasma concentrations of rosuvastatin between men and 
women.
                     
                     
                        
                           
                              Geriatric:
                            
There were no differences in plasma concentrations of rosuvastatin between the 
nonelderly and elderly populations (age ≥65 years).
                     
                     
                        
                           
                              Renal 
Impairment:
                            Mild to moderate renal impairment (CLcr greater than or equal to 30 mL/min/1.73 m2) had no influence 
on plasma concentrations of rosuvastatin. However, plasma concentrations of 
rosuvastatin increased to a clinically significant extent (about 3-fold) in 
patients with severe renal impairment (CLcr less than 30 
mL/min/1.73 m2) not receiving hemodialysis compared with 
healthy subjects (CLcr greater than 80 mL/min/1.73 m2).
                     
                     
                        
                           
                              Hemodialysis:
                            
Steady-state plasma concentrations of rosuvastatin in patients on chronic 
hemodialysis were approximately 50% greater compared with healthy volunteer 
subjects with normal renal function.
                     
                     
                        
                           
                              Hepatic 
Impairment:
                            In patients with chronic alcohol liver disease, plasma 
concentrations of rosuvastatin were modestly increased.
                        In patients with Child-Pugh A disease, Cmax and AUC 
were increased by 60% and 5%, respectively, as compared with patients with 
normal liver function. In patients with Child-Pugh B disease, Cmax and AUC were increased 100% and 21%, respectively, compared 
with patients with normal liver function.
                     
                  
               
               
            
         