
               
               
               7  DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           CYP3A4 inhibitors increase exposure to lomitapide. Strong and moderate CYP3A4 inhibitors are contraindicated with JUXTAPID. Patients must avoid grapefruit juice. Do not exceed 30 mg daily of JUXTAPID when used concomitantly with weak CYP3A4 inhibitors, including atorvastatin and oral contraceptives (2.3,
                               4,
                               5.6,
                               7.1,
                               7.2). 
                           Warfarin: Lomitapide increases plasma concentrations of warfarin. Monitor international normalized ratio (INR) regularly, especially with JUXTAPID dose adjustment (5.8,
                               7.3).
                           Simvastatin and lovastatin exposure increase with JUXTAPID.  Limit dose when co-administered with JUXTAPID due to myopathy risk (5.7,
                               7.4).
                           P-glycoprotein (P-gp) Substrates: Consider dose reduction of P-gp substrate because of possible increased absorption with JUXTAPID (7.5).
                           Bile Acid Sequestrants: Separate JUXTAPID dosing by at least 4 hours (7.6).
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1	Moderate and Strong CYP3A4 Inhibitors
                     
                        A strong CYP3A4 inhibitor has been shown to increase lomitapide exposure approximately 27-fold [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)]. Concomitant use of strong CYP3A4 inhibitors (such as boceprevir, clarithromycin, conivaptan, indinavir, itraconazole, ketoconazole, lopinavir/ritonavir, mibefradil, nefazodone, nelfinavir, posaconazole, ritonavir, saquinavir, telaprevir, telithromycin, tipranavir/ritonavir, voriconazole) with lomitapide is contraindicated. Concomitant use of moderate CYP3A4 inhibitors (such as amprenavir, aprepitant, atazanavir, ciprofloxacin, crizotinib, darunavir/ritonavir, diltiazem, erythromycin, fluconazole, fosamprenavir, imatinib, verapamil) has not been studied, but concomitant use with lomitapide is contraindicated since lomitapide exposure will likely increase significantly in the presence of these inhibitors.
                        Patients must avoid grapefruit juice while taking JUXTAPID [see Contraindications (4),
                               Warnings and Precautions (5.6), and Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2	Weak CYP3A4 Inhibitors
                     
                        Weak CYP3A4 inhibitors increase lomitapide exposure approximately 2-fold [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)]. Lomitapide dosage should not exceed 30 mg daily when it is used concomitantly with weak CYP3A4 inhibitors (such as alprazolam, amiodarone, amlodipine, atorvastatin, bicalutamide, cilostazol, cimetidine, cyclosporine, fluoxetine, fluvoxamine, ginkgo, goldenseal, isoniazid, lapatinib, nilotinib, oral contraceptives, pazopanib, ranitidine, ranolazine, ticagrelor, zileuton) [see Dosage and Administration (2.3),
                               Warnings and Precautions (5.6), and Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3	Warfarin
                     
                        Lomitapide increases plasma concentrations of both R(+)-warfarin and S(-)-warfarin by approximately 30% and increased the INR 22%. Patients taking warfarin should undergo regular monitoring of INR, particularly after any changes in lomitapide dosage. The dose of warfarin should be adjusted as clinically indicated [see Warnings and Precautions (5.8)].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4	Simvastatin and Lovastatin
                     
                        The risk of myopathy, including rhabdomyolysis, with simvastatin and lovastatin monotherapy is dose related. Lomitapide approximately doubles the exposure of simvastatin; therefore, the recommended dose of simvastatin should be reduced by 50% when initiating JUXTAPID [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)]. While taking JUXTAPID, limit simvastatin dosage to 20 mg daily (or 40 mg daily for patients who have previously tolerated simvastatin 80 mg daily for at least one year without evidence of muscle toxicity). Refer to the simvastatin prescribing information for simvastatin dosing recommendations.
                        Interaction between lovastatin and lomitapide has not been studied. However, the metabolizing enzymes and transporters responsible for the disposition of lovastatin and simvastatin are similar, suggesting that JUXTAPID may increase the exposure of lovastatin; therefore, reducing the dose of lovastatin should be considered when initiating JUXTAPID.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.5	P-glycoprotein Substrates
                     
                        Lomitapide is an inhibitor of P-glycoprotein (P-gp). Coadministration of lomitapide with P-gp substrates (such as aliskiren, ambrisentan, colchicine, dabigatran etexilate, digoxin, everolimus, fexofenadine, imatinib, lapatinib, maraviroc, nilotinib, posaconazole, ranolazine, saxagliptin, sirolimus, sitagliptin, talinolol, tolvaptan, topotecan) may increase the absorption of P-gp substrates. Dose reduction of the P-gp substrate should be considered when used concomitantly with lomitapide.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.6	Bile Acid Sequestrants
                     
                        JUXTAPID has not been tested for interaction with bile acid sequestrants. Administration of JUXTAPID and bile acid sequestrants should be separated by at least 4 hours since bile acid sequestrants can interfere with the absorption of oral medications.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         