
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           Probenicid decreases renal tubular secretion of amoxicillin which may result in increased blood levels of amoxicillin. (7.1)
                           Concomitant use of amoxicillin and oral anticoagulants may increase the prolongation of prothrombin time. (7.2)
                           Coadministration with allopurinol increases the risk of rash. (7.3)
                           Amoxicillin may reduce the efficacy of oral contraceptives. (7.4)
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 Probenecid
                     
                        Probenecid decreases the renal tubular secretion of amoxicillin. Concurrent use of amoxicillin and probenecid may result in increased and prolonged blood levels of amoxicillin.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 Oral Anticoagulants
                     
                        Abnormal prolongation of prothrombin time (increased international normalized ratio [INR]) has been reported in patients receiving amoxicillin and oral anticoagulants. Appropriate monitoring should be undertaken when anticoagulants are prescribed concurrently. Adjustments in the dose of oral anticoagulants may be necessary to maintain the desired level of anticoagulation.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3 Allopurinol
                     
                        The concurrent administration of allopurinol and amoxicillin increases the incidence of rashes in patients receiving both drugs as compared to patients receiving amoxicillin alone. It is not known whether this potentiation of amoxicillin rashes is due to allopurinol or the hyperuricemia present in these patients.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4 Oral Contraceptives
                     
                        Amoxicillin may affect the gut flora, leading to lower estrogen reabsorption and reduced efficacy of combined oral estrogen/progesterone contraceptives.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.5 Other Antibacterials
                     
                        Chloramphenicol, macrolides, sulfonamides, and tetracyclines may interfere with the bactericidal effects of penicillin. This has been demonstrated in vitro; however, the clinical significance of this interaction is not well documented.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.6 Effects on Laboratory Tests
                     
                        High urine concentrations of ampicillin may result in false-positive reactions when testing for the presence of glucose in urine using CLINITEST®, Benedict’s Solution, or Fehling’s Solution. Since this effect may also occur with amoxicillin, it is recommended that glucose tests based on enzymatic glucose oxidase reactions (such as CLINISTIX®) be used.
                        Following administration of ampicillin or amoxicillin to pregnant women, a transient decrease in plasma concentration of total conjugated estriol, estriol-glucuronide, conjugated estrone, and estradiol has been noted.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         