
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Clotrimazole and Betamethasone Dipropionate
                     
                        No comparative studies have been conducted with clotrimazole and betamethasone dipropionate lotion and clotrimazole alone. Use of corticosteroids in the treatment of a fungal infection may lead to suppression of host inflammation leading to worsening or decreased cure rate.
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Clotrimazole
                           
                              Skin penetration and systemic absorption of clotrimazole following topical application of clotrimazole and betamethasone dipropionate lotion have not been studied. The following information was obtained using 1% clotrimazole solution formulations. Six hours after the application of radioactive clotrimazole 1% solution onto intact and acutely inflamed skin, the concentration of clotrimazole varied from 100 mcg/cm3 in the stratum corneum, to 0.5 to 1 mcg/cm3 in the reticular dermis, and 0.1 mcg/cm3 in the subcutis. No measurable amount of radioactivity (<0.001 mcg/mL) was found in the serum within 48 hours after application under occlusive dressing of 0.5 mL of the solution. Only 0.5% or less of the applied radioactivity was excreted in the urine.
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Microbiology
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                       
                                       Mechanism of Action
                                       
                                          Clotrimazole is an imidazole antifungal agent. Imidazoles inhibit 14-α-demethylation of lanosterol in fungi by binding to one of the cytochrome P-450 enzymes. This leads to the accumulation of 14-α-methylsterols and reduced concentrations of ergosterol, a sterol essential for a normal fungal cytoplasmic membrane. The methylsterols may affect the electron transport system, thereby inhibiting growth of fungi.
                                       
                                       
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                       
                                       Activity In Vivo
                                       
                                       
                                          Clotrimazole has been shown to be active against most strains of the following dermatophytes, both in vitro and in clinical infections as described in the 
                                                INDICATIONS AND USAGE
                                              section: Epidermophyton floccosum, Trichophyton mentagrophytes, and Trichophyton rubrum.
                                          
                                       
                                       
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                       
                                       Activity In Vitro
                                       
                                       
                                          
                                             In vitro, clotrimazole has been shown to have activity against many dermatophytes, but the clinical significance of this information is unknown
                                             .
                                          
                                       
                                       
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                       
                                       Drug Resistance
                                       
                                          Strains of dermatophytes having a natural resistance to clotrimazole have not been reported. Resistance to azoles including clotrimazole has been reported in some Candida species.
                                          No single-step or multiple-step resistance to clotrimazole has developed during successive passages of Trichophyton mentagrophytes.
                                       
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Betamethasone Dipropionate
                           
                              Betamethasone dipropionate, a corticosteroid, has been shown to have topical (dermatologic) and systemic pharmacologic and metabolic effects characteristic of this class of drugs.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        The extent of percutaneous absorption of topical corticosteroids is determined by many factors, including the vehicle, the integrity of the epidermal barrier and the use of occlusive dressings (see 
                              DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION
                           ). Topical corticosteroids can be absorbed from normal intact skin. Inflammation and/or other disease processes in the skin may increase percutaneous absorption of topical corticosteroids. Occlusive dressings substantially increase the percutaneous absorption of topical corticosteroids (see 
                              DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION
                           ).
                        Once absorbed through the skin, the pharmacokinetics of topical corticosteroids are similar to systemically administered corticosteroids. Corticosteroids are bound to plasma proteins in varying degrees. Corticosteroids are metabolized primarily in the liver and are then excreted by the kidneys. Some of the topical corticosteroids and their metabolites are also excreted into the bile. Studies performed with clotrimazole and betamethasone dipropionate lotion indicate that this topical combination antifungal/corticosteroid may have vasoconstrictor potencies in a range that is comparable to high-potency topical corticosteroids. Therefore, use is not recommended in patients less than 17 years of age, in diaper dermatitis, and under occlusion.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         