
                     
                     
                     Drug Interactions
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Diuretics
                           
                           
                              Furosemide and probably other loop diuretics given concomitantly with metolazone can cause unusually large or prolonged losses of fluid and electrolytes (see ).
                                            WARNINGS
                              
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Other Antihypertensives
                           
                           
                              When metolazone tablets are used with other antihypertensive drugs, care must be taken, especially during initial therapy. Dosage adjustments of other antihypertensives may be necessary.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Alcohol, Barbiturates, and Narcotics
                           
                           
                              The hypotensive effects of these drugs may be potentiated by the volume contraction that may be associated with metolazone therapy.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Digitalis Glycosides
                           
                           
                              Diuretic-induced hypokalemia can increase the sensitivity of the myocardium to digitalis. Serious arrhythmias can result.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Corticosteroids or ACTH
                           
                           
                              May increase the risk of hypokalemia and increase salt and water retention.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Lithium
                           
                           
                              Serum lithium levels may increase (see ).
                                            WARNINGS
                              
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Curariform Drugs
                           
                           
                              Diuretic-induced hypokalemia may enhance neuromuscular blocking effects of curariform drugs (such as tubocurarine) - the most serious effect would be respiratory depression which could proceed to apnea. Accordingly, it may be advisable to discontinue metolazone three days before elective surgery.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Salicylates and Other Non-Steroidal Anti-Inflammatory Drugs
                           
                           
                              May decrease the antihypertensive effects of metolazone tablets.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Sympathomimetics
                           
                           
                              Metolazone may decrease arterial responsiveness to norepinephrine, but this diminution is not sufficient to preclude effectiveness of the pressor agent for therapeutic use.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Insulin and Oral Antidiabetic Agents
                           
                           
                              See .
                                            PRECAUTIONS: General: Glucose Tolerance
                              
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Methenamine
                           
                           
                              Efficacy may be decreased due to urinary alkalizing effect of metolazone.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Anticoagulants
                           
                           
                              Metolazone, as well as other thiazide-like diuretics, may affect the hypoprothrombinemic response to anticoagulants; dosage adjustments may be necessary.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               