
               
               
               DRUG INTERACTIONS SECTION
               
                  
                     7.1 Drugs with pH-Dependent Absorption KineticsDue to its effects on gastric acid secretion, lansoprazole can reduce the absorption of drugs where gastric pH is an important determinant of their bioavailability. Like with other drugs that decrease the intragastric acidity, the absorption of drugs such as ampicillin esters, ketoconazole, atazanavir, iron salts, erlotinib, and mycophenolate mofetil (MMF) can decrease, while the absorption of drugs such as digoxin can increase during treatment with lansoprazole delayed-release capsules [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)]. 
                        Lansoprazole delayed-release capsules are likely to substantially decrease the systemic concentrations of the HIV protease inhibitor atazanavir, which is dependent upon the presence of gastric acid for absorption, and may result in a loss of therapeutic effect of atazanavir and the development of HIV resistance. Therefore, lansoprazole delayed-release capsules should not be co-administered with atazanavir [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                        Co-administration of PPIs in healthy subjects and in transplant patients receiving MMF has been reported to reduce the exposure to the active metabolite, mycophenolic acid (MPA), possibly due to a decrease in MMF solubility at an increased gastric pH. The clinical relevance of reduced MPA exposure on organ rejection has not been established in transplant patients receiving PPIs and MMF. Use lansoprazole delayed-release capsules with caution in transplant patients receiving MMF. 
                        
                        7.2 WarfarinIn a study of healthy subjects, co-administration of single or multiple 60 mg doses of lansoprazole delayed-release capsules and warfarin did not affect the pharmacokinetics of warfarin nor prothrombin time (see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3). However, there have been reports of increased INR and prothrombin time in patients receiving PPIs and warfarin concomitantly. Increases in INR and prothrombin time may lead to abnormal bleeding and even death. Patients treated with PPIs and warfarin concomitantly may need to be monitored for increases in INR and prothrombin time. [See Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)]
                        7.3 TacrolimusConcomitant administration of lansoprazole and tacrolimus may increase whole blood levels of tacrolimus, especially in transplant patients who are intermediate or poor metabolizers of CYP2C19.
                        7.4 TheophyllineA minor increase (10%) in the clearance of theophylline was observed following the administration of lansoprazole delayed-release capsules concomitantly with theophylline. Although the magnitude of the effect on theophylline clearance is small, individual patients may require additional titration of their theophylline dosage when lansoprazole delayed-release capsules is started or stopped to ensure clinically effective blood levels. [See Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)]
                        
                        7.5 ClopidogrelConcomitant administration of lansoprazole and clopidogrel in healthy subjects had no clinically important effect on exposure to the active metabolite of clopidogrel or clopidogrel-induced platelet inhibition [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)]. No dose adjustment of clopidogrel is necessary when administered with an approved dose of lansoprazole delayed-release capsules.
                        7.6 MethotrexateCase reports, published population pharmacokinetic studies, and retrospective analyses suggest that concomitant administration of PPIs and methotrexate (primarily at high dose; see methotrexate prescribing information) may elevate and prolong serum levels of methotrexate and/or its metabolite hydroxymethotrexate. However, no formal drug interaction studies of high dose methotrexate with PPIs have been conducted [see Warnings and Precautions (5.7)]. 
                        In a study of rheumatoid arthritis patients receiving low-dose methotrexate, lansoprazole delayed-release capsules and naproxen, no effect on pharmacokinetics of methotrexate was observed [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                        7.7 Combination Therapy with ClarithromycinConcomitant administration of clarithromycin with other drugs can lead to serious adverse reactions due to drug interactions [see Warnings and Precautions in prescribing information for clarithromycin]. Because of these drug interactions, clarithromycin is contraindicated for co-administration with certain drugs [see Contraindications in prescribing information for clarithromycin].
                        For information on drug interactions for amoxicillin or clarithromycin, refer to their full prescribing information, DRUG INTERACTIONS section
                     
                  
               
               
            
         