
               
               
               
                  CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGYNabumetone is a nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID) that 
exhibits anti-inflammatory, analgesic and antipyretic properties in 
pharmacologic studies. As with other nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory agents, its 
mode of action is not known. However, the ability to inhibit prostaglandin 
synthesis may be involved in the anti-inflammatory effect
                  PharmacokineticsAfter oral administration, approximately 80% of a radiolabeled 
dose of nabumetone is found in the urine, indicating that nabumetone is well 
absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract. Nabumetone itself is not detected in 
the plasma because, after absorption, it undergoes rapid biotransformation to 
the principal active metabolite, 6-methoxy-2-naphthylacetic acid (6MNA). 
Approximately 35% of a 1000 mg oral dose of nabumetone is converted to 6MNA and 
50% is converted into unidentified metabolites which are subsequently excreted 
in the urine. Following oral administration of nabumetone tablets, 6MNA exhibits 
pharmacokinetic characteristics that generally follow a one-compartment model 
with first order input and first order elimination.
                  6MNA is more than 99% bound to plasma proteins. The free fraction is 
dependent on total concentration of 6MNA and is proportional to dose over the 
range of 1000 mg to 2000 mg. It is 0.2% to 0.3% at concentrations typically 
achieved following administration of nabumetone 1000 mg and is approximately 
0.6% to 0.8% of the total concentrations at steady state following daily 
administration of 2000 mg.
                  Steady-state plasma concentrations of 6MNA are slightly lower than predicted 
from single-dose data. This may result from the higher fraction of unbound 6MNA 
which undergoes greater hepatic clearance.
                  Coadministration of food increases the rate of absorption and subsequent 
appearance of 6MNA in the plasma but does not affect the extent of conversion of 
nabumetone into 6MNA. Peak plasma concentrations of 6MNA are increased by 
approximately one third.
                  Coadministration with an aluminum-containing antacid had no significant 
effect on the
                  bioavailability of 6MNA
                  
                  

               
               
            
         