
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              Bile Salt Efflux Pump (BSEP) Inhibitors (e.g., cyclosporine): Avoid concomitant use; if concomitant use is necessary, monitor serum transaminases and bilirubin (7.1)
                           
                              Bile Acid Resins and Aluminum-Based Antacids:  Take CHOLBAM at least 1 hour before or 4 to 6 hours (or at as great an interval as possible) after a bile acid binding resin or aluminum-based antacids. (2.3, 7.1)
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1. Effects of other drugs on CHOLBAM 
                     
                        Drug interactions with CHOLBAM mainly relate to agents capable of interrupting the enterohepatic circulation of bile acids. 
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Inhibitors of Bile Acid Transporters
                              
                              Avoid concomitant use of inhibitors of the bile salt efflux pump (BSEP) such as cyclosporine.  Concomitant medications that inhibit canalicular membrane bile acid transporters such as the BSEP may exacerbate accumulation of conjugated bile salts in the liver and result in clinical symptoms.  If concomitant use is deemed necessary, monitoring of serum transaminases and bilirubin is recommended.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Bile Acid Binding Resins
                              
                              Bile acid binding resins such as cholestyramine, colestipol, or colesevelam adsorb and reduce bile acid absorption and may reduce the efficacy of CHOLBAM. Take CHOLBAM at least 1 hour before or 4 to 6 hours (or at as great an interval as possible) after a bile acid binding resin [see Dosage and Administration (2.3)].
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Aluminum-Based Antacids
                              
                              Aluminum-based antacids have been shown to adsorb bile acids in vitro and can reduce the bioavailability of CHOLBAM. Take CHOLBAM at least 1 hour before or 4 to 6 hours (or at as great an interval as possible) after an aluminum-based antacid [see Dosage and Administration (2.3)].
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         