
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           CYP3A inhibitors: Recommended dose is 5 mg when used with moderate CYP3A inhibitors. Dose can be increased to 10 mg once daily if the 5 mg dose is not effective. Not recommended for use in patients taking strong CYP3A inhibitors (2.4, 7.2).
                           Strong CYP3A inducers: Efficacy may be reduced (7.2).
                           Digoxin: Monitor digoxin concentrations (7.3).
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1	CNS-Active Agents
                     
                        When BELSOMRA was co-administered with alcohol, additive psychomotor impairment was demonstrated. There was no alteration in the pharmacokinetics of BELSOMRA [see Warnings and Precautions (5.1, 5.3) and Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 	Effects of Other Drugs on BELSOMRA
                     
                        Metabolism by CYP3A is the major elimination pathway for suvorexant.
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 CYP3A Inhibitors
                              
                              Concomitant use of BELSOMRA with strong inhibitors of CYP3A (e.g., ketoconazole, itraconazole, posaconazole, clarithromycin, nefazodone, ritonavir, saquinavir, nelfinavir, indinavir, boceprevir, telaprevir, telithromycin and conivaptan) is not recommended [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                              
                              The recommended dose of BELSOMRA is 5 mg in subjects receiving moderate CYP3A inhibitors (e.g., amprenavir, aprepitant, atazanavir, ciprofloxacin, diltiazem, erythromycin, fluconazole, fosamprenavir, grapefruit juice, imatinib, verapamil). The dose can be increased to 10 mg in these patients if necessary for efficacy [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                              
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 CYP3A Inducers
                              
                              Suvorexant exposure can be substantially decreased when co-administered with strong CYP3A inducers (e.g., rifampin, carbamazepine and phenytoin). The efficacy of BELSOMRA may be reduced [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                              
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3 	Effects of BELSOMRA on Other Drugs
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Digoxin
                              
                              Concomitant administration of BELSOMRA with digoxin slightly increased digoxin levels due to inhibition of intestinal P-gp. Digoxin concentrations should be monitored when co-administering BELSOMRA with digoxin [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                              
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         