
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        The mechanism by which suvorexant exerts its therapeutic effect in insomnia is presumed to be through antagonism of orexin receptors. The orexin neuropeptide signaling system is a central promoter of wakefulness. Blocking the binding of wake-promoting neuropeptides orexin A and orexin B to receptors OX1R and OX2R is thought to suppress wake drive.
                        Antagonism of orexin receptors may also underlie potential adverse effects such as signs of narcolepsy/cataplexy. Genetic mutations in the orexin system in animals result in hereditary narcolepsy; loss of orexin neurons has been reported in humans with narcolepsy. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Evaluation of QTc Interval
                              
                              The effects of suvorexant on the QTc interval were evaluated in a randomized, placebo-, and active-controlled (moxifloxacin 400 mg) crossover study in healthy subjects (n=53). The upper bound of the one-sided 95% confidence interval for the largest placebo-adjusted, baseline-corrected QTc interval was below 10 ms based on analysis of suvorexant doses up to 240 mg, 12 times the maximum recommended dose. BELSOMRA thus does not prolong the QTc interval to any clinically relevant extent.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        Suvorexant exposure increases in a less than strictly dose-proportional manner over the range of 10-80 mg because of decreased absorption at higher doses. Suvorexant pharmacokinetics are similar in healthy subjects and patients with insomnia.
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Absorption
                              
                              Suvorexant peak concentrations occur at a median Tmax of 2 hours (range 30 minutes to 6 hours) under fasted conditions. The mean absolute bioavailability of 10 mg is 82%.
                              Ingestion of suvorexant with a high-fat meal resulted in no meaningful change in AUC or Cmax but a delay in Tmax of approximately 1.5 hours. Suvorexant may be taken with or without food; however for faster sleep onset, suvorexant should not be administered with or soon after a meal.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Distribution
                              
                              The mean volume of distribution of suvorexant is approximately 49 liters. Suvorexant is extensively bound (>99%) to human plasma proteins and does not preferentially distribute into red blood cells. Suvorexant binds to both human serum albumin and α1-acid glycoprotein. 
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Metabolism
                              
                              Suvorexant is mainly eliminated by metabolism, primarily by CYP3A with a minor contribution from CYP2C19. The major circulating entities are suvorexant and a hydroxy-suvorexant metabolite. This metabolite is not expected to be pharmacologically active. 
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Elimination
                              
                              The primary route of elimination is through the feces, with approximately 66% of radiolabeled dose recovered in the feces compared to 23% in the urine. The systemic pharmacokinetics of suvorexant are linear with an accumulation of approximately 1- to 2-fold with once-daily dosing. Steady-state is achieved by 3 days. The mean t1/2 is approximately 12 hours (95% CI: 12 to 13).
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Special Populations
                              
                              Gender, age, body mass index (BMI), and race were included as factors assessed in the population pharmacokinetic model to evaluate suvorexant pharmacokinetics in healthy subjects and to predict exposures in the patient population. Age and race are not predicted to have any clinically meaningful changes on suvorexant pharmacokinetics; therefore, no dose adjustment is warranted based upon these factors.
                              Suvorexant exposure is higher in females than in males. In females, the AUC and Cmax are increased by 17% and 9%, respectively, following administration of BELSOMRA 40 mg. The average concentration of suvorexant 9 hours after dosing is 5% higher for females across the dose range studied (10-40 mg). Dose adjustment of BELSOMRA is generally not needed based on gender only.
                              Apparent oral clearance of suvorexant is inversely related to body mass index. In obese patients, the AUC and Cmax are increased by 31% and 17%, respectively. The average concentration of suvorexant approximately 9 hours after a 20 mg dose is 15% higher in obese patients (BMI > 30 kg/m2) relative to those with a normal BMI (BMI ≤ 25 kg/m2).
                              In obese females, the AUC and Cmax are increased by 46% and 25%, respectively, compared to non-obese females. The higher exposure to suvorexant in obese females should be considered before increasing dose [see Dosage and Administration (2.2)].
                              
                              The effects of renal and hepatic impairment on the pharmacokinetics of suvorexant were evaluated in specific pharmacokinetic studies.
                              Suvorexant exposure after a single dose was similar in patients with moderate hepatic insufficiency (Child-Pugh category 7 to 9) and healthy matched control subjects; however, the suvorexant apparent terminal half-life was increased from approximately 15 hours (range 10 - 22 hours) in healthy subjects to approximately 19 hours (range 11 - 49 hours) in patients with moderate hepatic insufficiency [see Use in Specific Populations (8.7)].
                              Suvorexant exposure (expressed as total and unbound concentrations) was similar between patients with severe renal impairment (urinary creatinine clearance ≤30 mL/min/1.73m2) and healthy matched control subjects. No dose adjustment is required in patients with renal impairment [see Use in Specific Populations (8.8)].
                              
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Drug Interactions
                              
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       CNS-Active Drugs 
                                    
                                    An additive effect on psychomotor performance was observed when a single dose of 40 mg of suvorexant was co-administered with a single dose of 0.7 g/kg alcohol. Suvorexant did not affect alcohol concentrations and alcohol did not affect suvorexant concentrations [see Warnings and Precautions (5.1, 5.3) and Drug Interactions (7.1)].
                                    
                                    An interaction study with a single dose of 40 mg suvorexant and paroxetine 20 mg at steady-state levels in healthy subjects did not demonstrate a clinically significant pharmacokinetic or pharmacodynamic interaction.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Effects of Other Drugs on BELSOMRA
                                    
                                    The effects of other drugs on the pharmacokinetics of suvorexant are presented in Figure 1 as change relative to suvorexant administered alone (test/reference). Strong (e.g., ketoconazole or itraconazole) and moderate (e.g., diltiazem) CYP3A inhibitors significantly increased suvorexant exposure. Strong CYP3A inducers (e.g., rifampin) substantially decreased suvorexant exposure [see Drug Interactions (7.2)].
                                    
                                    
                                       Figure 1:
Effects of Co-administered Drugs on the Pharmacokinetics of Suvorexant
                                    
                                    
                                       
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Figure 1
                                       
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Effects of BELSOMRA on Other Drugs
                                    
                                    
                                       In vitro metabolism studies demonstrate that suvorexant has the potential to inhibit CYP3A and intestinal P-gp; however, suvorexant is unlikely to cause clinically significant inhibition of human CYP1A2, CYP2B6, CYP2C8, CYP2C9, CYP2C19 or CYP2D6. In addition, no clinically meaningful inhibition of OATP1B1, BCRP and OCT2 transporters is anticipated. Chronic administration of suvorexant is unlikely to induce the metabolism of drugs metabolized by major CYP isoforms. Specific in vivo effects on the pharmacokinetics of midazolam, warfarin, digoxin and oral contraceptives are presented in Figure 2 as a change relative to the interacting drug administered alone (test/reference) [see Drug Interactions (7.3)].
                                    


                                 



                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Figure 2
                                       
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         