
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY

               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action

                     
                        Topoisomerase I relieves torsional strain in DNA by inducing reversible single strand breaks. Topotecan binds to the topoisomerase I-DNA complex and prevents religation of these single strand breaks. The cytotoxicity of topotecan is thought to be due to double strand DNA damage produced during DNA synthesis, when replication enzymes interact with the ternary complex formed by topotecan, topoisomerase I, and DNA. Mammalian cells cannot efficiently repair these double strand breaks.

                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics

                     
                        The dose-limiting toxicity of topotecan is leukopenia. White blood cell count decreases with increasing topotecan dose or topotecan AUC. When topotecan is administered at a dose of 1.5 mg/m2/day for 5 days, an 80% to 90% decrease in white blood cell count at nadir is typically observed after the first cycle of therapy.

                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics

                     
                        The pharmacokinetics of topotecan have been evaluated in cancer patients following doses of 0.5 to 1.5 mg/m2 administered as a 30-minute infusion. Topotecan exhibits multi-exponential pharmacokinetics with a terminal half-life of 2 to 3 hours. Total exposure (AUC) is approximately dose-proportional.

                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Distribution: Binding of topotecan to plasma proteins is about 35%.

                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Metabolism: Topotecan undergoes a reversible pH dependent hydrolysis of its lactone moiety; it is the lactone form that is pharmacologically active. At pH ≤ 4, the lactone is exclusively present, whereas the ring-opened hydroxy-acid form predominates at physiologic pH. In vitro studies in human liver microsomes indicate topotecan is metabolized to an N-demethylated metabolite. The mean metabolite:parent AUC ratio was about 3% for total topotecan and topotecan lactone following IV administration.

                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Excretion: Renal clearance is an important determinant of topotecan elimination. In a mass balance/excretion study in 4 patients with solid tumors, the overall recovery of total topotecan and its N-desmethyl metabolite in urine and feces over 9 days averaged 73.4 ± 2.3% of the administered IV dose. Mean values of 50.8 ± 2.9% as total topotecan and 3.1 ± 1.0% as N-desmethyl topotecan were excreted in the urine following IV administration. Fecal elimination of total topotecan accounted for 17.9 ± 3.6% while fecal elimination of N-desmethyl topotecan was 1.7 ± 0.6%. An O-glucuronidation metabolite of topotecan and N-desmethyl topotecan has been identified in the urine. These metabolites, topotecan-O-glucuronide and N-desmethyl topotecan-O-glucuronide, were less than 2% of the administered dose.

                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Effect of Gender: The overall mean topotecan plasma clearance in male patients was approximately 24% higher than that in female patients, largely reflecting difference in body size.

                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Effect of Age: The effect of age on topotecan pharmacokinetics has not been studied.

                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Effect of Race: The effect of race on topotecan pharmacokinetics has not been studied.

                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Effect of Renal Impairment: As compared to the patients with creatinine clearance (CLcr) of > 60 mL/min, topotecan plasma clearance was decreased by 33% in patients with CLcr of 40 to 60 mL/min, and by 66% in patients with CLcr of 20 to 39 mL/min.  Dosage adjustment is recommended for patients with CLcr of 20 to 39 mL/min [see Dosage and Administration (
                                 
                                    2.3
                                 
                                 ) and Use in Specific Populations (
                                 
                                    8.5
                                 
                                 )].
                              
                              Topotecan in combination with cisplatin for the treatment of cervical cancer should only be initiated in patients with serum creatinine ≤ 1.5 mg/dL. In the clinical trial, cisplatin was discontinued for a serum creatinine > 1.5 mg/dL. Insufficient data are available regarding continuing monotherapy with topotecan after cisplatin discontinuation in patients with cervical cancer.

                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Effect of Hepatic Impairment: Plasma clearance in patients with hepatic impairment (serum bilirubin levels between 1.7 and 15.0 mg/dL) was decreased by 33% as compared to that in patients without hepatic impairment.

                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Drug Interactions: No formal drug interactions studies have been conducted. In vitro inhibition studies using marker substrates known to be metabolized by human P450 CYP1A2, CYP2A6, CYP2C8/9, CYP2C19, CYP2D6, CYP2E, CYP3A, or CYP4A or dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase indicate that the activities of these enzymes were not altered by topotecan. Enzyme inhibition by topotecan has not been evaluated in vivo.

                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         