
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           Renal clearance of lithium is reduced by diuretics, such as chlorthalidone increasing the risk of lithium toxicity (7)
                           NSAIDS increase risk of renal dysfunction and interfere with antihypertensive effect (7)
                           Dual inhibition of the renin-angiotensin system: Increased risk of renal impairment, hypotension, and hyperkalemia (7)
                           Lithium: Increases in serum lithium concentrations and lithium toxicity (7)
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           Edarbyclor
                        
                        The pharmacokinetics of azilsartan medoxomil and chlorthalidone are not altered when the drugs are co-administered.
                        No drug interaction studies have been conducted with other drugs and Edarbyclor, although studies have been conducted with azilsartan medoxomil and chlorthalidone.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           Azilsartan medoxomil
                        
                        No clinically significant drug interactions have been observed in studies of azilsartan medoxomil or azilsartan given with amlodipine, antacids, chlorthalidone, digoxin, fluconazole, glyburide, ketoconazole, metformin, pioglitazone, and warfarin. Therefore, azilsartan medoxomil may be used concomitantly with these medications.
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           Non-Steroidal Anti-Inflammatory Agents including Selective Cyclooxygenase-2 Inhibitors (COX-2 Inhibitors)
                        
                        In patients who are elderly, volume-depleted (including those on diuretic therapy), or who have compromised renal function, co-administration of NSAIDs, including selective COX-2 inhibitors, with angiotensin II receptor antagonists, including azilsartan, may result in deterioration of renal function, including possible acute renal failure. These effects are usually reversible. Monitor renal function periodically in patients receiving Edarbyclor and NSAID therapy.
                        The antihypertensive effect of Edarbyclor may be attenuated by NSAIDs, including selective COX-2 inhibitors.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           Dual Blockade of the Renin-Angiotensin System (RAS)
                        
                        Dual blockade of the RAS with angiotensin receptor blockers, ACE inhibitors, or aliskiren is associated with increased risks of hypotension, hyperkalemia, and changes in renal function (including acute renal failure) compared to monotherapy.  Most patients receiving the combination of two RAS inhibitors do not obtain any additional benefit compared to monotherapy. In general, avoid combined use of RAS inhibitors. Closely monitor blood pressure, renal function and electrolytes in patients on Edarbyclor and other agents that affect the RAS.
                        Do not coadminister aliskiren with Edarbyclor in patients with diabetes. Avoid use of aliskiren with Edarbyclor in patients with renal impairment (GFR <60 mL/min).
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           Chlorthalidone
                        
                        Lithium renal clearance is reduced by diuretics, such as chlorthalidone, increasing the risk of lithium toxicity. Consider monitoring lithium levels when using Edarbyclor.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           Lithium
                        
                        Increases in serum lithium concentrations and lithium toxicity have been reported during concomitant administration of lithium with angiotensin II receptor agonists. Monitor serum lithium levels during concomitant use.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         