
                     
                     
                     Drug Interactions
                     
                        Somatropin inhibits 11β‑hydroxysteroid
									dehydrogenase type 1 (11βHSD‑1) in
									adipose/hepatic tissue and may significantly impact the
									metabolism of cortisol and cortisone. As a consequence, in
									patients treated with somatropin, previously undiagnosed central
									(secondary) hypoadrenalism may be unmasked requiring
									glucocorticoid replacement therapy. In addition, patients
									treated with glucocorticoid replacement therapy for previously
									diagnosed hypoadrenalism may require an increase in their
									maintenance or stress doses; this may be especially true for
									patients treated with cortisone acetate and prednisone since
									conversion of these drugs to their biologically active
									metabolites is dependent on the activity of the
									11βHSD‑1 enzyme.
                        Excessive glucocorticoid therapy may attenuate the
									growth-promoting effects of somatropin in children. Therefore,
									glucocorticoid replacement therapy should be carefully adjusted
									in children with concomitant GH and glucocorticoid deficiency to
									avoid both hypoadrenalism and an inhibitory effect on growth.
                        The use of Nutropin in patients with CRI requiring
									glucocorticoid therapy has not been evaluated. Concomitant
									glucocorticoid therapy may inhibit the growth promoting effect
									of Nutropin. Therefore, if glucocorticoid replacement is
									required for CRI, the glucocorticoid dose should be carefully
									adjusted to avoid an inhibitory effect on growth.
                        There was no evidence in the controlled studies of
									Nutropin’s interaction with drugs commonly used in chronic renal
									insufficiency patients. Limited published data indicate that
									somatropin treatment increases cytochrome P450 (CP450) mediated
									antipyrine clearance in man. These data suggest that somatropin
									administration may alter the clearance of compounds known to be
									metabolized by CP450 liver enzymes (e.g., corticosteroids, sex
									steroids, anticonvulsants, cyclosporin). Careful monitoring is
									advisable when somatropin is administered in combination with
									other drugs known to be metabolized by CP450 liver enzymes.
									However, formal drug interaction studies have not been
									conducted. 
                        In adult women on oral estrogen replacement, a larger
									dose of somatropin may be required to achieve the defined
									treatment goal (see DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION).
                        In patients with diabetes mellitus requiring drug
									therapy, the dose of insulin and/or oral agent may require
									adjustment when somatropin therapy is initiated (see PRECAUTIONS,
										General).
                     
                     
                  
               