
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     General
                     
                        In vitro and in vivo preclinical and
									clinical testing have demonstrated that Nutropin is
									therapeutically equivalent to pituitary‑derived human
									GH (hGH). Pediatric patients who lack adequate endogenous GH
									secretion, patients with chronic renal insufficiency, and
									patients with Turner syndrome that were treated with Nutropin
									resulted in an increase in growth rate and an increase in
									insulin‑like growth factor‑I
									(IGF‑I) levels similar to that seen with
									pituitary‑derived hGH.
                        Actions that have been demonstrated for Nutropin,
									somatrem, and/or pituitary‑derived hGH
									include:
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              A. Tissue Growth
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                    1)Skeletal Growth: GH
												stimulates skeletal growth in pediatric patients
												with growth failure due to a lack of adequate
												secretion of endogenous GH or secondary to chronic
												renal insufficiency and in patients with Turner
												syndrome. Skeletal growth is accomplished at the
												epiphyseal plates at the ends of a growing bone.
												Growth and metabolism of epiphyseal plate cells are
												directly stimulated by GH and one of its mediators,
												IGF‑I. Serum levels of IGF‑I are
												low in children and adolescents who are GH
												deficient, but increase during treatment with GH. In
												pediatric patients, new bone is formed at the
												epiphyses in response to GH and IGF‑I.
												This results in linear growth until these growth
												plates fuse at the end of puberty.
                                 
                                    2)Cell Growth: Treatment with
												hGH results in an increase in both the number and
												the size of skeletal muscle cells.
                                 
                                    3)Organ Growth: GH influences
												the size of internal organs, including kidneys, and
												increases red cell mass. Treatment of
												hypophysectomized or genetic dwarf rats with GH
												results in organ growth that is proportional to the
												overall body growth. In normal rats subjected to
												nephrectomy‑induced uremia, GH promoted
												skeletal and body growth.
                              
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              B. Protein Metabolism
                           
                           
                              Linear growth is facilitated in part by
											GH‑stimulated protein synthesis. This is
											reflected by nitrogen retention as demonstrated by a
											decline in urinary nitrogen excretion and blood urea
											nitrogen during GH therapy.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              C. Carbohydrate Metabolism
                           
                           
                              GH is a modulator of carbohydrate metabolism. For
											example, patients with inadequate secretion of GH
											sometimes experience fasting hypoglycemia that is
											improved by treatment with GH. GH therapy may decrease
											insulin sensitivity. Untreated patients with chronic
											renal insufficiency and Turner syndrome have an
											increased incidence of glucose intolerance.
											Administration of hGH to adults or children resulted in
											increases in serum fasting and postprandial insulin
											levels, more commonly in overweight or obese
											individuals. In addition, mean fasting and postprandial
											glucose and hemoglobin A1c levels remained in
											the normal range.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              D. Lipid Metabolism
                           
                           
                              In GH‑deficient patients,
											administration of GH resulted in lipid mobilization,
											reduction in body fat stores, increased plasma fatty
											acids, and decreased plasma cholesterol
											levels.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              E. Mineral Metabolism
                           
                           
                              The retention of total body potassium in response
											to GH administration apparently results from cellular
											growth. Serum levels of inorganic phosphorus may
											increase slightly in patients with inadequate secretion
											of endogenous GH, chronic renal insufficiency, or
											patients with Turner syndrome during GH therapy due to
											metabolic activity associated with bone growth as well
											as increased tubular reabsorption of phosphate by the
											kidney. Serum calcium is not significantly altered in
											these patients. Sodium retention also occurs. Adults
											with childhood‑onset GH deficiency show low
											bone mineral density (BMD). GH therapy results in
											increases in serum alkaline phosphatase. (See PRECAUTIONS: Laboratory
												Tests.)
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              F. Connective Tissue
										Metabolism
                           
                           
                              GH stimulates the synthesis of chondroitin
											sulfate and collagen as well as the urinary excretion of
											hydroxyproline.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Subcutaneous Absorption
                           
                              The absolute bioavailability of recombinant human
											growth hormone (rhGH) after subcutaneous administration
											in healthy adult males has been determined to be
											81±20%. The mean terminal
											t½ after subcutaneous
											administration is significantly longer than that seen
											after intravenous administration
											(2.1±0.43 hours vs.
											19.5±3.1 minutes) indicating that the
											subcutaneous absorption of the compound is slow and
											rate‑limiting.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Distribution
                           
                              Animal studies with rhGH showed that GH localizes
											to highly perfused organs, particularly the liver and
											kidney. The volume of distribution at steady state for
											rhGH in healthy adult males is about 50 mL/kg
											body weight, approximating the serum volume.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Metabolism
                           
                              Both the liver and kidney have been shown to be
											important metabolizing organs for GH. Animal studies
											suggest that the kidney is the dominant organ of
											clearance. GH is filtered at the glomerulus and
											reabsorbed in the proximal tubules. It is then cleaved
											within renal cells into its constituent amino acids,
											which return to the systemic circulation.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Elimination
                           
                              The mean terminal t½ after
											intravenous administration of rhGH in healthy adult
											males is estimated to be
											19.5±3.1 minutes. Clearance of rhGH
											after intravenous administration in healthy adults and
											children is reported to be in the range of
											116–174 mL/hr/kg.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Bioequivalence of
										Formulations
                           
                              Nutropin has been determined to be bioequivalent
											to Nutropin AQ® [somatropin (rDNA
											origin) injection] based on the statistical evaluation
											of AUC and Cmax.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           SPECIAL POPULATIONS
                           
                              
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Pediatric
                                 
                                    Available literature data suggest that
													rhGH clearances are similar in adults and
													children.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Gender
                                 
                                    No data are available for exogenously
													administered rhGH. Available data for methionyl
													recombinant GH, pituitary‑derived GH,
													and endogenous GH suggest no consistent
													gender‑based differences in GH
													clearance.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Geriatrics
                                 
                                    Limited published data suggest that the
													plasma clearance and average
													steady‑state plasma concentration of
													rhGH may not be different between young and
													elderly patients.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Race
                                 
                                    Reported values for half‑lives
													for endogenous GH in normal adult black males
													are not different from observed values for
													normal adult white males. No data for other
													races are available.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Growth Hormone
												Deficiency (GHD)
                                 
                                    Reported values for clearance of rhGH in
													adults and children with GHD range
													138–245 mL/hr/kg and are
													similar to those observed in healthy adults and
													children. Mean terminal t½
													values following intravenous and subcutaneous
													administration in adult and pediatric GHD
													patients are also similar to those observed in
													healthy adult males.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Renal
												Insufficiency
                                 
                                    Children and adults with chronic renal
													failure (CRF) and end‑stage renal
													disease (ESRD) tend to have decreased clearance
													compared to normals. In a study with six
													pediatric patients 7 to 11 years of age, the
													clearance of Nutropin was reduced by
													21.5% and 22.6% after the
													intravenous infusion and subcutaneous injection,
													respectively, of 0.05 mg/kg of Nutropin
													compared to normal healthy adults. Endogenous GH
													production may also increase in some individuals
													with ESRD. However, no rhGH accumulation has
													been reported in children with CRF or ESRD dosed
													with current regimens.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Turner Syndrome
                                 
                                    No pharmacokinetic data are available for
													exogenously administered rhGH. However, reported
													half‑lives, absorption, and
													elimination rates for endogenous GH in this
													population are similar to the ranges observed
													for normal subjects and GHD
													populations.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Hepatic
												Insufficiency
                                 
                                    A reduction in rhGH clearance has been
													noted in patients with severe liver dysfunction.
													The clinical significance of this decrease is
													unknown.
                                    


                                    



                                       Single Dose Mean Growth Hormone Concentrations in Healthy Adult Males
                                    
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Single Dose Mean Growth Hormone Concentrations in Healthy Adult Males
                                       
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         