


Drug Interactions
Hypotension — Patients on Diuretic Therapy: Patients on diuretics, and especially those in whom diuretic therapy was recently instituted, may occasionally experience an excessive reduction of blood pressure after initiation of therapy with enalapril. The possibility of hypotensive effects with enalapril can be minimized by either discontinuing the diuretic or increasing the salt intake prior to initiation of treatment with enalapril. If it is necessary to continue the diuretic, provide close medical supervision after the initial dose for at least two hours and until blood pressure has stabilized for at least an additional hour. (See WARNINGS and DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION.)Hypotension — Patients on Diuretic Therapy: Patients on diuretics, and especially those in whom diuretic therapy was recently instituted, may occasionally experience an excessive reduction of blood pressure after initiation of therapy with enalapril. The possibility of hypotensive effects with enalapril can be minimized by either discontinuing the diuretic or increasing the salt intake prior to initiation of treatment with enalapril. If it is necessary to continue the diuretic, provide close medical supervision after the initial dose for at least two hours and until blood pressure has stabilized for at least an additional hour. (See Agents Causing Renin Release— The antihypertensive effect of enalapril is augmented by antihypertensive agents that cause renin release (eg, diuretics).Agents Causing Renin Release— The antihypertensive effect of enalapril is augmented by antihypertensive agents that cause renin release (eg, diuretics).Non-steroidal Anti-inflammatory Agents— In some patients with compromised renal function who are being treated with non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, the coadministration of enalapril may result in a further deterioration of renal function.  These effects are usually reversible.Non-steroidal Anti-inflammatory Agents— In some patients with compromised renal function who are being treated with non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, the coadministration of enalapril may result in a further deterioration of renal function.  These effects are usually reversible.In a clinical pharmacology study, indomethacin or sulindac was administered to hypertensive patients receiving VASOTEC (enalapril maleate).  In this study there was no evidence of a blunting of the antihypertensive action of VASOTEC (enalapril maleate).  However, reports suggest that NSAIDs may diminish the antihypertensive effect of ACE-inhibitors.  This interaction should be given consideration in patients taking NSAIDs concomitantly with ACE-inhibitors.Agents Increasing Serum Potassium— Enalapril attenuates potassium loss caused by thiazide-type diuretics. Potassium-sparing diuretics (eg, spironolactone, triamterene, or amiloride), potassium supplements, or potassium-containing salt substitutes may lead to significant increases in serum potassium. Therefore, if concomitant use of these agents is indicated because of demonstrated hypokalemia, they should be used with caution and with frequent monitoring of serum potassium.Agents Increasing Serum Potassium— Enalapril attenuates potassium loss caused by thiazide-type diuretics. Potassium-sparing diuretics (eg, spironolactone, triamterene, or amiloride), potassium supplements, or potassium-containing salt substitutes may lead to significant increases in serum potassium. Therefore, if concomitant use of these agents is indicated because of demonstrated hypokalemia, they should be used with caution and with frequent monitoring of serum potassium.Lithium— Lithium toxicity has been reported in patients receiving lithium concomitantly with drugs which cause elimination of sodium, including ACE inhibitors. A few cases of lithium toxicity have been reported in patients receiving concomitant enalapril and lithium and were reversible upon discontinuation of both drugs. It is recommended that serum lithium levels be monitored frequently if enalapril is administered concomitantly with lithium.Lithium— Lithium toxicity has been reported in patients receiving lithium concomitantly with drugs which cause elimination of sodium, including ACE inhibitors. A few cases of lithium toxicity have been reported in patients receiving concomitant enalapril and lithium and were reversible upon discontinuation of both drugs. It is recommended that serum lithium levels be monitored frequently if enalapril is administered concomitantly with lithium.CYP3A4 Inhibitors—Felodipine is metabolized by CYP3A4.  Co-administration of CYP3A4 inhibitors (eg, ketoconazole, itraconazole, erythromycin, grapefruit juice, cimetidine) with felodipine may lead to several-fold increases in the plasma levels of felodipine, either due to an increase in bioavailability or due to a decrease in metabolism.  These increases in concentration may lead to increased effects, (lower blood pressure and increased heart rate).  These effects have been observed with co-administration of itraconazole (a potent CYP3A4 inhibitor). Caution should be used when CYP3A4 inhibitors are co-administered with felodipine.  A conservative approach to dosing felodipine should be taken.  The following specific interactions have been reported:CYP3A4 Inhibitors—Felodipine is metabolized by CYP3A4.  Co-administration of CYP3A4 inhibitors (eg, ketoconazole, itraconazole, erythromycin, grapefruit juice, cimetidine) with felodipine may lead to several-fold increases in the plasma levels of felodipine, either due to an increase in bioavailability or due to a decrease in metabolism.  These increases in concentration may lead to increased effects, (lower blood pressure and increased heart rate).  These effects have been observed with co-administration of itraconazole (a potent CYP3A4 inhibitor). Caution should be used when CYP3A4 inhibitors are co-administered with felodipine.  A conservative approach to dosing felodipine should be taken.  The following specific interactions have been reported:Itraconazole—Co-administration of another extended release formulation of felodipine with itraconazole resulted in approximately 8-fold increase in the AUC, more than 6-fold increase in the Cmax, and 2-fold prolongation in the half-life of felodipine.Itraconazole—Co-administration of another extended release formulation of felodipine with itraconazole resulted in approximately 8-fold increase in the AUC, more than 6-fold increase in the CErythromycin—Co-administration of felodipine (PLENDIL) with erythromycin resulted in approximately 2.5-fold increase in the AUC and Cmax, and about 2-fold prolongation in the half-life of felodipine.Erythromycin—Co-administration of felodipine (PLENDIL) with erythromycin resulted in approximately 2.5-fold increase in the AUC and CGrapefruit juice—Co-administration of felodipine with grapefruit juice resulted in more than 2-fold increase in the AUC and Cmax, but no prolongation in the half-life of felodipine.Grapefruit juice—Co-administration of felodipine with grapefruit juice resulted in more than 2-fold increase in the AUC and CCimetidine—Co-administration of felodipine with cimetidine (a non-specific CYP-450 inhibitor) resulted in an increase of approximately 50% in the AUC and the Cmax, of felodipine.Cimetidine—Co-administration of felodipine with cimetidine (a non-specific CYP-450 inhibitor) resulted in an increase of approximately 50% in the AUC and the CBeta-Blocking Agents— Enalapril has been used concomitantly with beta adrenergic-blocking agents without evidence of clinically significant adverse interactions.Beta-Blocking Agents— Enalapril has been used concomitantly with beta adrenergic-blocking agents without evidence of clinically significant adverse interactions.A pharmacokinetic study of felodipine in conjunction with metoprolol demonstrated no significant effects on the pharmacokinetics of felodipine. The AUC and Cmax of metoprolol, however, were increased approximately 31% and 38%, respectively. In controlled clinical trials, however, beta blockers including metoprolol were concurrently administered with felodipine and were well tolerated.max of metoprolol, however, were increased approximately 31% and 38%, respectively. In controlled clinical trials, however, beta blockers including metoprolol were concurrently administered with felodipine and were well tolerated.Digoxin— Enalapril has been used concomitantly with digoxin without evidence of clinically significant adverse interactions.Digoxin— Enalapril has been used concomitantly with digoxin without evidence of clinically significant adverse interactions.When given concomitantly with felodipine ER, the pharmacokinetics of digoxin in patients with heart failure were not significantly altered.Anticonvulsants— In a pharmacokinetic study, maximum plasma concentrations of felodipine were considerably lower in epileptic patients on long-term anticonvulsant therapy (eg, phenytoin, carbamazepine, or phenobarbital) than in healthy volunteers. In such patients, the mean area under the felodipine plasma concentration-time curve was also reduced to approximately 6% of that observed in healthy volunteers. Since a clinically significant interaction may be anticipated, alternative antihypertensive therapy should be considered in these patients.Anticonvulsants— In a pharmacokinetic study, maximum plasma concentrations of felodipine were considerably lower in epileptic patients on long-term anticonvulsant therapy (eg, phenytoin, carbamazepine, or phenobarbital) than in healthy volunteers. In such patients, the mean area under the felodipine plasma concentration-time curve was also reduced to approximately 6% of that observed in healthy volunteers. Since a clinically significant interaction may be anticipated, alternative antihypertensive therapy should be considered in these patients.Tacrolimus— Felodipine may increase the blood concentration of tacrolimus. When given concomitantly with felodipine, the tacrolimus blood concentration should be followed and the tacrolimus dose may need to be adjusted.Tacrolimus— Felodipine may increase the blood concentration of tacrolimus. When given concomitantly with felodipine, the tacrolimus blood concentration should be followed and the tacrolimus dose may need to be adjusted.Other Concomitant Therapy— In healthy subjects, there were no clinically significant interactions when felodipine was given concomitantly with indomethacin or spironolactone.Other Concomitant Therapy— In healthy subjects, there were no clinically significant interactions when felodipine was given concomitantly with indomethacin or spironolactone.Enalapril has been used concomitantly with methyldopa, nitrates, hydralazine, and prazosin without evidence of clinically significant adverse interactions.


