
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  Local anesthetics block the generation and the conduction of
nerve impulses, presumably by increasing the threshold for electrical
excitation in the nerve, by slowing the propagation of the nerve
impulse, and by reducing the rate of rise of the action potential. In
general, the progression of anesthesia is related to the diameter,
myelination, and conduction velocity of affected nerve fibers. 
Clinically, the order of loss of nerve function is as follows: (1) pain,
(2) temperature, (3) touch, (4) proprioception, and (5) skeletal muscle
tone.
                  Systemic absorption of local anesthetics produces effects on the
cardiovascular and central nervous systems (CNS).  At blood
concentrations achieved with normal therapeutic doses, changes in cardiac
conduction, excitability, refractoriness, contractility, and peripheral
vascular resistance are minimal.  However, toxic blood
concentrations depress cardiac conduction and excitability, which may
lead to atrioventricular block, ventricular arrhythmias and cardiac
arrest, sometimes resulting in fatalities.  In addition,
myocardial contractility is depressed and peripheral vasodilation
occurs, leading to decreased cardiac output and arterial blood
pressure.  Recent clinical reports and animal research suggest
that these cardiovascular changes are more likely to occur after
unintended intravascular injection of bupivacaine.  Therefore,
incremental dosing is necessary.
                  Following systemic absorption, local anesthetics can produce
central nervous system stimulation, depression, or both. 
Apparent central stimulation is manifested as restlessness,
tremors and shivering progressing to convulsions, followed by depression
and coma progressing ultimately to respiratory arrest. 
However, the local anesthetics have a primary depressant effect on the
medulla and on higher centers.  The depressed stage may occur
without a prior excited state.
               
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        The rate of systemic absorption of local anesthetics is
dependent upon the total dose and concentration of drug
administered, the route of administration, the vascularity of
the administration site, and the presence or absence of
epinephrine in the anesthetic solution.  A dilute
concentration of epinephrine (1:200,000 or 5 mcg/mL) usually
reduces the rate of absorption and peak plasma concentration of
bupivacaine, permitting the use of moderately larger total doses
and sometimes prolonging the duration of action. 
                        The onset of action with bupivacaine is rapid and
anesthesia is long lasting.  The duration of anesthesia
is significantly longer with bupivacaine than with any other
commonly used local anesthetic.  It has also been noted
that there is a period of analgesia that persists after the
return of sensation, during which time the need for strong
analgesics is reduced.
                        The onset of action following dental injections is usually 2 to 10 minutes and anesthesia may last two or three times longer than lidocaine and mepivacaine for dental use, in many patients up to 7 hours.  The duration of anesthetic effect is prolonged by the addition of epinephrine 1:200,000.
                        Local anesthetics are bound to plasma proteins in varying
degrees.  Generally, the lower the plasma concentration
of drug the higher the percentage of drug bound to plasma
proteins.
                        Local anesthetics appear to cross the placenta by passive
diffusion.  The rate and degree of diffusion is
governed by (1) the degree of plasma protein binding, (2) the
degree of ionization, and (3) the degree of lipid
solubility.  Fetal/maternal ratios of local anesthetics
appear to be inversely related to the degree of plasma protein
binding, because only the free, unbound drug is available for
placental transfer.  Bupivacaine with a high protein
binding capacity (95%) has a low fetal/maternal ratio
(0.2 to 0.4).  The extent of placental transfer is also
determined by the degree of ionization and lipid solubility of
the drug.  Lipid soluble, nonionized drugs readily
enter the fetal blood from the maternal circulation.
                        Depending upon the route of administration, local
anesthetics are distributed to some extent to all body tissues,
with high concentrations found in highly perfused organs such as
the liver, lungs, heart, and brain.
                        Pharmacokinetic studies on the plasma profile of
bupivacaine after direct intravenous injection suggest a
three-compartment open model.  The first compartment is
represented by the rapid intravascular distribution of the
drug.  The second compartment represents the
equilibration of the drug throughout the highly perfused organs
such as the brain, myocardium, lungs, kidneys, and
liver.  The third compartment represents an
equilibration of the drug with poorly perfused tissues, such as
muscle and fat.  The elimination of drug from tissue distribution
depends largely upon the ability of binding sites in the
circulation to carry it to the liver where it is
metabolized.
                        After injection of Sensorcaine (bupivacaine HCl) for
caudal, epidural, or peripheral nerve block in man, peak levels
of bupivacaine in the blood are reached in 30 to 45 minutes,
followed by a decline to insignificant levels during the next 3
to 6 hours.
                        Various pharmacokinetic parameters of the local
anesthetics can be significantly altered by the presence of
hepatic or renal disease, addition of epinephrine, factors
affecting urinary pH, renal blood flow, the route of drug
administration, and the age of the patient.  The
half-life of bupivacaine in adults is 2.7 hours and in neonates
8.1 hours.
                        In clinical studies, elderly patients reached the maximal
spread of analgesia and maximal motor blockade more rapidly than
younger patients.  Elderly patients also exhibited
higher peak plasma concentrations following administration of
this product.  The total plasma clearance was decreased
in these patients.
                        Amide-type local anesthetics such as bupivacaine are
metabolized primarily in the liver via conjugation with
glucuronic acid.  Patients with hepatic disease, especially those with
severe hepatic disease, may be more susceptible to the potential
toxicities of the amide-type local anesthetics. Pipecoloxylidine
is the major metabolite of bupivacaine.
                        The kidney is the main excretory organ for most local
anesthetics and their metabolites.  Urinary excretion
is affected by urinary perfusion and factors affecting urinary
pH.  Only 6% of bupivacaine is excreted
unchanged in the urine.
                        When administered in recommended doses and
concentrations, Sensorcaine (bupivacaine HCl) does not
ordinarily produce irritation or tissue damage and does not
cause methemoglobinemia.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         