
                     
                     
                     Drug Interactions
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Immunosuppressive Drugs, Gemfibrozil, Niacin (Nicotinic Acid), Erythromycin: See 
                                    WARNINGS: Skeletal Muscle
                                 .
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Cytochrome P450 3A4 Inhibitors: 
                                 In vitro and in vivo data indicate that pravastatin is not metabolized by cytochrome P450 3A4 to a clinically significant extent. This has been shown in studies with known cytochrome P450 3A4 inhibitors (see 
                                    Diltiazem
                                  and 
                                    Itraconazole
                                  below). Other examples of cytochrome P450 3A4 inhibitors include ketoconazole, mibefradil, and erythromycin.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Diltiazem: Steady-state levels of diltiazem (a known, weak inhibitor of P450 3A4) had no effect on the pharmacokinetics of pravastatin. In this study, the AUC and Cmax of another HMG-CoA reductase inhibitor which is known to be metabolized by cytochrome P450 3A4 increased by factors of 3.6 and 4.3, respectively.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Itraconazole: The mean AUC and Cmax for pravastatin were increased by factors of 1.7 and 2.5, respectively, when given with itraconazole (a potent P450 3A4 inhibitor which also inhibits p-glycoprotein transport) as compared to placebo. The mean t½ was not affected by itraconazole, suggesting that the relatively small increases in Cmax and AUC were due solely to increased bioavailability rather than a decrease in clearance, consistent with inhibition of p-glycoprotein transport by itraconazole. This drug transport system is thought to affect bioavailability and excretion of HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors, including pravastatin. The AUC and Cmax of another HMG-CoA reductase inhibitor which is known to be metabolized by cytochrome P450 3A4 increased by factors of 19 and 17, respectively, when given with itraconazole.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Antipyrine: Since concomitant administration of pravastatin had no effect on the clearance of antipyrine, interactions with other drugs metabolized via the same hepatic cytochrome isozymes are not expected.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Cholestyramine/Colestipol: Concomitant administration resulted in an approximately 40 to 50% decrease in the mean AUC of pravastatin. However, when pravastatin was administered 1 hour before or 4 hours after cholestyramine or 1 hour before colestipol and a standard meal, there was no clinically significant decrease in bioavailability or therapeutic effect. (See 
                                    DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION: Concomitant Therapy
                                 .)
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Warfarin: Concomitant administration of 40 mg pravastatin had no clinically significant effect on prothrombin time when administered in a study to normal elderly subjects who were stabilized on warfarin.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Cimetidine: The AUC0-12 hr for pravastatin when given with cimetidine was not significantly different from the AUC for pravastatin when given alone. A significant difference was observed between the AUC's for pravastatin when given with cimetidine compared to when administered with antacid.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Digoxin: In a crossover trial involving 18 healthy male subjects given 20 mg pravastatin and 0.2 mg digoxin concurrently for 9 days, the bioavailability parameters of digoxin were not affected. The AUC of pravastatin tended to increase, but the overall bioavailability of pravastatin plus its metabolites SQ 31,906 and SQ 31,945 was not altered.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Cyclosporine: Some investigators have measured cyclosporine levels in patients on pravastatin (up to 20 mg), and to date, these results indicate no clinically meaningful elevations in cyclosporine levels. In one single-dose study, pravastatin levels were found to be increased in cardiac transplant patients receiving cyclosporine.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Gemfibrozil: In a crossover study in 20 healthy male volunteers given concomitant single doses of pravastatin and gemfibrozil, there was a significant decrease in urinary excretion and protein binding of pravastatin. In addition, there was a significant increase in AUC, Cmax, and Tmax for the pravastatin metabolite SQ 31,906. Combination therapy with pravastatin and gemfibrozil is generally not recommended. (See 
                                    WARNINGS: Skeletal Muscle
                                 .)
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              In interaction studies with aspirin, antacids (1 hour prior to pravastatin sodium), cimetidine, nicotinic acid, or probucol, no statistically significant differences in bioavailability were seen when pravastatin sodium was administered.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               