
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
                  No drug interaction studies have been conducted with amlodipine, valsartan, and hydrochlorothiazide tablets and other drugs, although studies have been conducted with the individual components. A pharmacokinetic drug-drug interaction study has been conducted to address the potential for pharmacokinetic interaction between the triple combination, amlodipine, valsartan, and hydrochlorothiazide tablets, and the corresponding 3 double combinations. No clinically relevant interaction was observed. 
                  
                     Amlodipine 
                  
                  
                     Impact of other Drugs on Amlodipine 
                  
                  
                     CYP3A Inhibitors 
                  
                  Coadministration with CYP3A inhibitors (moderate and strong) results in increased systemic exposure to amlodipine and may require dose reduction. Monitor for symptoms of hypotension and edema when amlodipine is coadministered with CYP3A inhibitors to determine the need for dose adjustment [see Clinical Pharmacology (
                     
                        12.3)]. 
                  
                     CYP3A Inducers 
                  
                  No information is available on the quantitative effects of CYP3A inducers on amlodipine. Blood pressure should be closely monitored when amlodipine is coadministered with CYP3A inducers. 
                  
                     Sildenafil 
                  
                  Monitor for hypotension when sildenafil is coadministered with amlodipine [see Clinical Pharmacology (
                     
                        12.2)]. 
                  
                     Impact of Amlodipine on other Drugs 
                  
                  
                     Simvastatin 
                  
                  Coadministration of simvastatin with amlodipine increases the systemic exposure of simvastatin. Limit the dose of simvastatin in patients on amlodipine to 20 mg daily [see Clinical Pharmacology (
                     
                        12.3)]. 
                  
                     Immunosuppressants 
                  
                  Amlodipine may increase the systemic exposure of cyclosporine or tacrolimus when coadministered. Frequent monitoring of trough blood levels of cyclosporine and tacrolimus is recommended and adjust the dose when appropriate [see Clinical Pharmacology (
                     
                        12.3)].
                  
                     Valsartan 
                  
                  No clinically significant pharmacokinetic interactions were observed when valsartan was coadministered with amlodipine, atenolol, cimetidine, digoxin, furosemide, glyburide, hydrochlorothiazide, or indomethacin. The valsartan-atenolol combination was more antihypertensive than either component, but it did not lower the heart rate more than atenolol alone. 
                  
                     In vitro metabolism studies have indicated that CYP450 mediated drug interaction between valsartan and coadministered drugs are unlikely because of the low extent of metabolism [see Pharmacokinetics - Valsartan, (12.3)]. 
                  Coadministration of valsartan and warfarin did not change the pharmacokinetics of valsartan or the time-course of the anticoagulant properties of warfarin. 
                  
                     Potassium: Concomitant use of valsartan with other agents that block the renin-angiotensin system, potassium-sparing diuretics (e.g., spironolactone, triamterene, amiloride), potassium supplements, salt substitutes containing potassium or other drugs that may increase potassium levels (e.g., heparin) may lead to increases in serum potassium and in heart failure patients to increases in serum creatinine. If co-medication is considered necessary, monitoring of serum potassium is advisable.
                  
                     Non-Steroidal Anti-Inflammatory Agents including Selective Cyclooxygenase-2 Inhibitors (COX-2 Inhibitors): In patients who are elderly, volume-depleted (including those on diuretic therapy), or with compromised renal function, coadministration of NSAIDs, including selective COX-2 inhibitors, with angiotensin II receptor antagonists, including valsartan, may result in deterioration of renal function, including possible acute renal failure. These effects are usually reversible. Monitor renal function periodically in patients receiving valsartan and NSAID therapy. 
                  The antihypertensive effect of angiotensin II receptor antagonists, including valsartan, may be attenuated by NSAIDs including selective COX-2 inhibitors.
                  
                     Dual Blockade of the Renin-Angiotensin System (RAS): Dual blockade of the RAS with angiotensin receptor blockers, ACE inhibitors, or aliskiren is associated with increased risks of hypotension, hyperkalemia, and changes in renal function (including acute renal failure) compared to monotherapy. Most patients receiving the combination of two RAS inhibitors do not obtain any additional benefit compared to monotherapy. In general, avoid combined use of RAS inhibitors. Closely monitor blood pressure, renal function, and electrolytes in patients on amlodipine, valsartan, and hydrochlorothiazide tablets and other agents that affect the RAS. 
                  Do not coadminister aliskiren with amlodipine, valsartan, and hydrochlorothiazide tablets in patients with diabetes. Avoid use of aliskiren with amlodipine, valsartan, and hydrochlorothiazide tablets in patients with renal impairment (GFR < 60 mL/min).
                  
                     Valsartan – Hydrochlorothiazide 
                  
                  
                     Lithium: Increases in serum lithium concentrations and lithium toxicity have been reported during concomitant administration of lithium with angiotensin II receptor antagonists or thiazides. Monitor lithium levels in patients taking amlodipine, valsartan, and hydrochlorothiazide tablets.
                  
                     Hydrochlorothiazide 
                  
                  When administered concurrently the following drugs may interact with thiazide diuretics:
                  
                     Antidiabetic drugs (oral agents and insulin): Dosage adjustment of the antidiabetic drug may be required.
                  
                     Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs and COX-2 selective inhibitors): When amlodipine, valsartan, and hydrochlorothiazide tablets and non-steroidal anti-inflammatory agents are used concomitantly, the patient should be observed closely to determine if the desired effect of diuretic is obtained.
                  
                     Carbamazepine: May lead to symptomatic hyponatremia.
                  
                     Ion exchange resins: Staggering the dosage of hydrochlorothiazide and ion exchange resins (e.g., cholestyramine, colestipol) such that hydrochlorothiazide is administered at least 4 hours before or 4 to 6 hours after the administration of resins would potentially minimize the interaction [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)]. 
                  
                     Cyclosporine: Concomitant treatment with cyclosporine may increase the risk of hyperuricemia and gout-type complications.
               
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              •If simvastatin is coadministered with amlodipine, do not exceed doses greater than 20 mg daily of simvastatin (7) 
                           
                              •Antidiabetic drugs: Dosage adjustment of antidiabetic may be required (7) 
                           
                              •Cholestyramine and colestipol: Reduced absorption of thiazides (12.3) 
                           
                              •Lithium: Increased risk of lithium toxicity. Monitor serum lithium concentrations during concurrent use. (7) 
                           
                              •NSAID use may lead to increased risk of renal impairment and loss of anti-hypertensive effect (7) 
                           
                              •Dual inhibition of the renin-angiotensin system: Increased risk of renal impairment, hypotension, and hyperkalemia (7) 
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         