
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           Do not co-administer with atazanavir or nelfinavir (7.1)
                           Concomitant warfarin use may require monitoring (7.2)
                           May interfere with the absorption of drugs where gastric pH is important for bioavailability (e.g. ketoconazole, ampicillin esters, atazanavir, iron salts, erlotinib and mycophenolate mofetil) (7.4)
                           May produce false-positive urine screen for THC (7.5)
                           Methotrexate: Pantoprazole may increase serum level of methotrexate (7.6)
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 Interference with Antiretroviral Therapy
                     
                        Concomitant use of atazanavir or nelfinavir with proton pump inhibitors is not recommended. Co-administration of atazanavir or nelfinavir with proton pump inhibitors is expected to substantially decrease atazanavir or nelfinavir plasma concentrations and may result in a loss of therapeutic effect and development of drug resistance.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 Coumarin Anticoagulants
                     
                        There have been postmarketing reports of increased INR and prothrombin time in patients receiving proton pump inhibitors, including Pantoprazole, and warfarin concomitantly. Increases in INR and prothrombin time may lead to abnormal bleeding and even death. Patients treated with proton pump inhibitors and warfarin concomitantly should be monitored for increases in INR and prothrombin time.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3 Clopidogrel
                     
                        Concomitant administration of pantoprazole and clopidogrel in healthy subjects had no clinically important effect on exposure to the active metabolite of clopidogrel or clopidogrel-induced platelet inhibition [see 
                           
                              Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)
                           ]. No dose adjustment of clopidogrel is necessary when administered with an approved dose of Pantoprazole.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4 Drugs for Which Gastric pH Can Affect Bioavailability
                     
                        Due to its effects on gastric acid secretion, pantoprazole can reduce the absorption of drugs where gastric pH is an important determinant of their bioavailability. Like with other drugs that decrease the intragastric acidity, the absorption of drugs such as ketoconazole, ampicillin esters, atazanavir, iron salts, erlotinib, and mycophenolate mofetil (MMF) can decrease. 
                        Co-administration of pantoprazole in healthy subjects and in transplant patients receiving MMF has been reported to reduce the exposure to the active metabolite, mycophenolic acid (MPA), possibly due to a decrease in MMF solubility at an increased gastric pH. The clinical relevance of reduced MPA exposure on organ rejection has not been established in transplant patients receiving Pantoprazole Sodium Delayed-Release Tablets and MMF. Use Pantoprazole Sodium Delayed-Release Tablets with caution in transplant patients receiving MMF [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.5 False Positive Urine Tests for THC
                     
                        There have been reports of false positive urine screening tests for tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) in patients receiving proton pump inhibitors. An alternative confirmatory method should be considered to verify positive results.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.6 Methotrexate
                     
                        Case reports, published population pharmacokinetic studies, and retrospective analyses suggest that concomitant administration of PPIs and methotrexate (primarily at high dose; see methotrexate prescribing information) may elevate and prolong serum levels of methotrexate and/or its metabolite hydroxymethotrexate. However, no formal drug interaction studies of methotrexate with PPIs have been conducted [see Warnings and Precautions (5.10) ].
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         