
               
               
               12  CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1  Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Edoxaban is a selective inhibitor of FXa.  It does not require antithrombin III for antithrombotic activity.  Edoxaban inhibits free FXa, and prothrombinase activity and inhibits thrombin-induced platelet aggregation.  Inhibition of FXa in the coagulation cascade reduces thrombin generation and reduces thrombus formation.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2  Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        As a result of FXa inhibition, edoxaban prolongs clotting time tests such as prothrombin time (PT), and activated partial thromboplastin time (aPTT). Changes observed in PT, INR, and aPTT at the expected therapeutic dose, however, are small, subject to a high degree of variability and not useful in monitoring the anticoagulant effect of edoxaban.  Following oral administration, peak pharmacodynamic effects are observed within 1-2 hours, which correspond with peak edoxaban concentrations (Cmax).
                        
                           Cardiac Electrophysiology 
                        
                        In a thorough QT study in healthy men and women aged 19-45 years, no QTc interval prolongation was observed with edoxaban (90 mg and 180 mg).
                        
                           Pharmacodynamic Interactions: Aspirin
                        
                        Co-administration of aspirin (100 mg or 325 mg) and edoxaban increased bleeding time relative to that seen with either drug alone. 
                        
                           NSAID (Naproxen)
                        
                        Co-administration of naproxen (500 mg) and edoxaban increased bleeding time relative to that seen with either drug alone.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3  Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        Edoxaban displays approximately dose-proportional pharmacokinetics for doses of 15 to 150 mg and 60 to 120 mg following single and repeat doses, respectively, in healthy subjects.
                        
                           Absorption
                        
                        Following oral administration, peak plasma edoxaban concentrations are observed within 1-2 hours. Absolute bioavailability is 62%. Food does not affect total systemic exposure to edoxaban. SAVAYSA was administered with or without food in the ENGAGE AF-TIMI 48 and Hokusai VTE trials. No data are available regarding the bioavailability upon crushing and/or mixing of edoxaban tablets into food, liquids, or administration through feeding tubes.
                        
                           Distribution
                        
                        Disposition is biphasic. The steady-state volume of distribution (Vdss) is 107 (19.9) L [mean (SD)]. In vitro plasma protein binding is approximately 55%. There is no clinically relevant accumulation of edoxaban (accumulation ratio 1.14) with once daily dosing. 
                        Steady-state concentrations are achieved within 3 days.
                        
                           Metabolism
                        
                        Unchanged edoxaban is the predominant form in plasma. There is minimal metabolism via hydrolysis (mediated by carboxylesterase 1), conjugation, and oxidation by CYP3A4.
                        The predominant metabolite M-4, formed by hydrolysis, is human-specific and active and reaches less than 10% of the exposure of the parent compound in healthy subjects. Exposure to the other metabolites is less than 5% of exposure to edoxaban.
                        
                           Elimination
                        
                        Edoxaban is eliminated primarily as unchanged drug in the urine. Renal clearance (11 L/hour) accounts for approximately 50% of the total clearance of edoxaban (22 L/hour). Metabolism and biliary/intestinal excretion account for the remaining clearance. The terminal elimination half-life of edoxaban following oral administration is 10 to 14 hours.
                        
                           Specific Populations
                        
                        
                           Hepatic Impairment
                        
                        In a dedicated pharmacokinetic study, patients with mild or moderate hepatic impairment (classified as Child-Pugh A or Child-Pugh B) exhibited similar pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics to their matched healthy control group. There is no clinical experience with edoxaban in patients with severe hepatic impairment [see Use in Specific Populations (8.7)].
                        
                           Renal Impairment
                        
                        In a dedicated pharmacokinetic study, total systemic exposure to edoxaban for subjects with CrCL > 50 to < 80 mL/min, CrCL 30 to 50 mL/min, CrCL < 30 mL/min, or undergoing peritoneal dialysis, were increased by 32%, 74%, 72%, and 93%, respectively, relative to subjects with CrCL ≥ 80 mL/min [see Use in Specific Populations (8.6)].
                        
                           Hemodialysis
                        
                        A 4-hour hemodialysis session reduced total edoxaban exposure by less than 7%.
                        
                           Age
                        
                        In a population pharmacokinetic analysis, after taking renal function and body weight into account, age had no additional clinically significant effect on edoxaban pharmacokinetics.
                        
                           Weight
                        
                        In a population pharmacokinetic analysis, total exposure in patients with median low body weight (55 kg) was increased by 13% as compared with patients with median high body weight (84 kg).
                        
                           Gender
                        
                        In a population pharmacokinetic analysis, after accounting for body weight, gender had no additional clinically significant effect on edoxaban pharmacokinetics.
                        
                           Race
                        
                        In a population pharmacokinetic analysis, edoxaban exposures in Asian patients and non-Asian patients were similar.
                        
                           In vitro Drug Interactions Studies
                        
                        
                           In vitro studies indicate that edoxaban does not inhibit the major cytochrome P450 enzymes (CYP1A2, 2A6, 2B6, 2C8/9, 2C19, 2D6, 2E1, or 3A4) and does not induce CYP1A2, CYP3A4 or the P-gp transporter (MDR1). In vitro data also indicate that edoxaban does not inhibit the following transporters at clinically relevant concentrations: P-gp, the organic anion transporters OAT1 or OAT3; the organic cation transporters OCT1 or OCT2; or the organic ion transporting polypeptides OATP1B1 or OATP1B3. Edoxaban is a substrate of P-gp transporter.
                        
                           Drug Interactions
                        
                        
                           Impact of Other Drugs on SAVAYSA
                        
                        The effect of co-administered amiodarone, cyclosporine, dronedarone, erythromycin, ketoconazole, quinidine, verapamil, and rifampin on edoxaban exposure is shown in Figure 12.1.
                        
                           Figure 12.1:	Summary of Drug Interaction Study Results
                        
                        
                           
                        
                        
                           Impact of Edoxaban on Other Drugs
                        
                        Edoxaban increased the Cmax of concomitantly administered digoxin by 28%; however, the AUC was not affected. Edoxaban had no effect on the Cmax and AUC of quinidine.
                        Edoxaban decreased the Cmax and AUC of concomitantly administered verapamil by 14% and 16%, respectively.
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           figure12.1
                           
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         