
                     
                     
                     Drug Interactions
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Antacids
                              
                              The simultaneous oral administration of KAYEXALATE with nonabsorbable cation-donating antacids and laxatives may reduce the resin's potassium exchange capability.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Non-absorbable cation-donating antacids and laxatives
                              
                              Systemic alkalosis has been reported after cation-exchange resins were administered orally in combination with nonabsorbable cation-donating antacids and laxatives such as magnesium hydroxide and aluminum carbonate. Magnesium hydroxide should not be administered with KAYEXALATE. One case of grand mal seizure has been reported in a patient with chronic hypocalcemia of renal failure who was given KAYEXALATE with magnesium hydroxide as a laxative.
                              Intestinal obstruction due to concretions of aluminum hydroxide when used in combination with KAYEXALATE has been reported.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Digitalis
                              
                              The toxic effects of digitalis on the heart, especially various ventricular arrhythmias and A-V nodal dissociation, are likely to be exaggerated by hypokalemia, even in the face of serum digoxin concentrations in the "normal range". (See WARNINGS.)
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Sorbitol
                              
                              Concomitant use of Sorbitol with KAYEXALATE has been implicated in cases of intestinal necrosis, which may be fatal. Therefore, concomitant administration is not recommended. (See WARNINGS.)
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Lithium
                              
                              KAYEXALATE may decrease absorption of lithium.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Thyroxine
                              
                              KAYEXALATE may decrease absorption of thyroxine.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               