
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              •Inhibitors of CYP3A4 may increase plasma concentrations of ixabepilone; dose of IXEMPRA must be reduced with strong CYP3A4 inhibitors (7.1).
                           
                              •Inducers of CYP3A4 may decrease plasma concentrations of ixabepilone; alternative therapeutic agents with low enzyme induction potential should be considered (7.1).
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 Effect of Other Drugs on Ixabepilone
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Drugs That May Increase Ixabepilone Plasma Concentrations
                           
                           
                              
                                 CYP3A4 Inhibitors: Coadministration of ixabepilone with ketoconazole, a potent CYP3A4 inhibitor, increased ixabepilone AUC by 79% compared to ixabepilone treatment alone. If alternative treatment cannot be administered, a dose adjustment should be considered. The effect of mild or moderate inhibitors (eg, erythromycin, fluconazole, or verapamil) on exposure to ixabepilone has not been studied. Therefore, caution should be used when administering mild or moderate CYP3A4 inhibitors during treatment with IXEMPRA, and alternative therapeutic agents that do not inhibit CYP3A4 should be considered. Patients receiving CYP3A4 inhibitors during treatment with IXEMPRA should be monitored closely for acute toxicities (eg, frequent monitoring of peripheral blood counts between cycles of IXEMPRA) [see Dosage and Administration (2.2)].
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Drugs That May Decrease Ixabepilone Plasma Concentrations
                           
                           
                              
                                 CYP3A4 Inducers: IXEMPRA is a CYP3A4 substrate. Coadministration of IXEMPRA with rifampin, a potent CYP3A4 inducer, decreased ixabepilone AUC by 43% compared to IXEMPRA treatment alone. Other strong CYP3A4 inducers (eg, dexamethasone, phenytoin, carbamazepine, rifabutin, and phenobarbital) may also decrease ixabepilone concentrations leading to subtherapeutic levels. Therefore, therapeutic agents with low enzyme induction potential should be considered for coadministration with IXEMPRA. St. John’s Wort may decrease ixabepilone plasma concentrations unpredictably and should be avoided. If patients must be coadministered a strong CYP3A4 inducer, a gradual dose adjustment may be considered [see Dosage and Administration (2.2)].
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 Effect of Ixabepilone on Other Drugs
                     
                        Ixabepilone does not inhibit CYP enzymes at relevant clinical concentrations and is not expected to alter the plasma concentrations of other drugs [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3 Capecitabine
                     
                        In patients with cancer who received ixabepilone (40 mg/m2) in combination with capecitabine (1000 mg/m2), ixabepilone Cmax decreased by 19%, capecitabine Cmax decreased by 27%, and 5-fluorouracil AUC increased by 14%, as compared to ixabepilone or capecitabine administered separately. The interaction is not clinically significant given that the combination treatment is supported by efficacy data.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         