
               
               
               12  CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of action
                     
                        Regulation of glucose metabolism is the primary activity of insulins and insulin analogs, including insulin glulisine. Insulins lower blood glucose by stimulating peripheral glucose uptake by skeletal muscle and fat, and by inhibiting hepatic glucose production. Insulins inhibit lipolysis and proteolysis, and enhance protein synthesis. 
                        The glucose lowering activities of APIDRA and of regular human insulin are equipotent when administered by the intravenous route. After subcutaneous administration, the effect of APIDRA is more rapid in onset and of shorter duration compared to regular human insulin. [See Pharmacodynamics (12.2)].
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        Studies in healthy volunteers and patients with diabetes demonstrated that APIDRA has a more rapid onset of action and a shorter duration of activity than regular human insulin when given subcutaneously.
                        In a study in patients with type 1 diabetes (n= 20), the glucose-lowering profiles of APIDRA and regular human insulin were assessed at various times in relation to a standard meal at a dose of 0.15 Units/kg. (Figure 1.)
                        The maximum blood glucose excursion (ΔGLUmax; baseline subtracted glucose concentration) for APIDRA injected 2 minutes before a meal was 65 mg/dL compared to 64 mg/dL for regular human insulin injected 30 minutes before a meal (see Figure 1A), and 84 mg/dL for regular human insulin injected 2 minutes before a meal (see Figure 1B). The maximum blood glucose excursion for APIDRA injected 15 minutes after the start of a meal was 85 mg/dL compared to 84 mg/dL for regular human insulin injected 2 minutes before a meal (see Figure 1C).
                        
                           Figure 1. Serial mean blood glucose collected up to 6 hours following a single dose of APIDRA and regular human insulin. APIDRA given 2 minutes (APIDRA - pre) before the start of a meal compared to regular human insulin given 30 minutes (Regular - 30 min) before start of the meal (Figure 1A) and compared to regular human insulin (Regular - pre) given 2 minutes before a meal (Figure 1B). APIDRA given 15 minutes (APIDRA - post) after start of a meal compared to regular human insulin (Regular - pre) given 2 minutes before a meal (Figure 1C). On the x-axis zero (0) is the start of a 15-minute meal.
                        


                        


In a randomized, open-label, two-way crossover study, 16 healthy male subjects received an intravenous infusion of APIDRA or regular human insulin with saline diluent at a rate of 0.8 milliUnits/kg/min for two hours. Infusion of the same dose of APIDRA or regular human insulin produced equivalent glucose disposal at steady state.
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           Figure
                           
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           Figure
                           
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           Figure
                           
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           text
                           
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Absorption and bioavailability
                              
                              Pharmacokinetic profiles in healthy volunteers and patients with diabetes (type 1 or type 2) demonstrated that absorption of insulin glulisine was faster than that of regular human insulin.
                              In a study in patients with type 1 diabetes (n=20) after subcutaneous administration of 0.15 Units/kg, the median time to maximum concentration (Tmax) was 60 minutes (range 40 to 120 minutes) and the peak concentration (Cmax) was 83 microUnits/mL (range 40 to 131 microUnits/mL) for insulin glulisine compared to a median Tmax of 120 minutes (range 60 to 239 minutes) and a Cmax of 50 microUnits/mL (range 35 to 71 microUnits/mL) for regular human insulin. (Figure 2)
                              
                                 Figure 2. Pharmacokinetic profiles of insulin glulisine and regular human insulin in patients with type 1 diabetes after a dose of 0.15 Units/kg.
                              
                                 
                              
                              Insulin glulisine and regular human insulin were administered subcutaneously at a dose of 0.2 Units/kg in an euglycemic clamp study in patients with type 2 diabetes (n=24) and a body mass index (BMI) between 20 and 36 kg/m2. The median time to maximum concentration (Tmax) was 100 minutes (range 40 to 120 minutes) and the median peak concentration (Cmax) was 84 microUnits/mL (range 53 to 165 microUnits/mL) for insulin glulisine compared to a median Tmax of 240 minutes (range 80 to 360 minutes) and a median Cmax of 41 microUnits/mL (range 33 to 61 microUnits/mL) for regular human insulin.  (Figure 3.)
                              
                                 Figure 3. Pharmacokinetic profiles of insulin glulisine and regular human insulin in patients with type 2 diabetes after a subcutaneous dose of 0.2 Units/kg.
                              
                                 
                              
                              When APIDRA was injected subcutaneously into different areas of the body, the time-concentration profiles were similar. The absolute bioavailability of insulin glulisine after subcutaneous administration is approximately 70%, regardless of injection area (abdomen 73%, deltoid 71%, thigh 68%).
                              In a clinical study in healthy volunteers (n=32) the total insulin glulisine bioavailability was similar after subcutaneous injection of insulin glulisine and NPH insulin (premixed in the syringe) and following separate simultaneous subcutaneous injections. There was 27% attenuation of the maximum concentration (Cmax) of APIDRA after premixing; however, the time to maximum concentration (Tmax) was not affected. No data are available on mixing APIDRA with insulin preparations other than NPH insulin. [See Clinical Studies (14)].
                              
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Figure
                                 
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 Figure
                                 
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Distribution and elimination
                              
                              The distribution and elimination of insulin glulisine and regular human insulin after intravenous administration are similar with volumes of distribution of 13 and 21 L and half-lives of 13 and 17 minutes, respectively. After subcutaneous administration, insulin glulisine is eliminated more rapidly than regular human insulin with an apparent half-life of 42 minutes compared to 86 minutes.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.4	Clinical pharmacology in specific populations
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Pediatric patients
                              
                              The pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic properties of APIDRA and regular human insulin were assessed in a study conducted in children 7 to 11 years old (n=10) and adolescents 12 to 16 years old (n=10) with type 1 diabetes. The relative differences in pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics between APIDRA and regular human insulin in these patients with type 1 diabetes were similar to those in healthy adult subjects and adults with type 1 diabetes.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Race
                              
                              A study in 24 healthy Caucasians and Japanese subjects compared the pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics after subcutaneous injection of insulin glulisine, insulin lispro, and regular human insulin. With subcutaneous injection of insulin glulisine, Japanese subjects had a greater initial exposure (33%) for the ratio of AUC(0–1h) to AUC(0–clamp end) than Caucasians (21%) although the total exposures were similar. There were similar findings with insulin lispro and regular human insulin. 
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Obesity
                              
                              Insulin glulisine and regular human insulin were administered subcutaneously at a dose of 0.3 Units/kg in a euglycemic clamp study in obese, non-diabetic subjects (n=18) with a body mass index (BMI) between 30 and 40 kg/m2. The median time to maximum concentration (Tmax) was 85 minutes (range 49 to 150 minutes) and the median peak concentration (Cmax) was 192 microUnits/mL (range 98 to 380 microUnits/mL) for insulin glulisine compared to a median Tmax of 150 minutes (range 90 to 240 minutes) and a median Cmax of 86 microUnits/mL (range 43 to 175 microUnits/mL) for regular human insulin. 
                              The more rapid onset of action and shorter duration of activity of APIDRA and insulin lispro compared to regular human insulin were maintained in an obese non-diabetic population (n= 18). (Figure 4.)
                              
                                 Figure 4. Glucose infusion rates (GIR) in a euglycemic clamp study after subcutaneous injection of 0.3 Units/kg of APIDRA, insulin lispro or regular human insulin in an obese population.
                              
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Figure
                                 
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Renal impairment
                              
                              Studies with human insulin have shown increased circulating levels of insulin in patients with renal failure. In a study performed in 24 non-diabetic subjects with normal renal function (ClCr >80 mL/min), moderate renal impairment (30–50 mL/min) and severe renal impairment (<30 mL/min), the subjects with moderate and severe renal impairment had increased exposure to insulin glulisine by 29% to 40% and reduced clearance of insulin glulisine by 20% to 25% compared to subjects with normal renal function. [See Warnings and Precautions (5.6)].
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Hepatic impairment
                              
                              The effect of hepatic impairment on the pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of APIDRA has not been studied. Some studies with human insulin have shown increased circulating levels of insulin in patients with liver failure. [See Warnings and Precautions (5.6)
                                 ].
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Gender
                              
                              The effect of gender on the pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of APIDRA has not been studied. 
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Pregnancy
                              
                              The effect of pregnancy on the pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of APIDRA has not been studied. 
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Smoking
                              
                              The effect of smoking on the pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of APIDRA has not been studied.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         