
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Endogenous estrogens are largely responsible for the development and maintenance of the female reproductive system and secondary sexual characteristics. Although circulating estrogens exist in a dynamic equilibrium of metabolic interconversions, estradiol is the principal intracellular human estrogen and is substantially more potent than its metabolites, estrone and estriol at the receptor level.
                        The primary source of estrogen in normally cycling adult women is the ovarian follicle, which secretes 70 to 500 mcg of estradiol daily, depending on the phase of the menstrual cycle. After menopause, most endogenous estrogen is produced by conversion of androstenedione, which is secreted by the adrenal cortex, to estrone in the peripheral tissues. Thus, estrone and the sulfate conjugated form, estrone sulfate, are the most abundant circulating estrogens in postmenopausal women.
                        Estrogens act through binding to nuclear receptors in estrogen-responsive tissues. To date, two estrogen receptors have been identified. These vary in proportion from tissue to tissue.
                        Circulating estrogens modulate the pituitary secretion of the gonadotropins, luteinizing hormone (LH) and FSH, through a negative feedback mechanism. Estrogens act to reduce the elevated levels of these hormones seen in postmenopausal women.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        There are no pharmacodynamic data for estradiol transdermal system continuous delivery (once-weekly).
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Absorption
                              
                           
                           
                              Transdermal administration of estradiol transdermal system continuous delivery (once-weekly) produces mean serum concentrations of estradiol comparable to those produced by premenopausal women in the early follicular phase of the ovulatory cycle. The pharmacokinetics of estradiol following application of the estradiol transdermal system continuous delivery (once-weekly) were investigated in 197 healthy postmenopausal women in six studies. In five of the studies, the estradiol transdermal system continuous delivery (once-weekly) was applied to the abdomen, and in a sixth study, application to the buttocks and abdomen were compared.
                              The estradiol transdermal system continuous delivery (once-weekly) continuously releases estradiol which is transported across intact skin leading to sustained circulating levels of estradiol during a 7 day treatment period. The systemic availability of estradiol after transdermal administration is about 20 times higher than that after oral administration. This difference is due to the absence of first pass metabolism when estradiol is given by the transdermal route.
                              In a bioavailability study, the estradiol transdermal system continuous delivery (once-weekly) 7.75 cm2 was studied with the estradiol transdermal system continuous delivery (once-weekly) 15.5 cm2 as reference. The mean estradiol levels in serum from the two sizes are shown in Figure 1.
                              
                                 Figure 1 Mean Serum 17β-Estradiol Concentrations versus Time Profile following Application of a 7.75 cm2 Transdermal Patch and Application of a 15.5 cm2 Estradiol Transdermal System Continuous Delivery (Once-Weekly) Patch 
                              
                              Dose proportionality was demonstrated for the estradiol transdermal system continuous delivery (once-weekly) 7.75 cm2 as compared to the estradiol transdermal system continuous delivery (once-weekly) 15.5 cm2 in a 2-week crossover study with a 1-week washout period between the two-transdermal systems in 24 postmenopausal women.
                              Dose proportionality was also demonstrated for the estradiol transdermal system continuous delivery (once-weekly) (15.5 cm2 and 31 cm2) in a 1-week study conducted in 54 postmenopausal women. The mean steady state levels (Cavg) of the estradiol during the application of estradiol transdermal system continuous delivery (once-weekly) 31 cm2 and 15.5 cm2 on the abdomen were about 80 and 40 pg/mL, respectively.
                              In a 3-week multiple application study in 24 postmenopausal women, the 31 cm2 estradiol transdermal system continuous delivery (once-weekly) produced average peak estradiol concentrations (Cmax) of approximately 100 pg/mL. Trough values at the end of each wear interval (Cmin) were approximately 35 pg/mL. Nearly identical serum curves were seen each week, indicating little or no accumulation of estradiol in the body. Serum estrone peak and trough levels were 60 and 40 pg/mL, respectively.
                              In a single dose, randomized, crossover study conducted to compare the effect of site of application, 38 postmenopausal women wore a single estradiol transdermal system continuous delivery (once-weekly) 31 cm2 for one week on the abdomen and buttocks. The estradiol serum concentration profiles are shown in Figure 2. Values of Cmax and Cavg were, respectively, 25 percent and 17 percent higher with the buttock application than with the abdomen application.
                              
                                 Figure 2 Observed Mean (± SE) Estradiol Serum Concentrations for a One Week Application of the Estradiol Transdermal System Continuous Delivery (Once-Weekly) (31 cm2) to the Abdomen and Buttocks of 38 Postmenopausal Women 
                              
                              Table 2 provides a summary of estradiol pharmacokinetic parameters determined during evaluation of the estradiol transdermal system continuous delivery (once-weekly).
                              


                              


The relative standard deviation of each pharmacokinetic parameter after application to the abdomen averaged 50 percent, which is indicative of the considerable intersubject variability associated with transdermal drug delivery. The relative standard deviation of each pharmacokinetic parameter after application to the buttock was lower than that after application to the abdomen (for example, for Cmax 39 percent versus 62 percent, and for Cavg 35 percent versus 48 percent).
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Figure 1 Mean Serum 17β-Estradiol Concentrations vs. Time Profile following Application of a 7.75 cm2 Transdermal Patch and Application of a 15.5 cm2 Estradiol Transdermal System Continuous Delivery (Once-Weekly) Patch
                                 
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 Figure 2 Observed Mean (± S.E.) Estradiol Serum Concentrations for a One Week Application of the Estradiol Transdermal System Continuous Delivery (Once-Weekly) (31 cm2) to the abdomen and buttocks of 38 postmenopausal women
                                 
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Distribution
                              
                           
                           
                              The distribution of exogenous estrogens is similar to that of endogenous estrogens. Estrogens are widely distributed in the body and are generally found in higher concentrations in the sex hormone target organs. Estrogens circulate in the blood largely bound to SHBG and albumin.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Metabolism
                              
                           
                           
                              Exogenous estrogens are metabolized in the same manner as endogenous estrogens. Circulating estrogens exist in a dynamic equilibrium of metabolic interconversions. These transformations take place mainly in the liver. Estradiol is converted reversibly to estrone, and both can be converted to estriol, which is a major urinary metabolite. Estrogens also undergo enterohepatic recirculation via sulfate and glucuronide conjugation in the liver, biliary secretion of conjugates into the intestine, and hydrolysis in the intestine followed by reabsorption. In postmenopausal women, a significant proportion of the circulating estrogens exist as sulfate conjugates, especially estrone sulfate, which serves as a circulating reservoir for the formation of more active estrogens.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Excretion
                              
                           
                           
                              Estradiol, estrone, and estriol are excreted in the urine along with glucuronide and sulfate conjugates.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Adhesion
                              
                           
                           
                              An open-label study of adhesion potentials of placebo transdermal systems that correspond to the 7.75 cm2 and 15.5 cm2 sizes of estradiol transdermal system continuous delivery (once-weekly) was conducted in 112 healthy women of 45 to 75 years of age. Each woman applied both transdermal systems weekly, on the upper outer abdomen, for 3 consecutive weeks. It should be noted that lower abdomen and upper quadrant of the buttock are the approved sites of application for estradiol transdermal system continuous delivery (once-weekly).
                              The adhesion assessment was done visually on Days 2, 4, 5, 6, 7 of each week of transdermal system wear. A total of 1,654 adhesion observations were conducted for 333 transdermal systems of each size.
                              Of these observations, approximately 90 percent showed essentially no lift for both the 7.75 cm2 and 15.5 cm2 transdermal systems. Of the total number of transdermal systems applied, approximately 5 percent showed complete detachment for each size. Adhesion potentials of the 23.25 cm2 and 31 cm2 sizes of transdermal systems (0.075 mg per day and 0.1 mg per day) have not been studied.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         