
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
                  

                  No drug interaction studies have been conducted using lamivudine and zidovudine tablets [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)]. 
                  
               
               
               
                  
                     
                        

                        • Concomitant use with the following drugs should be avoided: stavudine (7.1), zalcitabine (7.1), doxorubicin (7.2). 
• Bone marrow suppressive/cytotoxic agents: May increase the hematologic toxicity of zidovudine. (7.3) 
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1   Antiretroviral Agents 
                     
                        

                        
                           Lamivudine:  Zalcitabine: Lamivudine and zalcitabine may inhibit the intracellular phosphorylation of one another. Therefore, use of lamivudine and zidovudine tablet in combination with zalcitabine is not recommended.

                           Zidovudine:
                           Stavudine: Concomitant use of lamivudine and zidovudine tablet with stavudine should be avoided since an antagonistic relationship with zidovudine has been demonstrated in vitro.

                           Nucleoside Analogues Affecting DNA Replication: Some nucleoside analogues affecting DNA replication, such as ribavirin, antagonize the in vitro antiviral activity of zidovudine against HIV-1; concomitant use of such drugs should be avoided.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 Doxorubicin 
                     
                        
                           Zidovudine: Concomitant use of lamivudine and zidovudine tablet with doxorubicin should be avoided since an antagonistic relationship with zidovudine has been demonstrated in vitro.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3    Hematologic/Bone Marrow Suppressive/Cytotoxic Agents 
                     
                        

                        
                           Zidovudine: Coadministration of ganciclovir, interferon alfa, ribavirin, and other bone marrow suppressive or cytotoxic agents may increase the hematologic toxicity of zidovudine. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4   Interferon- and Ribavirin-Based Regimens 
                     
                        

                        
                           Lamivudine: Although no evidence of a pharmacokinetic or pharmacodynamic interaction (e.g., loss of HIV-1/HCV virologic suppression) was seen when ribavirin was coadministered with lamivudine in HIV-1/HCV co-infected patients, hepatic decompensation (some fatal) has occurred in HIV-l/HCV co-infected patients receiving combination antiretroviral therapy for HIV-1 and interferon alfa with or without ribavirin [see Warnings and Precautions (5.5),Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.5   Trimethoprim/Sulfamethoxazole (TMP/SMX) 
                     
                        

                        
                           Lamivudine: No change in dose of either drug is recommended. There is no information regarding the effect on lamivudine pharmacokinetics of higher doses of TMP/SMX such as those used to treat PCP. 
                        　
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         