
               
               
               
                  CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  Methylphenidate is a racemic mixture comprised of the d- and l-threo enantiomers. The d-threo enantiomer is more pharmacologically active than the l-threo enantiomer.
                  Methylphenidate HCl is a central nervous system (CNS) stimulant.
                  The mode of therapeutic action in humans is not completely understood, but methylphenidate presumably activates the brain stem arousal system and cortex to produce its stimulant effect. Methylphenidate is thought to block the reuptake of norepinephrine and dopamine into the presynaptic neuron and increase the release of these monoamines into the extraneuronal space.
                  There is neither specific evidence which clearly establishes the mechanism whereby methylphenidate hydrochloride produces its mental and behavioral effects in children, nor conclusive evidence regarding how these effects relate to the condition of the central nervous system.
               
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        Pharmacokinetics
                     
                     
                        
                           Absorption
                        
                        Methylphenidate hydrochloride oral
solution is readily absorbed. Following oral administration of methylphenidate hydrochloride
oral solution, peak plasma methylphenidate concentrations are achieved at 1 to
2 hours. Methylphenidate hydrochloride oral solution has been shown to be
bioequivalent to Ritalin® tablet. The mean Cmax following
a 20 mg dose is approximately 9 ng/mL.
                        
                           Food Effect
                        
                        In a study in adult volunteers to
investigate the effects of a high-fat meal on the bioavailability of methylphenidate
hydrochloride oral solution at a dose of 20 mg, the presence of food delayed
the peak by approximately 1 hour (1.7 hours, fasted and 2.7 hours, fed).
Overall, a high-fat meal increased the Cmax of methylphenidate
hydrochloride oral solution by about 13% and the AUC by about 25%, on average.
Through a cross-study comparison, the magnitude of increase in Cmax
and AUC is found to be comparable between the methylphenidate hydrochloride
oral solution and Ritalin®, the immediate release tablet.
                        
                           Metabolism and Excretion
                        
                        In humans, methylphenidate is
metabolized primarily via deesterification to alpha-phenylpiperidine acetic
acid (PPA, ritalinic acid). The metabolite has little or no pharmacologic
activity.
                        After oral dosing of radiolabeled
methylphenidate in humans, about 90% of the radioactivity was recovered in
urine. The main urinary metabolite was PPA, accounting for approximately 80% of
the dose.
                        The pharmacokinetics of the methylphenidate
hydrochloride oral solution have been studied in healthy adult volunteers. The
mean terminal half-life (t½) of methylphenidate following
administration of 20 mg methylphenidate hydrochloride (t½=2.7 hours)
is comparable to the mean terminal t½ following administration of
Ritalin® (methylphenidate hydrochloride immediate-release tablets)
(t½=2.8h) in healthy adult volunteers.
                        
                           Special
Populations
                        
                        Gender - The effect of gender on the
pharmacokinetics of methylphenidate after methylphenidate hydrochloride oral
solution administration has not been studied.
                        
                           Race - The influence of race on the pharmacokinetics of
methylphenidate after methylphenidate hydrochloride oral solution
administration has not been studied.
                        
                           Age - The pharmacokinetics of
methylphenidate after methylphenidate hydrochloride oral solution
administration have not been studied in pediatrics.
                        
                           Renal Insufficiency
                        
                        There is no experience with the use of
methylphenidate hydrochloride oral solution in patients with renal
insufficiency. After oral administration of radiolabeled methylphenidate in
humans, methylphenidate was extensively metabolized and approximately 80% of
the radioactivity was excreted in the urine in the form of ritalinic acid.
Since renal clearance is not an important route of methylphenidate clearance,
renal insufficiency is expected to have little effect on the pharmacokinetics
of methylphenidate hydrochloride oral solution.
                        
                           Hepatic Insufficiency
                        
                        There is no experience with the use of
methylphenidate hydrochloride oral solution in patients with hepatic
insufficiency.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         