
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Absorption
                     
                        Following 60-minute intravenous infusions of 200 mg and 400 mg ciprofloxacin to normal volunteers, the mean maximum serum concentrations achieved were 2.1 and 4.6 mcg/mL, respectively; the concentrations at 12 hours were 0.1 and 0.2 mcg/mL, respectively.
                        


                        



The pharmacokinetics of ciprofloxacin are linear over the dose range of 200 to 400 mg administered intravenously. Comparison of the pharmacokinetic parameters following the 1st and 5th I.V. dose on a q 12 h regimen indicates no evidence of drug accumulation.
The absolute bioavailability of oral ciprofloxacin is within a range of 70-80% with no substantial loss by first pass metabolism. An intravenous infusion of 400-mg ciprofloxacin given over 60 minutes every 12 hours has been shown to produce an area under the serum concentration time curve (AUC) equivalent to that produced by a 500-mg oral dose given every 12 hours. An intravenous infusion of 400 mg ciprofloxacin given over 60 minutes every 8 hours has been shown to produce an AUC at steady-state equivalent to that produced by a 750-mg oral dose given every 12 hours. A 400-mg I.V. dose results in a Cmax similar to that observed with a 750-mg oral dose. An infusion of 200 mg ciprofloxacin given every 12 hours produces an AUC equivalent to that produced by a 250-mg oral dose given every 12 hours.
                        


                     



                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Distribution
                     
                        After intravenous administration, ciprofloxacin is present in saliva, nasal and bronchial secretions, sputum, skin blister fluid, lymph, peritoneal fluid, bile, and prostatic secretions. It has also been detected in the lung, skin, fat, muscle, cartilage, and bone. Although the drug diffuses into cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), CSF concentrations are generally less than 10% of peak serum concentrations. Levels of the drug in the aqueous and vitreous chambers of the eye are lower than in serum.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Metabolism
                     
                        After I.V. administration, three metabolites of ciprofloxacin have been identified in human urine which together account for approximately 10% of the intravenous dose. The binding of ciprofloxacin to serum proteins is 20 to 40%. Ciprofloxacin is an inhibitor of human cytochrome P450 1A2 (CYP1A2) mediated metabolism. Coadministration of ciprofloxacin with other drugs primarily metabolized by CYP1A2 results in increased plasma concentrations of these drugs and could lead to clinically significant adverse events of the coadministered drug (see  
                              CONTRAINDICATIONS; WARNINGS; PRECAUTIONS: Drug Interactions
                           ).
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Excretion
                     
                        The serum elimination half-life is approximately 5-6 hours and the total clearance is around 35 L/hr. After intravenous administration, approximately 50% to 70% of the dose is excreted in the urine as unchanged drug. Following a 200-mg I.V. dose, concentrations in the urine usually exceed 200 mcg/mL 0-2 hours after dosing and are generally greater than 15 mcg/mL 8-12 hours after dosing. Following a 400-mg I.V. dose, urine concentrations generally exceed 400 mcg/mL 0-2 hours after dosing and are usually greater than 30 mcg/mL 8-12 hours after dosing. The renal clearance is approximately 22 L/hr. The urinary excretion of ciprofloxacin is virtually complete by 24 hours after dosing.
                        Although bile concentrations of ciprofloxacin are several fold higher than serum concentrations after intravenous dosing, only a small amount of the administered dose (< 1%) is recovered from the bile as unchanged drug. Approximately 15% of an I.V. dose is recovered from the feces within 5 days after dosing.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Special Populations
                     
                        Pharmacokinetic studies of the oral (single dose) and intravenous (single and multiple dose) forms of ciprofloxacin indicate that plasma concentrations of ciprofloxacin are higher in elderly subjects (> 65 years) as compared to young adults. Although the Cmax is increased 16-40%, the increase in mean AUC is approximately 30%, and can be at least partially attributed to decreased renal clearance in the elderly. Elimination half-life is only slightly (~20%) prolonged in the elderly. These differences are not considered clinically significant. (See 
                              PRECAUTIONS, Geriatric Use
                           .)
                        
                           Patient with Renal Impairment
                        
                        In patients with reduced renal function, the half-life of ciprofloxacin is slightly prolonged and dosage adjustments may be required. (See 
                              DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION
                           .)
                        
                           Patient with Hepatic Impairment
                        
                        In preliminary studies in patients with stable chronic liver cirrhosis, no significant changes in ciprofloxacin pharmacokinetics have been observed. However, the kinetics of ciprofloxacin in patients with acute hepatic insufficiency have not been fully elucidated. 
                        
                           Pediatrics
                        
                        Following a single oral dose of 10 mg/kg ciprofloxacin suspension to 16 children ranging in age from 4 months to 7 years, the mean Cmax was 2.4 mcg/mL (range: 1.5 – 3.4 mcg /mL) and the mean AUC was 9.2 mcg *h/mL (range: 5.8 – 14.9 mcg *h/mL). There was no apparent age-dependence, and no notable increase in Cmax or AUC upon multiple dosing (10 mg/kg TID). In children with severe sepsis who were given intravenous ciprofloxacin (10 mg/kg as a 1-hour infusion), the mean Cmax was 6.1 mcg /mL (range: 4.6 – 8.3 mcg/mL) in 10 children less than 1 year of age; and 7.2 mcg /mL (range: 4.7 – 11.8 mcg/mL) in 10 children between 1 and 5 years of age. The AUC values were 17.4 mcg *h/mL (range: 11.8 – 32.0 mcg *h/mL) and 16.5 mcg *h/mL (range: 11.0 – 23.8 mcg *h/mL) in the respective age groups. These values are within the range reported for adults at therapeutic doses. Based on population pharmacokinetic analysis of pediatric patients with various infections, the predicted mean half-life in children is approximately 4-5 hours, and the bioavailability of the oral suspension is approximately 60%.
                        
                           Drug-Drug Interactions 
                        
                        Concomitant administration with tizanidine is contraindicated (See 
                              CONTRAINDICATIONS
                           ). The potential for pharmacokinetic drug interactions between ciprofloxacin and theophylline, caffeine, cyclosporins, phenytoin, sulfonylurea glyburide, metronidazole, warfarin, probenecid, and piperacillin sodium has been evaluated. (See 
                              WARNINGS: PRECAUTIONS, Drug Interactions
                           .)
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         