
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY

               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Pharmacodynamics

                     
                        There are no studies examining the inhibition of the enzyme ornithine decarboxylase (ODC) in human skin following the application of topical eflornithine. However, there are studies in the literature that report the inhibition of ODC activity in skin following oral eflornithine. It is postulated that topical eflornithine hydrochloride irreversibly inhibits skin ODC activity. This enzyme is necessary in the synthesis of polyamines. Animal data indicate that inhibition of ornithine decarboxylase inhibits cell division and synthetic functions, which affect the rate of hair growth. VANIQA
                           ® (eflornithine hydrochloride) cream, 13.9% has been shown to retard the rate of hair growth in non-clinical and clinical studies.

                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Pharmacokinetics

                     
                        The mean percutaneous absorption of eflornithine in women with unwanted facial hair, from a 13.9% w/w cream formulation, is less than 1% of the radioactive dose, following either single or multiple doses under conditions of clinical use, that included shaving within 2 hours before radiolabeled dose application in addition to other forms of cutting or plucking, and tweezing to remove facial hair. Steady state was reached within four days of twice-daily application. The apparent steady-state plasma t1/2 of eflornithine was approximately 8 hours. Following twice-daily application of 0.5 g of the cream (total dose 1 g/day; 139 mg as anhydrous eflornithine hydrochloride), under conditions of clinical use in women with unwanted facial hair (n=10), the steady-state Cmax, Ctrough and AUC12hr were approximately 10 ng/mL, 5 ng/mL, and 92 ng•hr/mL, respectively, expressed in terms of the anhydrous free base of eflornithine hydrochloride. At steady state, the dose-normalized peak concentrations (Cmax) and the extent of daily systemic exposure (AUC) of eflornithine following twice-daily application of 0.5 g of the cream (total dose 1 g/day) is estimated to be approximately 100- and 60-fold lower, when compared to 370 mg/day once-daily oral doses. This compound is not known to be metabolized and is primarily excreted unchanged in the urine.

                     
                     
                  
               
            
         