
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  Ampicillin for Injection, USP diffuses readily into most body tissues and fluids. However, penetration into the cerebrospinal fluid and brain occurs only when the meninges are inflamed. Ampicillin is excreted largely unchanged in the urine and its excretion can be delayed by concurrent administration of probenecid. The active form appears in the bile in higher concentrations than those found in serum. Ampicillin is the least serum-bound of all the penicillins, averaging about 20% compared to approximately 60 to 90% for other penicillins. Ampicillin for Injection, USP is well tolerated by most patients and has been given in doses of 2 grams daily for many weeks without adverse reactions.
                  
                     
                        Microbiology
                     
                  
                  While 
                        in vitro
                      studies have demonstrated the susceptibility of most strains of the following organisms, clinical efficacy for infections other than those included in the 
                        INDICATIONS AND USAGE
                      section has not been demonstrated.
                  
                     Antibacterial Activity
                  
                  The following bacteria have been shown in in vitro studies to be susceptible to Ampicillin for Injection, USP:
                  
                     Gram-positive Bacteria:
                  Hemolytic and nonhemolytic streptococci
                        
Streptococcus pneumoniae

                     Nonpenicillinase-producing staphylococci 
                        
Clostridium spp. 
                        
B. anthracis
Listeria monocytogenes

                     Most strains of enterococci.
                  
                     Gram-negative Bacteria: 
                  
                     H. influenzae 
                     

                     N. gonorrhoeae 
                     

                     N. meningitidis 
                     

                     Proteus mirabilis
                  
                  Many strains of Salmonella, Shigella, and E. coli.
                  
                  Ampicillin does not resist destruction by penicillinase.
                  
                     Susceptibility Test Methods
                  
                  
                     
                        Diffusion Techniques
                     
                  
                  Quantitative methods that require measurement of zone diameters provide reproducible estimates of the susceptibility of bacteria to antimicrobial compounds. One such standardized procedure1,2 that has been recommended for use with disks to test the susceptibility of microorganisms to ampicillin, uses the 10 mcg ampicillin disk. Interpretation involves correlation of the diameter obtained in the disk test with the minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) for ampicillin. Reports from the laboratory providing results of the standard single-disk susceptibility test with a 10 mcg ampicillin disk should be interpreted according to the criteria provided in Table 1.
                  
                     
                        Dilution Techniques
                     
                  
                  Quantitative methods that are used to determine minimum inhibitory concentrations (MICs) provide reproducible estimates of the susceptibility of bacteria to antimicrobial compounds. One such standardized procedure1,3 uses a standardized dilution method (broth or agar) or equivalent with ampicillin powder. The MIC values obtained should be interpreted according to the criteria provided in Table 1.
                  


                  


Non-meningitidis S. pneumoniae isolates may be considered susceptible to ampicillin if the isolate has a penicillin MIC of ≤0.06 mcg/mL.
                  Susceptibility of staphylococci to ampicillin may be deduced from testing only penicillin and either cefoxitin or oxacillin.
                  A report of “Susceptible”(S) indicates that the pathogen is likely to be inhibited by usually achievable concentrations of the antimicrobial compound in the blood. A report of “Intermediate” (I) indicates that the result should be considered equivocal, if the microorganism is not fully susceptible to alternative, clinically feasible drugs, the test should be repeated. This category implies possible clinical applicability in body sites where the drug is physiologically concentrated or in situations where high dosage of the drug can be used. This category also provides a buffer zone that prevents small uncontrolled technical factors from causing major discrepancies in interpretation. A report of “Resistant” (R) indicates that the pathogen is not likely to be inhibited if the antimicrobial compound in the blood reaches the concentrations usually achievable; other therapy should be selected.
                  
                     Quality Control
                  
                  Standardized susceptibility test procedures require the use of laboratory control microorganisms1,2,3. 
                  The 10 mcg ampicillin disk and the standard ampicillin powder should provide respectively the following zone diameters and MIC values in these laboratory test quality control strains:
                  


