
               
               
               12  CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Gadoteridol is a paramagnetic agent and, as such, develops
a magnetic moment when placed in a magnetic field. The relatively
large magnetic moment produced by the paramagnetic agent results in
a relatively large local magnetic field, which can enhance the relaxation
rates of water protons in the vicinity of the paramagnetic agent.
                        In MRI, visualization of normal
and pathologic brain tissue depends, in part, on variations in the
radiofrequency signal intensity that occur with: 1) differences in
proton density; 2) differences of the spin-lattice or longitudinal
relaxation times (T1); and 3) differences in the spin-spin or transverse
relaxation time (T2). When placed in a magnetic field, gadoteridol
decreases T1 relaxation times in the target tissues. At recommended
doses, the effect is observed with greatest sensitivity in the T1-weighted
sequences.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        Gadoteridol affects proton relaxation times and consequently the
MR signal.  The enhancement of the signal intensity is effected by
the dose and relaxivity of the gadoterate molecule.  Consistently,
for all gadolinium based contrast agents, the relaxivity of gadoteridol
decreases with the increase of the magnetic field strength used in
clinical MRI (0.2 –3.0T).
                        Gadoteridol does not cross the intact blood-brain barrier and, therefore,
does not accumulate in normal brain or in lesions that have a normal
blood-brain barrier, e.g., cysts, mature post-operative scars, etc.
However, disruption of the blood-brain barrier or abnormal vascularity
allows accumulation of gadoteridol in lesions such as neoplasms, abscesses,
and subacute infarcts. The pharmacokinetics of gadoteridol in various
lesions is not known.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        The pharmacokinetics of intravenously administered
gadoteridol in normal subjects conforms to a two-compartment open
model with mean distribution and elimination half-lives (reported
as mean ± SD) of about 0.20 ± 0.04 hours and 1.57 ± 0.08 hours, respectively.
                        
                           Elimination
                           
Gadoteridol is eliminated in the urine with 94.4 ± 4.8% (mean ±
SD) of the dose excreted within 24 hours post-injection. It is unknown
if biotransformation or decomposition of gadoteridol occur in vivo.  The renal and plasma clearance rates (1.41 ± 0.33
mL/ min/kg and 1.50 ± 0.35 mL/ min/kg, respectively) of gadoteridol
are essentially identical, indicating no alteration in elimination
kinetics on passage through the kidneys and that the drug is essentially
cleared through the kidney. The volume of distribution (204 ± 58 mL/kg)
is equal to that of extracellular water, and clearance is similar
to that of substances which are subject to glomerular filtration.
                        It is unknown if protein binding
of gadoteridol occurs in vivo.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         