
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              •Amiodarone is a substrate for CYP3A and CYP2C8, so inhibitors and inducers affect amiodarone exposure (7)
                           
                              •Amiodarone inhibits p-glycoprotein and CYP1A2, CYP2C9, CYP2D6, and CYP3A, increasing exposure to other drugs (7)
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 Pharmacodynamic Interactions 
                     
                        
                           Drugs prolonging the QT interval: Co-administration of drugs prolonging the QT interval (such as class I and III antiarrhythmics, lithium, certain phenothiazines, tricyclic antidepressants, certain fluoroquinolone and macrolide antibiotics, azole antifungals, halogenated inhalation anesthetic agents) increases the risk of Torsade de Pointes. In general, avoid concomitant use of drugs that prolong the QT interval [see Warnings and Precautions (5.4)
                           ]. 
                        
                           Drugs that slow heart rate: Concomitant use of drugs with depressant effects on the sinus and AV node (e.g., digoxin, beta blockers, verapamil, diltiazem, clonidine) can potentiate the electrophysiologic and hemodynamic effects of amiodarone, resulting in bradycardia, sinus arrest, and AV block. Monitor heart rate in patients on amiodarone and concomitant drugs that slow heart rate.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 Pharmacokinetic Interactions 
                     
                        
                           
                              Effect of other drugs on amiodarone 
                           
                        
                        Amiodarone is metabolized to the active metabolite desethylamiodarone (DEA) by the cytochrome P450 (CYP450) enzyme group, specifically CYP3A and CYP2C8. Amiodarone has the potential for interactions with drugs or substances that may be substrates, inhibitors or inducers of CYP450 enzymes (e.g., inhibitors such as protease inhibitors, grapefruit juice, certain fluoroquinolone and macrolide antibiotics, azole antifungals and inducers such as St. John’s Wort) or P-glycoprotein. In view of the long and variable half-life of amiodarone, potential for drug interactions exists not only with concomitant medication but also with drugs administered after discontinuation of amiodarone [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                        
                        Patients should avoid grapefruit juice beverages while taking amiodarone because exposure to amiodarone is significantly increased [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                        
                        
                           
                              Effect of amiodarone on other drugs
                           
                        
                        Amiodarone and DEA are inhibitors of P-glycoprotein and certain CYP450 enzymes, including CYP1A2, CYP2C9, CYP2D6 and CYP3A [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].  
                        
                           Antiarrhythmics: The metabolism of quinidine, procainamide, flecainide can be inhibited by amiodarone. In general, initiate any added antiarrhythmic drug at a lower than usual dose and monitor the patient carefully. During transfer to oral amiodarone, reduce the dose levels of previously administered agents by 30 to 50% several days after the addition of oral amiodarone. Review the continued need for the other antiarrhythmic agent after the effects of amiodarone have been established, and attempt discontinuation [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)]. 
                        
                           Digoxin: In patients receiving digoxin therapy, administration of oral amiodarone results in an increase in serum digoxin concentration. Reduce dose of digoxin by half or discontinue digoxin. If digitalis treatment is continued, monitor serum levels closely and observe patients for clinical evidence of toxicity [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                        
                            HMG-CoA Reductase Inhibitors: Limit the dose of simvastatin in patients on amiodarone to 20 mg daily. Limit the daily dose of lovastatin to 40 mg.  Lower starting and maintenance doses of other CYP3A4 substrates (e.g., atorvastatin) may be required as amiodarone may increase the plasma concentration of these drugs.
                        
                           Anticoagulants: Potentiation of warfarin-type (CYP2C9 and CYP3A substrate) anticoagulant response is almost always seen in patients receiving amiodarone and can result in serious or fatal bleeding. Since the concomitant administration of warfarin with amiodarone increases the INR by 100% after 3 to 4 days, reduce the dose of the anticoagulant by one-third to one-half, and monitor INR closely.
                        
                           Cyclosporine (CYP3A substrate) administered in combination with oral amiodarone has been reported to produce persistently elevated plasma concentrations of cyclosporine resulting in elevated creatinine, despite reduction in dose of cyclosporine. Monitor cyclosporine drug levels and renal function in patients taking both drugs. 
                        Increased steady-state levels of phenytoin during concomitant therapy with amiodarone have been reported. Monitor phenytoin levels in patients taking both drugs.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         