
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Fluoride F18 ion normally accumulates in the skeleton in an even fashion, with greater deposition in the axial skeleton (e.g. vertebrae and pelvis) than in the appendicular skeleton and greater deposition in the bones around joints than in the shafts of long bones. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        Increased fluoride F18 ion deposition in bone can occur in areas of increased osteogenic activity during growth, infection, malignancy (primary or metastatic) following trauma, or inflammation of bone.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        After intravenous administration, fluoride F18 ion is rapidly cleared from the plasma in a biexponential manner. The first phase has a half-life of 0.4 h, and the second phase has a half-life of 2.6 h. Essentially all the fluoride F18 that is delivered to bone by the blood is retained in the bone. One hour after administration of fluoride F18 only about 10% of the injected dose remains in the blood. Fluoride F18 diffuses through capillaries into bone extracellular fluid space, where it becomes bound by chemisorption at the surface of bone crystals, preferentially at sites of newly mineralizing bone. 
                        Deposition of fluoride F18 in bone appears to be primarily a function of blood flow to the bone and the efficiency of the bone in extracting the fluoride F18. Fluoride F18 does not appear to be bound to serum proteins. 
                        In patients with normal renal function, 20% or more of the fluorine ion is cleared from the body in the urine within the first 2 hours after intravenous administration.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         