
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
                  Apixaban is a substrate of both CYP3A4 and P-gp. Inhibitors of CYP3A4 and P-gp increase exposure to apixaban and increase the risk of bleeding. Inducers of CYP3A4 and P-gp decrease exposure to apixaban and increase the risk of stroke and other thromboembolic events.
               
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              ●Strong dual inhibitors of CYP3A4 and P-gp increase blood levels of apixaban. Reduce ELIQUIS dose or avoid coadministration. (2.5, 7.1, 12.3)
                           
                           
                              ●Simultaneous use of strong dual inducers of CYP3A4 and P-gp reduces blood levels of apixaban: Avoid concomitant use. (7.2, 12.3)
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 Strong Dual Inhibitors of CYP3A4 and P-gp
                     
                        For patients receiving ELIQUIS 5 mg or 10 mg twice daily, the dose of ELIQUIS should be decreased by 50% when coadministered with drugs that are strong dual inhibitors of CYP3A4 and P-gp (e.g., ketoconazole, itraconazole, ritonavir, or clarithromycin) [see 
                           
                              Dosage and Administration (2.5)
                           
                            and Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                        For patients receiving ELIQUIS at a dose of 2.5 mg twice daily, avoid coadministration with strong dual inhibitors of CYP3A4 and P-gp [see 
                           
                              Dosage and Administration (2.5)
                           
                            and Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 Strong Dual Inducers of CYP3A4 and P-gp
                     
                        Avoid concomitant use of ELIQUIS with strong dual inducers of CYP3A4 and P-gp (e.g., rifampin, carbamazepine, phenytoin, St. John’s wort) because such drugs will decrease exposure to apixaban [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3 Anticoagulants and Antiplatelet Agents
                     
                        Coadministration of antiplatelet agents, fibrinolytics, heparin, aspirin, and chronic NSAID use increases the risk of bleeding.
                        APPRAISE-2, a placebo-controlled clinical trial of apixaban in high-risk, post-acute coronary syndrome patients treated with aspirin or the combination of aspirin and clopidogrel, was terminated early due to a higher rate of bleeding with apixaban compared to placebo. The rate of ISTH major bleeding was 2.8% per year with apixaban versus 0.6% per year with placebo in patients receiving single antiplatelet therapy and was 5.9% per year with apixaban versus 2.5% per year with placebo in those receiving dual antiplatelet therapy.
                        In ARISTOTLE, concomitant use of aspirin increased the bleeding risk on ELIQUIS from 1.8% per year to 3.4% per year and concomitant use of aspirin and warfarin increased the bleeding risk from 2.7% per year to 4.6% per year. In this clinical trial, there was limited (2.3%) use of dual antiplatelet therapy with ELIQUIS.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         