
               
               
               7. DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              Muscle relaxants: Monitor patients receiving muscle relaxants and IONSYS for signs of respiratory depression that may be greater than otherwise expected. (
     7.2)
    
                           
                              Monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs): Avoid use of IONSYS in patients taking MAOIs or within 14 days of stopping such treatment. (
     7.4)
    
                           
                              Mixed agonist/antagonist and partial agonist analgesics: Avoid use with IONSYS because they may reduce the analgesic effect of IONSYS or precipitate withdrawal. (
     7.5)
    
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 Central Nervous System Depressants
                     
                        The concomitant use of IONSYS with other central nervous system depressants including sedatives, hypnotics, tranquilizers, phenothiazines, general anesthetics, other opioids, and alcohol can increase the risk of respiratory depression, profound sedation, coma, and death. Monitor patients receiving concomitant CNS depressants and IONSYS for signs of respiratory depression, sedation, and hypotension 
  [see Warnings and Precautions (
   5.4)].
  
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 Muscle Relaxants
                     
                        IONSYS may enhance the neuromuscular blocking action of true skeletal muscle relaxants and produce an increased degree of respiratory depression. Monitor patients receiving muscle relaxants and IONSYS for signs of respiratory depression that may be greater than otherwise expected.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3 Drugs Affecting CYP3A4 Isoenzyme System
                     
                        
                           Inhibitors of CYP3A4
                        
                        Because the CYP3A4 isoenzyme plays a major role in the metabolism of fentanyl, drugs that inhibit CYP3A4 activity may cause decreased clearance of fentanyl which could lead to an increase in fentanyl plasma concentrations and result in increased or prolonged opioid effects. These effects could be more pronounced with concomitant use of 3A4 inhibitors. If coadministration with IONSYS is necessary, monitor patients for respiratory depression and sedation at frequent intervals and consider dose adjustments until stable drug effects are achieved
   [see Clinical Pharmacology (
   12.3)].
  
                        
                        
                           Inducers of CYP3A4
                        
                        CYP450 3A4 inducers may induce the metabolism of fentanyl and, therefore, may cause increased clearance of the drug which could lead to a decrease in fentanyl plasma concentrations, lack of efficacy or, possibly, development of a withdrawal syndrome in a patient who has developed physical dependence to fentanyl. If co-administration with IONSYS is necessary, monitor for signs of opioid withdrawal and consider dose adjustments until stable drug effects are achieved 
  [see Clinical Pharmacology (
   12.3)].
  
                        
                        After stopping the treatment of a CYP3A4 inducer, as the effects of the inducer decline, the fentanyl plasma concentration will increase which could increase or prolong both the therapeutic and adverse effects, and may cause serious respiratory depression or death
   [see Clinical Pharmacology (
   12.3)].
  
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4 Monoamine Oxidase (MAO) Inhibitors
                     
                        Avoid use of IONSYS in patients who would require the concomitant administration of a monoamine oxidase (MAO) inhibitor, or within 14 days of stopping such a treatment because severe and unpredictable potentiation by MAO inhibitors has been reported with opioid analgesics.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.5 Agonist/Antagonist and Partial Agonist Opioid Analgesics
                     
                        Mixed agonist/antagonist (i.e., pentazocine, nalbuphine, and butorphanol) and partial agonist (buprenorphine) analgesics may reduce the analgesic effect of IONSYS or may precipitate withdrawal symptoms. Avoid the use of agonist/antagonist and partial agonist analgesics in patients receiving IONSYS.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.6 Diuretics
                     
                        IONSYS can reduce the efficacy of diuretics by inducing the release of antidiuretic hormone. IONSYS may also lead to acute retention of urine by causing spasm of the sphincter of the bladder, particularly in men with enlarged prostates.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.7 Anticholinergics
                     
                        Anticholinergics or other medications with anticholinergic activity when used concurrently with IONSYS may result in increased risk of urinary retention and/or severe constipation, which may lead to paralytic ileus. Monitor patients for signs of urinary retention or reduced gastrointestinal motility when IONSYS is used concurrently with anticholinergic drugs.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         