
               
               
               12. CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Fentanyl is an opioid analgesic. Fentanyl interacts predominantly with the μ-opioid receptor. These μ-binding sites are discretely distributed in the human brain, spinal cord, and other tissues.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        
                           Analgesia
                        
                        In clinical settings, fentanyl exerts its principal pharmacologic effects on the central nervous system. Its primary actions of therapeutic value are analgesia and sedation. Fentanyl may increase the patient’s tolerance for pain and decrease the perception of suffering, although the presence of the pain itself may still be recognized. When patients titrated themselves to analgesic effect with IONSYS, serum concentrations were in the range of 0.4 to 1.5 ng/mL over the 24-hour dosing period.
                        
                        
                           Respiratory Effects
                        
                        Hypoventilation can occur throughout the therapeutic range of fentanyl serum concentrations and may occur at any time during therapy, especially for patients who have an underlying pulmonary condition or who receive doses of opioids or other CNS drugs associated with hypoventilation in addition to IONSYS. The respiratory effects of IONSYS should be monitored by clinical evaluation, including oxygen saturation, respiratory rate, and degree of sedation. After delivery of the maximum number of doses in the shortest possible time period (80 consecutive doses delivered over approximately 13 hours), the fentanyl serum concentration was in the range of 1.51 to 2.37 ng/mL, which is in the range that could result in respiratory depression 
  [see Warnings and Precautions (
   5.1) and Overdosage (
   10)].
  
                        
                        
                        
                           Effects on the Cardiovascular System
                        
                        Fentanyl may produce orthostatic hypotension and fainting. Histamine assays and skin wheal testing in humans indicate that clinically significant histamine release rarely occurs with fentanyl administration. Assays in humans show no clinically significant histamine release in dosages up to 50 mcg/kg.
                        
                        
                           Effects on Central Nervous System
                        
                        Central nervous system effects, such as sedation and depression of respiration, increase with increasing serum fentanyl concentrations. In addition to analgesia, alterations in mood, euphoria and dysphoria, and drowsiness commonly occur. Fentanyl depresses the respiratory centers and the cough reflex, and constricts the pupils. Analgesic blood concentrations of fentanyl may cause nausea and vomiting by directly stimulating the chemoreceptor trigger zone, but nausea and vomiting are significantly more common in ambulatory than in recumbent patients, as is postural syncope.
                        
                        
                           Effects on Gastrointestinal Tract and Other Smooth Muscle
                        
                        Opioids increase the tone and decrease the propulsive contractions of the smooth muscle of the gastrointestinal tract. The resultant prolongation in gastrointestinal transit time may be responsible for the constipating effect of opioids. Because opioids may increase biliary tract pressure, some patients with biliary colic may experience worsening rather than relief of pain.
                        
                        While opioids generally increase the tone of urinary tract smooth muscle, the net effect tends to be variable, in some cases producing urinary urgency, in others, difficulty in urination.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        Unless otherwise specified, the clinical pharmacology studies described in this section were performed in healthy adult volunteers. Volunteers were administered naltrexone to antagonize the opioid effects of fentanyl.
                        
                           Absorption
                        
                        At the initiation of each dose, an electrical current is activated for 10 minutes, which moves a dose of fentanyl from the drug-containing reservoir through the skin and into the systemic circulation. Compared to IV fentanyl administration, fentanyl concentrations in blood increase slowly with IONSYS activation and continue to increase for approximately 5 minutes after the completion of each 10 minute dose.
                        The systemic absorption of fentanyl from IONSYS increases as a function of time, and this increase appears to be independent of frequency of dosing. At treatment initiation, the amount of fentanyl absorbed is expected to be approximately 16 mcg (see Figure 9A and Figure 9B). In clinical pharmacokinetic studies, on-demand dosing was initiated immediately after IONSYS application. This resulted in absorption of a 40 mcg fentanyl dose by about 10 hours post treatment initiation. Thereafter, a 40 mcg dose of fentanyl is delivered with each activation.
                        After delivery of the maximum number of doses in the shortest possible time period (80 consecutive doses delivered over approximately 13 hours), the average fentanyl serum concentration was 1.94 ± 0.43 ng/mL. Pharmacokinetic data from illustrative dosing regimens are represented in Table 2. When IONSYS was applied without activating the current, the average absorption rate for fentanyl over 24 hours was 2.3 mcg/h.
                        Inter-subject variability in fentanyl AUC following IONSYS treatment (33%) was comparable to IV fentanyl treatment (28%).
                        The delivery of fentanyl from IONSYS is similar whether applied on the upper outer arm or the chest. When IONSYS is placed on the lower inner arm, the delivery of fentanyl is approximately 20% lower. Other application sites have not been evaluated.
                        Figure 9: Serum Fentanyl Concentration Following 40 mcg IONSYS
  ® (fentanyl) Compared to IV Fentanyl
 
                        A: First Hour of a Representative Treatment *
                        
                           
                        
                        B: Last Hour and Upon Termination of a Representative Treatment *
                        
                           
                        
                        * IONSYS
  ® 40 mcg: 2 sequential doses over 20 minutes every hour for 23 hours and 20 minutes; IV: 80 mcg dose over 20 minutes every hour for 23 hours and 20 minutes.
 
                        


                        


AUC for this dosing regimen is value estimated between 23-24 hours
  

Average AUC over all doses delivered during the treatment duration (13.33 hours)
  

                           a Representative dosing regimen based on number of doses administered by patients in Phase 3 clinical studies
  

                           b Maximum theoretical dosing
 
                        
                           Distribution
                        
                        Fentanyl administered intravenously exhibits a three-compartment disposition model. In healthy volunteers after IV administration, the estimated initial distribution half-life was about 6 minutes; the second distribution half-life was about 1-hour; and the terminal half-life was about 16 hours. The average volume of distribution for fentanyl at steady state following IV administration is 833 L.
                        Mean values for unbound fractions of fentanyl in plasma are estimated to be between 13 and 21%. Fentanyl binds to erythrocytes, α1‑acid glycoproteins, and plasma albumin.
                        Binding is independent of drug concentration over the therapeutic range. Fentanyl plasma protein binding capacity decreases with increasing ionization of the drug. Alterations in blood pH may alter ionization of fentanyl and therefore its distribution between plasma and the central nervous system. Fentanyl accumulates in the skeletal muscle and fat and is released slowly into the blood.
                        
                           Elimination
                        
                        
                           Metabolism
                           

In humans, fentanyl is metabolized primarily by cytochrome P450 3A4-mediated N-dealkylation to norfentanyl and other inactive metabolites that do not contribute materially to the observed activity of the drug. The average clearance in healthy subjects following IV administration was observed to be 53 L/h.
 
                        A decline in fentanyl concentration after termination of treatment and the terminal half-life is similar following IV administration of fentanyl and IONSYS (see Figure 9B). This suggests a negligible contribution from continued absorption of fentanyl remaining in the skin.
                        Skin does not metabolize fentanyl administered transdermally. This was determined in a human keratinocyte cell assay.
                        
                           Excretion
                           

Within 72 hours of IV fentanyl administration, approximately 75% of the dose is excreted in urine, mostly as metabolites, with less than 10% representing unchanged drug. Approximately 9% of the dose is recovered in the feces, primarily as metabolites.
 
                        
                           Specific Populations
                        
                        
                           Age
                           

Age did not affect fentanyl absorption from IONSYS.
 
                        
                           Sex
                           

Sex differences have been reported for hepatically metabolized drugs. Generally, those that are metabolized by CYP3A4 appear to be eliminated faster by women in many cases. There have been no reports on gender differences in fentanyl pharmacokinetics.
 
                        
                           Race
                           

Race did not affect fentanyl absorption from IONSYS.
 
                        
                           Renal Impairment
                           

No studies specific to IONSYS in patients with renal impairment have been conducted. In the literature, the pharmacokinetics of fentanyl in patients with severe renal disease was compared to healthy patients. Plasma fentanyl concentrations decreased faster following an IV fentanyl administration in those with renal disease than in the control group, indicating more rapid clearance in the former. As renal clearance of fentanyl is only 10%, a decrease in renal function would not be expected to have a significant effect on the clearance of fentanyl.
 
                        
                           Hepatic Impairment
                           

No studies specific to IONSYS in patients with hepatic impairment have been conducted. In the literature, fentanyl appears to be affected more by hepatic blood flow than by hepatocellular function. The plasma concentration time profiles for the control and cirrhotic patients were similar and not significantly different with respective average elimination half-life values of 10.8 mL/min/kg vs. 11.3 mL/min/kg and volume of distribution values of 3.81 L/kg vs. 4.41 L/kg. In addition, the pharmacokinetics of fentanyl in patients with end-stage liver disease who were undergoing hemodialysis to those in normal patients was studied. While differences between groups were not statistically significant, fentanyl clearance values were reported to be lower for the hepatically impaired patients.
 
                        
                           Drug Interaction Studies
                        
                        
                           CYP3A4 Inhibitors
                           

Fentanyl is metabolized mainly via the human cytochrome P450 3A4 isoenzyme system (CYP3A4). The interaction between ritonavir, a CPY3A4 inhibitor, and fentanyl was investigated in eleven healthy volunteers in a randomized crossover study. Subjects received oral ritonavir or placebo for 3 days. The ritonavir dose was 200 mg tid on Day 1 and 300 mg tid on Day 2 followed by one morning dose of 300 mg on Day 3. On Day 2, fentanyl was given as a single IV dose at 5 mcg/kg two hours after the afternoon dose of oral ritonavir or placebo. Naloxone was administered to counteract the side effects of fentanyl. The results suggested that ritonavir might decrease the clearance of fentanyl by 67%, resulting in a 174% (range 52%–420%) increase in fentanyl AUC0-∞. The concomitant use of transdermal fentanyl with all CYP3A4 inhibitors (such as ritonavir, ketoconazole, itraconazole, troleandomycin, clarithromycin, nelfinavir, nefazadone, amiodarone, amprenavir, aprepitant, diltiazem, erythromycin, fluconazole, fosamprenavir, verapamil, or grapefruit juice) may result in an increase in fentanyl plasma concentrations, which could increase or prolong adverse drug effects and may cause potentially fatal respiratory depression. Carefully monitor patients receiving IONSYS and any CYP3A4 inhibitor for signs of respiratory depression for an extended period of time and discontinue IONSYS if warranted 
  [see Boxed Warning, Warnings and Precautions (
   5.15), and Drug Interactions (
   7.3)].
  
                        
                        
                           CYP3A4 Inducers
                           

Co-administration with agents that induce CYP3A4 activity may decrease plasma concentration of fentanyl following use of IONSYS. Discontinuation of a concomitantly used cytochrome P450 3A4 inducer may result in an increase in fentanyl plasma concentration.
 
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           First Hour of a Representative Treatment image
                           
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           Last Hour and Upon Termination of a Representative Treatment image
                           
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         