
               
               
               DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
                  

                  

                  In controlled trials, terazosin capsules have been added to 
diuretics, and several beta-adrenergic blockers; no unexpected interactions were 
observed. Terazosin capsules have also been used in patients on a variety of 
concomitant therapies; while these were not formal interaction studies, no 
interactions were observed. Terazosin capsules have been used concomitantly in 
at least 50 patients on the following drugs or drug classes: 
                  1. analgesic/anti-inflammatory (e.g., acetaminophen, aspirin, codeine, 
ibuprofen, indomethacin); 
                  2. antibiotics (e.g., erythromycin, trimethoprim and sulfamethoxazole); 
                  3. anticholinergic/sympathomimetics (e.g., phenylephrine hydrochloride, 
phenylpropanolamine hydrochloride, pseudoephedrine hydrochloride); 
                  4. antigout (e.g., allopurinol); 
                  5. antihistamines (e.g., chlorpheniramine); 
                  6. cardiovascular agents (e.g., atenolol, hydrochlorothiazide, 
methyclothiazide, propranolol); 
                  7. corticosteroids; 
                  8. gastrointestinal agents (e.g., antacids); 
                  9. hypoglycemics 
                  10. sedatives and tranquilizers (e.g., diazepam). 
                  
                     Use With Other Drugs
                  
                  In a study (n=24) where terazosin and verapamil were administered 
concomitantly, terazosin’s mean AUC0-24 increased 11% 
after the first verapamil dose and after 3 weeks of verapamil treatment it 
increased by 24% with associated increases in Cmax (25%) 
and Cmin (32%) means. Terazosin mean Tmax 
decreased from 1.3 hours to 0.8 hours after 3 weeks of verapamil 
treatment. Statistically significant differences were not found in the verapamil 
level with and without terazosin. In a study (n=6) where terazosin and captopril 
were administered concomitantly, plasma disposition of captopril was not 
influenced by concomitant administration of terazosin and
                  terazosin maximum plasma concentrations increased linearly with dose at 
steady-state after administration of terazosin plus captopril (see DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION). 
                  
                  
                  Carcinogenesis, Mutagenesis, Impairment of 
FertilityTerazosin capsules were devoid of mutagenic potential when 
evaluated in vivo and in vitro 
(the Ames test, in vivo cytogenetics, the 
dominant lethal test in mice, in vivo Chinese hamster 
chromosome aberration test and V79 forward mutation assay). 
                  Terazosin capsules, administered in the feed to rats at doses of 8, 40, and 
250 mg/kg/day (70, 350, and 2100 mg/M2/day), for two 
years, was associated with a statistically significant increase in benign 
adrenal medullary tumors of male rats exposed to the 250 mg/kg dose. This dose 
is 175 times the maximum recommended human dose of 20 mg (12 mg/M2). Female rats were unaffected. Terazosin capsules were not 
oncogenic in mice when administered in feed for 2 years at a maximum tolerated 
dose of 32 mg/kg/day (110 mg/M2; 9 times the maximum 
recommended human dose). The absence of mutagenicity in a battery of tests, of 
tumorigenicity of any cell type in the mouse carcinogenicity assay, of increased 
total tumor incidence in either species, and of proliferative adrenal lesions in 
female rats, suggests a male rat species-specific event. Numerous other diverse 
pharmaceutical and chemical compounds have also been associated with benign 
adrenal medullary tumors in male rats without supporting evidence for 
carcinogenicity in man. 
                  The effect of terazosin capsules on fertility was assessed in a standard 
fertility/reproductive performance study in which male and female rats were 
administered oral doses of 8, 30 and 120 mg/kg/day. Four of 20 male rats given 
30 mg/kg (240 mg/M2; 20 times the maximum recommended 
human dose) and five of 19 male rats given 120 mg/kg (960 mg/M2; 80 times the maximum recommended human dose) failed to sire 
a litter. Testicular weights and morphology were unaffected by treatment. 
Vaginal smears at 30 and 120 mg/kg/day, however, appeared to contain less sperm 
than smears from control matings and good correlation was reported between sperm 
count and subsequent pregnancy. 
                  Oral administration of terazosin capsules for one or two years elicited a 
statistically significant increase in the incidence of testicular atrophy in 
rats exposed to 40 and 250 mg/kg/day (29 and 175 times the maximum recommended 
human dose), but not in rats exposed to 8 mg/kg/day (> 6 times the maximum 
recommended human dose). Testicular atrophy was also observed in dogs dosed with 
300 mg/kg/day (> 500 times the maximum recommended human dose) for three 
months but not after one year when dosed with 20 mg/kg/day (38 times the maximum 
recommended human dose). This lesion has also been seen with prazosin 
hydrochloride, another (marketed) selective-alpha-1 blocking agent. 
                  

               
               
            
         