
                     
                     
                     Interactions
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Drug Interactions
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 With Diuretics
                                 
                                     Patients on diuretics, especially those with intravascular volume depletion, may occasionally experience an excessive reduction of blood pressure after initiation of therapy with fosinopril sodium tablets. The possibility of hypotensive effects with fosinopril can be minimized by either discontinuing the diuretic or increasing salt intake prior to initiation of treatment with fosinopril. If this is not possible, the starting dose should be reduced and the patient should be observed closely for several hours following an initial dose and until blood pressure has stabilized (see 
                                          DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION
                                       ). 
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 With potassium supplements and potassium-sparing diuretics
                                 
                                     Fosinopril can attenuate potassium loss caused by thiazide diuretics. Potassium-sparing diuretics (spironolactone, amiloride, triamterene, and others) or potassium supplements can increase the risk of hyperkalemia. Therefore, if concomitant use of such agents is indicated, they should be given with caution, and the patient's serum potassium should be monitored frequently. 
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 With lithiu
                                 
                                     Increased serum lithium levels and symptoms of lithium toxicity have been reported in patients receiving ACE inhibitors during therapy with lithium. These drugs should be coadministered with caution, and frequent monitoring of serum lithium levels is recommended. If a diuretic is also used, the risk of lithium toxicity may be increased. 
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 With antacids
                                 
                                     In a clinical pharmacology study, coadministration of an antacid (aluminum hydroxide, magnesium hydroxide, and simethicone) with fosinopril reduced serum levels and urinary excretion of fosinoprilat as compared with fosinopril administered alone, suggesting that antacids may impair absorption of fosinopril. Therefore, if concomitant administration of these agents is indicated, dosing should be separated by 2 hours. 
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Other
                                 
                                     Neither fosinopril nor its metabolites have been found to interact with food. In separate single or multiple dose pharmacokinetic interaction studies with chlorthalidone, nifedipine, propranolol, hydrochlorothiazide, cimetidine, metoclopramide, propantheline, digoxin, and warfarin, the bioavailability of fosinoprilat was not altered by coadministration of fosinopril with any one of these drugs. In a study with concomitant administration of aspirin and fosinopril, the bioavailability of unbound fosinoprilat was not altered. 
                                    In a pharmacokinetic interaction study with warfarin, bioavailability parameters, the degree of protein binding, and the anticoagulant effect (measured by prothrombin time) of warfarin were not significantly changed.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Drug/Laboratory Test Interactions
                           
                              Fosinopril may cause a false low measurement of serum digoxin levels with the Digi-Tab® RIA Kit for Digoxin. Other kits, such as the Coat-A-Count® RIA Kit, may be used. 
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               