
               
               
               12  CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1  Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Leuprolide acetate, a GnRH agonist, acts as a potent inhibitor of gonadotropin secretion when given continuously and in therapeutic doses. Human studies indicate that following an initial stimulation of gonadotropins, chronic stimulation with leuprolide acetate results in suppression or "downregulation" of these hormones and consequent suppression of ovarian and testicular steroidogenesis. These effects are reversible on discontinuation of drug therapy.
                        Leuprolide acetate is not active when given orally. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3  Pharmacokinetics
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Absorption
                           
                              
                                 LUPRON DEPOT-PED 7.5 mg, 11.25 mg, or 15 mg for 1-month administration 
                              
                              Following a single LUPRON DEPOT-PED 7.5 mg for 1-month administration to adult patients, mean peak leuprolide plasma concentration was almost 20 ng/mL at 4 hours and then declined to 0.36 ng/mL at 4 weeks. However, intact leuprolide and an inactive major metabolite could not be distinguished by the assay which was employed in the study. Nondetectable leuprolide plasma concentrations have been observed during chronic LUPRON DEPOT-PED 7.5 mg administration, but testosterone levels appear to be maintained at castrate levels.
                              In a study of 55 children with central precocious puberty, doses of 7.5 mg, 11.25 mg and 15.0 mg of LUPRON DEPOT-PED were given every 4 weeks and in a subset of 22 children, trough leuprolide plasma levels were determined according to weight categories as summarized below:
                              


                              



                                 LUPRON DEPOT-PED 11.25 mg or 30 mg for 3-month administration
                              
                              Following a single LUPRON DEPOT-PED 11.25 mg or 30 mg for 3-month administration to children with CPP, leuprolide concentrations increased with increasing dose with mean peak leuprolide plasma concentration of 19.1 and 52.5 ng/mL at 1 hour for the 11.25 and 30 mg dose levels, respectively. The concentrations then declined to 0.08 and 0.25 ng/mL at 2 weeks after dosing for the 11.25 and 30 mg dose levels. Mean leuprolide plasma concentration remained constant from month 1 to month 3 for both 11.25 and 30 mg doses. The mean leuprolide concentrations 3 months after the first and second injections were similar indicating no accumulation of leuprolide from repeated administration.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Distribution
                           
                              The mean steady-state volume of distribution of leuprolide following intravenous bolus administration to healthy male volunteers was 27 L. In vitro binding to human plasma proteins ranged from 43% to 49%. 
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Metabolism
                           
                              In healthy male volunteers, a 1 mg bolus of leuprolide administered intravenously revealed that the mean systemic clearance was 7.6 L/h, with a terminal elimination half-life of approximately 3 hours based on a two compartment model.
                              In rats and dogs, administration of 14C-labeled leuprolide was shown to be metabolized to smaller inactive peptides; a pentapeptide (Metabolite I), tripeptides (Metabolites II and III) and a dipeptide (Metabolite IV). These fragments may be further catabolized.
                              The major metabolite (M-I) plasma concentrations measured in 5 prostate cancer patients reached maximum concentration 2 to 6 hours after dosing and were approximately 6% of the peak parent drug concentration. One week after dosing, mean plasma M-I concentrations were approximately 20% of mean leuprolide concentrations. 
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Excretion
                           
                              Following administration of LUPRON DEPOT 3.75 mg to 3 patients, less than 5% of the dose was recovered as parent and M-I metabolite in the urine.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Specific Populations
                           
                              The pharmacokinetics of LUPRON DEPOT-PED has not been determined in patients with hepatic or renal impairment.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Drug-Drug Interactions
                           
                              No pharmacokinetic-based drug-drug interaction studies have been conducted with LUPRON DEPOT-PED. However, because leuprolide acetate is a peptide that is primarily degraded by peptidase and not by cytochrome P-450 enzymes as noted in specific studies, and the drug is only about 46% bound to plasma proteins, drug interactions are not expected to occur.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         