
               
               
               12      	CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1      	Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Zingo™ delivers lidocaine hydrochloride monohydrate into the dermis. Lidocaine is an amide- type local anesthetic agent that blocks sodium ion channels required for the initiation and conduction of neuronal impulses, resulting in local anesthesia.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2      	Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        Zingo™ provides local dermal analgesia within 1–3 minutes of application. Analgesia diminishes within 10 minutes of treatment.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3      	Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        
                           Absorption
                        
                        A single dose of Zingo™ in adults did not produce detectable plasma concentrations of lidocaine (limit of quantitation 5 ng/mL) in any subject tested (n = 38).
                        Application of Zingo™ to broken or inﬂamed skin, or multiple Zingo™ applications, could result  in systemic plasma levels of lidocaine that could produce systemic toxicity.
                        
                           Distribution
                        
                        When lidocaine is administered intravenously to healthy volunteers, the steady-state volume of distribution is approximately 0.8 to 1.3 L/kg. At much higher plasma concentrations (1 to 4 mcg/ mL of free base) than those found following application of Zingo™, the plasma protein binding of lidocaine is concentration dependent. Lidocaine crosses the placental and blood brain  barriers, presumably by passive diffusion. CNS toxicity may typically be observed around 5000 ng/mL of lidocaine; however a small number of patients reportedly may show signs of toxicity at approximately 1000 ng/mL.
                        
                           Metabolism
                        
                        It is not known if lidocaine is metabolized in the skin. Lidocaine is metabolized rapidly by the liver to a number of metabolites including monoethylglycinexylidide (MEGX) and glycinexylidide (GX), both of which have pharmacologic activity similar to, but less potent than that of lidocaine. The major metabolic pathway of lidocaine, sequential N-deethylation to monoethylglycinexylidide (MEGX) and glycinexylidide (GX), is primarily mediated by CYP1A2 with a minor role of CYP3A4. The metabolite, 2,6-xylidine, has unknown pharmacologic activity. Following intravenous administration of lidocaine, MEGX and GX concentrations in serum range from 11% to 36% and from 5% to 11% of lidocaine concentrations, respectively. Serum concentrations of MEGX are about one-third the serum lidocaine concentrations.
                        
                           Elimination
                        
                        The half-life of lidocaine elimination from the plasma following intravenous administration is approximately 1.8 hours. Lidocaine and its metabolites are excreted by the kidneys. More than 98% of an absorbed dose of lidocaine can be recovered in the urine as metabolites or parent drug. Less than 10% of lidocaine is excreted unchanged in adults, and approximately 20% is excreted unchanged in neonates. The systemic clearance is approximately 8–10 mL/min/kg. During intravenous studies, the elimination half-life of lidocaine was statistically signiﬁcantly longer in elderly patients (2.5 hours) than in younger patients (1.5 hours).
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         