
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Carfilzomib is a tetrapeptide epoxyketone proteasome inhibitor that irreversibly binds to the N‑terminal threonine‑containing active sites of the 20S proteasome, the proteolytic core particle within the 26S proteasome.  Carfilzomib had antiproliferative and proapoptotic activities in vitro in solid and hematologic tumor cells.  In animals, carfilzomib inhibited proteasome activity in blood and tissue and delayed tumor growth in models of multiple myeloma, hematologic, and solid tumors.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        Intravenous carfilzomib administration resulted in suppression of proteasome chymotrypsin-like (CT-L) activity when measured in blood 1 hour after the first dose.  Doses of carfilzomib ≥ 15 mg/m2 with or without lenalidomide and dexamethasone induced a ≥ 80% inhibition of the CT-L activity of the proteasome.  In addition, carfilzomib 20 mg/m2 intravenously as a single agent, resulted in a mean inhibition of the low molecular mass polypeptide 2 (LMP2) and multicatalytic endopeptidase complex-like 1 (MECL1) subunits of the proteasome ranging from 26% to 32% and 41% to 49%, respectively.  Proteasome inhibition was maintained for ≥ 48 hours following the first dose of carfilzomib for each week of dosing. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        The Cmax and AUC following a single intravenous dose of 27 mg/m2 was 4232 ng/mL and 379 ng•hr/mL, respectively.  Following repeated doses of carfilzomib at 15 and 20 mg/m2, systemic exposure (AUC) and half-life were similar on Days 1 and 15 or 16 of Cycle 1, suggesting there was no systemic carfilzomib accumulation.  At doses between 20 and 36 mg/m2, there was a dose-dependent increase in exposure.
                        
                           Distribution: The mean steady-state volume of distribution of a 20 mg/m2 dose of carfilzomib was 28 L.  When tested in vitro, the binding of carfilzomib to human plasma proteins averaged 97% over the concentration range of 0.4 to 4 micromolar.
                        
                           Metabolism: Carfilzomib was rapidly and extensively metabolized.  The predominant metabolites measured in human plasma and urine, and generated in vitro by human hepatocytes, were peptide fragments and the diol of carfilzomib, suggesting that peptidase cleavage and epoxide hydrolysis were the principal pathways of metabolism.  Cytochrome P450-mediated mechanisms played a minor role in overall carfilzomib metabolism.  The metabolites have no known biologic activity.  
                        
                           Elimination: Following intravenous administration of doses ≥15 mg/m2, carfilzomib was rapidly cleared from the systemic circulation with a half-life of ≤1 hour on Day 1 of Cycle 1.  The systemic clearance ranged from 151 to 263 L/hour, and exceeded hepatic blood flow, suggesting that carfilzomib was largely cleared extrahepatically.  In 24 hours, approximately 25% of the administered dose of carfilzomib was excreted in urine as metabolites.  Urinary and fecal excretion of the parent compound was negligible (0.3% of total dose).
                        
                           Age: Population pharmacokinetic analyses that included patients ranging from 35 to 87.6 years of age indicate that the pharmacokinetics of carfilzomib are not influenced by age.
                        
                           Gender: Population pharmacokinetic analyses indicate that the pharmacokinetics of carfilzomib are not influenced by gender.
                        
                           Hepatic Impairment:No dedicated studies have been completed in patients with hepatic impairment.
                        
                           Renal Impairment:A pharmacokinetic study was conducted in which 50 multiple myeloma patients who had various degrees of renal impairment and who were classified according to their creatinine clearances (CLcr) into the following groups:  normal function (CLcr > 80 mL/min, n = 12), mild impairment (CLcr 50–80 mL/min, n = 12), moderate impairment (CLcr 30–49 mL/min, n = 10), severe impairment (CLcr < 30 mL/min, n = 8), and chronic dialysis (n = 8).  Kyprolis, as a single agent, was administered intravenously over 2 to 10 minutes, on two consecutive days, weekly for three weeks (Days 1, 2, 8, 9, 15, and 16), followed by a 12‑day rest period every 28 days.  Patients received an initial dose of 15 mg/m2, which could be escalated to 20 mg/m2 starting in Cycle 2 if 15 mg/m2 was well tolerated in Cycle 1.  In this study, renal function status had no effect on the clearance or exposure of carfilzomib following a single or repeat-dose administration [see Use in Specific Populations (8.6)].
                        
                           
                              Cytochrome P450:
                            In an in vitro study using human liver microsomes, carfilzomib showed modest direct (Ki = 1.7 micromolar) and time-dependent inhibition (Ki = 11 micromolar) of human cytochrome CYP3A4/5.  In vitro studies indicated that carfilzomib did not induce human CYP1A2 and CYP3A4 in cultured fresh human hepatocytes.  Cytochrome P450-mediated mechanisms play a minor role in the overall metabolism of carfilzomib.  A clinical trial of 17 patients using oral midazolam as a CYP3A probe demonstrated that the pharmacokinetics of midazolam were unaffected by concomitant carfilzomib administration.  Kyprolis is not expected to inhibit CYP3A4/5 activities and/or affect the exposure to CYP3A4/5 substrates.
                        
                           
                              P-gp:
                            Carfilzomib is a P‑glycoprotein (P-gp) substrate.  In vitro, carfilzomib inhibited the efflux transport of P-gp substrate digoxin by 25% in a Caco-2 monolayer system.  However, given that Kyprolis is administered intravenously and is extensively metabolized, the pharmacokinetics of Kyprolis is unlikely to be affected by P‑gp inhibitors or inducers.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         