
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
                  Nevirapine is principally metabolized by the liver via the cytochrome P450 isoenzymes, 3A and 2B6. Nevirapine is known to be an inducer of these enzymes. As a result, drugs that are metabolized by these enzyme systems may have lower than expected plasma levels when co-administered with nevirapine.
                  The specific pharmacokinetic changes that occur with co-administration of nevirapine and other drugs are listed in Clinical Pharmacology, Table 4. Clinical comments about possible dosage modifications based on established drug interactions are listed in Table 3. The data in Tables 3 and 4 are based on the results of drug interaction trials conducted in HIV-1 seropositive subjects unless otherwise indicated. In addition to established drug interactions, there may be potential pharmacokinetic interactions between nevirapine and other drug classes that are metabolized by the cytochrome P450 system. These potential drug interactions are also listed in Table 3. Although specific drug interaction trials in HIV-1 seropositive subjects have not been conducted for some classes of drugs listed in Table 3, additional clinical monitoring may be warranted when co-administering these drugs.
                  The in vitro interaction between nevirapine and the antithrombotic agent warfarin is complex. As a result, when giving these drugs concomitantly, plasma warfarin levels may change with the potential for increases in coagulation time. When warfarin is co-administered with nevirapine, anticoagulation levels should be monitored frequently.
                  


               



               
               
                  
                     
                        Co-administration of nevirapine can alter the concentrations of other drugs and other drugs may alter the concentration of nevirapine. The potential for drug interactions must be considered prior to and during therapy              (5.4, 7, 12.3)          
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         