
                     
                     
                     Drug Interactions
                     
                        In clinical trials, no significant adverse reactions occurred with other drugs commonly used in the perioperative period, including: central nervous system depressants, autonomic drugs, skeletal muscle relaxants, anti-infective agents, hormones and synthetic substitutes, blood derivatives, and cardiovascular drugs.
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           INTRAVENOUS ANESTHETICS:
                           
                              Sevoflurane, USP administration is compatible with barbiturates, propofol, and other commonly used intravenous anesthetics.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           BENZODIAZEPINES AND OPIOIDS:
                           
                              Benzodiazepines and opioids would be expected to decrease the MAC of sevoflurane, USP in the same manner as with other inhalational anesthetics. Sevoflurane, USP administration is compatible with benzodiazepines and opioids as commonly used in surgical practice.
                              Opioids, such as fentanyl, alfentanil, and sufentanil, when combined with sevoflurane, may lead to a synergistic decrease in heart rate, blood pressure, and respiratory rate.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           NITROUS OXIDE:
                           
                              As with other halogenated volatile anesthetics, the anesthetic requirement for sevoflurane, USP is decreased when administered in combination with nitrous oxide. Using 50% N2O, the MAC equivalent dose requirement is reduced approximately 50% in adults, and approximately 25% in pediatric patients (see Dosage and Administration).
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           NEUROMUSCULAR BLOCKING AGENTS:
                           
                              As is the case with other volatile anesthetics, sevoflurane, USP increases both the intensity and duration of neuromuscular blockade induced by nondepolarizing muscle relaxants. When used to supplement alfentanil-N2O anesthesia, sevoflurane, USP and isoflurane equally potentiate neuromuscular block induced with pancuronium, vecuronium or atracurium. Therefore, during sevoflurane, USP anesthesia, the dosage adjustments for these muscle relaxants are similar to those required with isoflurane.
                              Potentiation of neuromuscular blocking agents requires equilibration of muscle with delivered partial pressure of sevoflurane, USP. Reduced doses of neuromuscular blocking agents during induction of anesthesia may result in delayed onset of conditions suitable for endotracheal intubation or inadequate muscle relaxation.
                              Among available nondepolarizing agents, only vecuronium, pancuronium and atracurium interactions have been studied during sevoflurane, USP anesthesia. In the absence of specific guidelines:
                              
                                 For endotracheal intubation, do not reduce the dose of nondepolarizing muscle relaxants.
                                 During maintenance of anesthesia, the required dose of nondepolarizing muscle relaxants is likely to be reduced compared to that during N2O/opioid anesthesia. Administration of supplemental doses of muscle relaxants should be guided by the response to nerve stimulation. The effect of sevoflurane, USP on the duration of depolarizing neuromuscular blockade induced by succinylcholine has not been studied.
                              
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           EPINEPHRINE/ADRENALINE
                           
                              Sevoflurane is similar to isoflurane in the sensitization of the myocardium to the arrhythmogenic effect of exogenously administered adrenaline. The threshold dose of adrenaline producing multiple ventricular arrhythmias has been established at 5 mcg/kg body weight when administered submucosally.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           BETA BLOCKERS
                           
                              Sevoflurane may increase the negative inotropic, chronotropic and dromotropic effects of beta blockers through blockade of cardiovascular compensation mechanisms.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           VERAPAMIL
                           
                              Impairment of atrioventricular conduction was observed when verapamil and sevoflurane were administered at the same time.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           ST. JOHN'S WART
                           
                              Severe hypotension and delayed emergence from anesthesia with halogenated inhalational anesthetics have been reported in patients treated long-term with St John’s Wort.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               