
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  
                     
                        Distribution
                     
                  
                  Biologically inactive clindamycin phosphate is converted to active clindamycin.
                  By the end of short-term intravenous infusion, peak serum levels of active clindamycin are reached.
                  After intramuscular injection of clindamycin phosphate, peak levels of active clindamycin are reached within 3 hours in adults and 1 hour in pediatric patients. Serum level curves may be constructed from IV peak serum levels as given in Table 1 by application of elimination half-lives (see 
                        Excretion
                     ).
                  Serum levels of clindamycin can be maintained above the 
                        in vitro
                      minimum inhibitory concentrations for most indicated organisms by administration of clindamycin phosphate every 8 to 12 hours in adults and every 6 to 8 hours in pediatric patients, or by continuous intravenous infusion. An equilibrium state is reached by the third dose.
                  No significant levels of clindamycin are attained in the cerebrospinal fluid even in the presence of inflamed meninges.
                  
                     
                        Excretion
                     
                  
                  Biologically inactive clindamycin phosphate disappears rapidly from the serum; the average elimination half-life is 6 minutes; however, the serum elimination half-life of active clindamycin is about 3 hours in adults and 2½ hours in pediatric patients.
                  
                     
                        Special Populations
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Renal/Hepatic Impairment
                     
                  
                  The elimination half-life of clindamycin is increased slightly in patients with markedly reduced renal or hepatic function. Hemodialysis and peritoneal dialysis are not effective in removing clindamycin from the serum. Dosage schedules need not be modified in the presence of mild or moderate renal or hepatic disease.
                  
                     
                        Use in Elderly
                     
                  
                  Pharmacokinetic studies in elderly volunteers (61 to 79 years) and younger adults (18 to 39 years) indicate that age alone does not alter clindamycin pharmacokinetics (clearance, elimination half-life, volume of distribution, and area under the serum concentration-time curve) after IV administration of clindamycin phosphate. After oral administration of clindamycin hydrochloride, elimination half-life is increased to approximately 4.0 hours (range 3.4 to 5.1 h) in the elderly, compared to 3.2 hours (range 2.1 to 4.2 h) in younger adults. The extent of absorption, however, is not different between age groups and no dosage alteration is necessary for the elderly with normal hepatic function and normal (age-adjusted) renal function1.
                  Serum assays for active clindamycin require an inhibitor to prevent 
                        in vitro
                      hydrolysis of clindamycin phosphate. 
                  


                  



                     
                        Microbiology 
                     
                  
                  Clindamycin inhibits bacterial protein synthesis by binding to the 50S subunit of the ribosome. It has activity against Gram-positive aerobes and anaerobes, as well as some Gram-negative anaerobes. Clindamycin is bacteriostatic. Cross-resistance between clindamycin and lincomycin is complete. Antagonism 
                        in vitro
                      has been demonstrated between clindamycin and erythromycin. Clindamycin inducible resistance has been identified in macrolide-resistant 
                        staphylococci 
                     and beta-hemolytic 
                        streptococci
                     . Macrolide-resistant isolates of these organisms should be screened for clindamycin inducible resistance using the D-zone test.
                  Clindamycin has been shown to be active against most of the isolates of the following microorganisms, both 
                        in vitro
                      and in clinical infections, as described in the 
                        INDICATIONS AND USAGE 
                     section.
                  
                     
                        Gram-positive Aerobes
                     
                  
                              
                        Staphylococcus aureus
                       (methicillin-susceptible strains)
                 
                        Streptococcus pneumoniae
                      (penicillin-susceptible strains)
                 
                        Streptococcus pyogenes
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Anaerobes
                     
                  
                              
                        Prevotella melaninogenica
                     
                     

                     
                                    Fusobacterium necrophorum
                     
                     

                     
                                    Fusobacterium nucleatum
                     
                     

                     
                                    Peptostreptococcus anaerobius
                     
                     

                     
                                    Clostridium perfringens
                     
                  
                  At least 90% of the microorganisms listed below exhibit 
                        in vitro
                      minimum inhibitory concentrations (MICs) less than or equal to the clindamycin susceptible MIC breakpoint for organisms of a similar type to those shown in Table 2. However, the efficacy of clindamycin in treating clinical infections due to these microorganisms 
                        has not been
                      established in adequate and well-controlled clinical trials.
                  
                     
                        Gram-positive aerobes
                     
                  
                              
                        Staphylococcus epidermidis
                      (methicillin-susceptible strains)
                 
                        Streptococcus agalactiae
                     
                     

                     
                                    Streptococcus anginosus
                     
                     

                     
                                    Streptococcus oralis
                     
                     

                     
                                    Streptococcus mitis
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Anaerobes
                     
                  
                              
                        Prevotella intermedia
                     
                     

                     
                                    Prevotella bivia
                     
                     

                     
                                    Propionibacterium acnes
                     
                     

                     
                                    Micromonas (“Peptostreptococcus”) micros
                     
                     

                     
                                    Finegoldia (“Peptostreptococcus”) magna
                     
                     

                     
                                    Actinomyces israelii
                     
                     

                     
                                    Clostridium clostridioforme
                     
                     

                     
                                    Eubacterium lentum
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Susceptibility Testing Methods
                     
                  
                  When available, the clinical microbiology laboratory should provide cumulative 
                        in vitro
                      susceptibility test results for antimicrobial drugs used in local hospitals and practice areas to the physician as periodic reports that describe the susceptibility profile of nosocomial and community-acquired pathogens. These reports should aid the physician in selecting the most effective antimicrobial.
                  
                     
                        Dilution Techniques
                     
                  
                  Quantitative methods are used to determine antimicrobial minimum inhibitory concentrations (MICs). These MICs provide estimates of the susceptibility of bacteria to antimicrobial compounds. The MICs should be determined using a standardized procedure based on dilution methods (broth, agar or microdilution)2,3 or equivalent using standardized inoculum and concentrations of clindamycin. The MIC values should be interpreted according to the criteria provided in Table 2.
                  
                     
                        Diffusion Techniques
                     
                  
                  Quantitative methods that require the measurement of zone diameters also provide reproducible estimates of the susceptibility of bacteria to antimicrobial compounds. The standardized procedure2,4 requires the use of standardized inoculum concentrations. This procedure uses paper disks impregnated with 2 mcg of clindamycin to test the susceptibility of microorganisms to clindamycin. Reports from the laboratory  providing results of the standard single-disk susceptibility test with a 2 mcg clindamycin disk should be interpreted according to the criteria in Table 2.
                  


                  


A report of “Susceptible” indicates that the pathogen is likely to be inhibited if the antimicrobial compound in the blood reaches the concentrations usually achievable. A report of “Intermediate” indicates that the result should be considered equivocal, and, if the microorganism is not fully susceptible to alternative, clinically feasible drugs, the test should be repeated. This category implies possible clinical applicability in body sites where the drug is physiologically concentrated or in situations where high dosage of drug can be used. This category also provides a buffer zone that prevents small, uncontrolled technical factors from causing major discrepancies in interpretation.
                  A report of “Resistant” indicates that the pathogen is not likely to be inhibited if the antimicrobial compound in the blood reaches the concentrations usually achievable; other therapy should be selected.
                  
                     
                        Quality Control
                     
                  
                  Standardized susceptibility test procedures require the use of laboratory controls to monitor and ensure the accuracy and precision of the supplies and reagents used in the assay, and the techniques of the individuals performing the test.2,3,4,5 Standard clindamycin powder should provide the MIC ranges in Table 3. For the disk diffusion technique using the 2 mcg clindamycin disk the criteria provided in Table 2 should be achieved.
                  


