
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               Granisetron does not induce or inhibit the cytochrome P-450 drug-metabolizing enzyme system in vitro. There have been no definitive drug-drug interaction studies to examine pharmacokinetic or pharmacodynamic interaction with other drugs; however, in humans, granisetron hydrochloride injection has been safely administered with drugs representing benzodiazepines, neuroleptics and anti-ulcer medications commonly prescribed with antiemetic treatments. Granisetron hydrochloride injection also does not appear to interact with emetogenic cancer chemotherapies. Because granisetron is metabolized by hepatic cytochrome P-450 drug-metabolizing enzymes, inducers or inhibitors of these enzymes may change the clearance and, hence, the half-life of granisetron. No specific interaction studies have been conducted in anesthetized patients. In addition, the activity of the cytochrome P-450 subfamily 3A4 (involved in the metabolism of some of the main narcotic analgesic agents) is not modified by granisetron hydrochloride injection in vitro. 

                  
In in vitro human microsomal studies, ketoconazole inhibited ring oxidation of granisetron hydrochloride injection. However, the clinical significance of in vivo pharmacokinetic interactions with ketoconazole is not known. In a human pharmacokinetic study, hepatic enzyme induction with phenobarbital resulted in a 25% increase in total plasma clearance of intravenous granisetron hydrochloride injection. The clinical significance of this change is not known. 

                  
QT prolongation has been reported with granisetron hydrochloride injection. Use of granisetron hydrochloride injection in patients concurrently treated with drugs known to prolong the QT interval and/or are arrhythmogenic may result in clinical consequences.
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           Granisetron hydrochloride injection has been administered safely with benzodiazepines, neuroleptics, and anti-ulcer medications. (7)
                           Does not appear to interact with emetogenic cancer chemotherapies. (7) 
                           Inducers or inhibitors of CYP450 enzymes may change the clearance and therefore the half-life of granisetron. (7)
                           Coadministration of granisetron hydrochloride injection with drugs known to prolong the QT interval and/or are arrhythmogenic may result in clinical consequences. (7)
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         