
               
               
               
                  CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY

               
               
                  Indium forms a saturated (1:3) complex with oxyquinoline. The complex is neutral and lipid-soluble, which enables it to penetrate the cell membrane. Within the cell, indium becomes firmly attached to cytoplasmic components; the liberated oxyquinoline is released by the cell. It is thought that the mechanism of labeling cells with Indium In-111 Oxyquinoline involves an exchange reaction between the oxyquinoline carrier and subcellular components, which chelate indium more strongly than oxyquinoline. The low stability constant of the oxyquinoline complex, estimated at approximately 10, supports this theory.
                  Following the recommended leukocyte cell labeling procedure, approximately 77% of the added Indium In-111Oxyquinoline is incorporated in the resulting cell pellet (which represents approximately 3-4 x 108 WBC).
                  Cell clumping can occur and was found in about one fifth of the leukocyte preparations examined. The presence of red blood cells or plasma will lead to reduced leukocyte labeling efficiency. Transferrin in plasma competes for Indium In-111 Oxyquinoline.
                  Chemotaxis of granulocytes deteriorates during storage and loss of chemotaxis may cause false negative scans. The spontaneous release of Indium In-111 has been reported to range from about 3% at one hour to 24% at 24 hours [ten Berge, R.J.M., Natarajan, A.T., Hardeman, M.R., et al. Labeling with Indium In-111 has detrimental effects on human lymphocytes. Journal of Nuclear Medicine, 24, 615-620 (1983)]. The maximum amount of time recommended between drawing the blood and reinjection should not exceed 5 hours. It is recommended that the labeled cells be used within one hour of preparation, if possible, and no more than three hours after preparation.
                  Cell aggregates of various degrees have been reported. Cell labeling techniques and standing of cell preparation may be contributing factors.
               
               
            
         