
               
               
               7  DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           Irbesartan (7):
                        
                        
                           NSAIDs and selective COX-2 inhibitors: May lead to increased risk of renal impairment and loss of antihypertensive effect. Monitor renal function periodically.
                        
                        
                           Hydrochlorothiazide (7):
                        
                        
                           Antidiabetic Drugs: Dosage adjustment of antidiabetic may be required
                           Cholestyramine and colestipol: Reduced absorption of thiazides
                           Lithium: Reduced renal clearance and high risk of lithium toxicity when used with diuretics. Should not be given with diuretics.
                           NSAIDs: Can reduce diuretic, natriuretic, and antihypertensive effects of diuretics and increase risk for renal impairment.
                           Carbamazepine: Increased risk of hyponatremia.
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           Irbesartan
                        
                        No significant drug-drug interactions have been found in interaction studies with hydrochlorothiazide, digoxin, warfarin, and nifedipine. [See Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)
                           .]
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           Non-Steroidal Anti-Inflammatory Agents Including Selective Cyclooxygenase-2 Inhibitors (COX-2 Inhibitors)
                        
                        In patients who are elderly, volume-depleted (including those on diuretic therapy), or with compromised renal function, coadministration of NSAIDs, including selective COX-2 inhibitors, with angiotensin II receptor antagonists, including irbesartan, may result in deterioration of renal function, including possible acute renal failure. These effects are usually reversible. Monitor renal function periodically in patients receiving irbesartan and NSAID therapy.
                        The antihypertensive effect of angiotensin II receptor antagonists, including irbesartan, may be attenuated by NSAIDs including selective COX-2 inhibitors.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           Hydrochlorothiazide
                        
                        When administered concurrently the following drugs may interact with thiazide diuretics:
                        
                           Alcohol,
Barbiturates, or Narcotics: potentiation of orthostatic hypotension
may occur.
                        
                           Antidiabetic Drugs (oral agents
and insulin): dosage adjustment of the antidiabetic drug may be required.
                        
                           Other
Antihypertensive Drugs: additive effect or potentiation.
                        
                           Cholestyramine
and Colestipol Resins: absorption of hydrochlorothiazide is impaired in the presence of anionic exchange resins. Single doses of either cholestyramine or colestipol resins bind the hydrochlorothiazide and reduce its absorption from the gastrointestinal tract by up to 85% and 43%, respectively. Irbesartan and hydrochlorothiazide tablets should be taken at least one hour before or four hours after these medications.
                        
                           Corticosteroids,
ACTH: intensified electrolyte depletion, particularly hypokalemia.
                        
                           Pressor
Amines (e.g., Norepinephrine): possible decreased response to pressor
amines but not sufficient to preclude their use.
                        
                           Skeletal
Muscle Relaxants, Nondepolarizing (e.g., Tubocurarine): possible increased
responsiveness to the muscle relaxant.
                        
                           Lithium: should not generally be given with diuretics. Diuretic agents reduce the renal clearance of lithium and add a high risk of lithium toxicity. Refer to the package insert for lithium preparations before use of such preparations with irbesartan and hydrochlorothiazide tablets. [See Warnings and Precautions (5.5)
                           .]
                        
                           Non-steroidal Anti-inflammatory Drugs: in some patients, the administration of a non-steroidal anti-inflammatory agent can reduce the diuretic, natriuretic, and antihypertensive effects of loop, potassium-sparing and thiazide diuretics. Therefore, when irbesartan and hydrochlorothiazide tablets and non-steroidal anti-inflammatory agents are used concomitantly, the patient should be observed closely to determine if the desired effect of the diuretic is obtained.
                        
                           Carbamazepine: concomitant use of carbamazepine and hydrochlorothiazide has been associated with the risk of symptomatic hyponatremia. Electrolytes should be monitored during concomitant use.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         