
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
                  Enter section text here
               
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           Meperidine: Risk of serious, sometimes fatal reactions from serotonin 
syndrome. See also Contraindications. (7.1)
                           Dextromethorphan: Risk of psychosis episodes or bizarre behavior. See also 
Contraindications. (7.2)
                           MAO inhibitors: Risk of non-selective MAO inhibition and hypertensive 
crisis. See also Contraindications. (7.4)
                           Antidepressants (SSRIs, SNRIs, tricyclic, tetracyclic, or triazolopyridine): 
Concomitant use not recommended. (7.5)
                           Levodopa: See also Warnings and Precautions. (7.6)
                           Ciprofloxacin and Other CYP1A2 Inhibitors: Increased rasagiline plasma 
levels possible. Increased risk of adverse events. See also Dosage and 
Administration and Warnings and Precautions.(7.7)
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 Meperidine
                     
                        Serious, sometimes fatal reactions have been precipitated with 
concomitant use of meperidine (e.g., Demerol and other tradenames) and MAO 
inhibitors including selective MAO-B inhibitors [see Contraindications (4.1)].
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 Dextromethorphan
                     
                        The concomitant use of AZILECT and dextromethorphan was not 
allowed in clinical studies. The combination of MAO inhibitors and 
dextromethorphan has been reported to cause brief episodes of psychosis or 
bizarre behavior. Therefore, in view of AZILECT's MAO inhibitory activity, 
dextromethorphan should not be used concomitantly with AZILECT [see Contraindications (4.2)].
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3 Sympathomimetic Medications
                     
                        The concomitant use of AZILECT and sympathomimetic medications 
was not allowed in clinical studies. Severe hypertensive reactions have followed 
the administration of sympathomimetics and non-selective MAO inhibitors. One 
case of hypertensive crisis has been reported in a patient taking the 
recommended dose of a selective MAO-B inhibitor and a sympathomimetic medication 
(ephedrine). Elevated blood pressure was reported in another patient taking the 
recommended dose of AZILECT and ophthalmic drops with a sympathomimetic 
medication (tetrahydrozoline). 
                        Because AZILECT is a selective MAOI, hypertensive reactions are not 
ordinarily expected with the concomitant use of sympathomimetic medications. 
Nevertheless, caution should be exercised when concomitantly using recommended 
doses of AZILECT with any sympathomimetic medications including nasal, oral, and 
ophthalmic decongestants and cold remedies.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4 MAO Inhibitors
                     
                        AZILECT should not be administered along with other MAO 
inhibitors because of the increased risk of non-selective MAO inhibition that 
may lead to a hypertensive crisis [see Contraindications (4.3)]. 
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.5 Antidepressants
                     
                        Concomitant use of AZILECT with one of many classes of 
antidepressants (e.g., SSRIs, SNRIs, triazolopyridine, tricyclic or tetracyclic 
antidepressants) is not recommended [see Warnings and Precautions (5.1)].
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.6 Levodopa/Carbidopa
                     
                        
                           [see Warnings and Precautions 
(5.6) and Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.7 Ciprofloxacin and Other CYP1A2 Inhibitors

                     
                        Rasagiline plasma concentrations may increase up to 2 fold in 
patients using concomitant ciprofloxacin and other CYP1A2 inhibitors. This could 
result in increased adverse events [see Warnings and Precautions (5.2) and Clinical 
Pharmacology (12.3)].
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.8 Theophylline
                     
                        
                           [see Clinical Pharmacology 
(12.3)].
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.9 Tyramine/Rasagiline Interaction

                     
                        MAO in the gastrointestinal tract and liver (primarily type A) is 
thought to provide vital protection from exogenous amines (e.g., tyramine) that 
have the capacity, if absorbed intact, to cause a "hypertensive crisis," the 
so-called "cheese reaction". If large amounts of certain exogenous amines (e.g., 
from fermented cheese, herring, over-the-counter cough/cold medications) gain 
access to the systemic circulation because MAO-A has been inhibited, they cause 
release of norepinephrine which may result in a rise in systemic blood pressure. 
MAOIs that selectively inhibit MAO-B are largely devoid of the potential to 
cause tyramine-induced hypertensive crisis.
                        Results of a special tyramine challenge study indicate that rasagiline is 
selective for MAO-B at recommended doses and can ordinarily be used without 
dietary tyramine restriction. However, certain foods (e.g., aged cheeses, such 
as Stilton cheese) may contain very high amounts (i.e., > 150 mg) of tyramine 
and could potentially cause a hypertensive cheese reaction in patients taking 
AZILECT due to mild increased sensitivity to tyramine. Patients should be 
advised to avoid foods (e.g., aged cheese) containing a very large amount of 
tyramine while taking recommended doses of AZILECT because of the potential for 
large increases in blood pressure. Selectivity for inhibiting MAO-B diminishes 
in a dose-related manner as the dose is progressively increased above the 
recommended daily doses. 
                        There were no cases of hypertensive crisis in the clinical development 
program associated with 1 mg daily rasagiline treatment, in which most patients 
did not follow dietary tyramine restriction.
                        Despite the selective inhibition of MAO-B at recommended doses of AZILECT, 
there have been post-marketing reports of patients who experienced significantly 
elevated blood pressure (including rare cases of hypertensive crisis) after 
ingestion of unknown amounts of tyramine-rich foods while taking recommended 
doses of AZILECT [see Dosing and 
Administration (2), and Warnings and Precautions 
(5.4)].
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         