


CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
Isosorbide mononitrate is the major active metabolite of isosorbide dinitrate (ISDN), and most of the clinical activity of the 				dinitrate is attributable to the mononitrate. The principal pharmacological action of isosorbide mononitrate, due to its nitric oxide metabolite, is direct relaxation of 
							vascular smooth muscle. The result is dilatation of peripheral arteries and veins, especially the latter. Dilation of the veins promotes 
							peripheral pooling of blood and decreases venous return to the heart, thereby reducing left ventricular end-diastolic pressure and 
							pulmonary capillary wedge pressure (preload). Arteriolar relaxation reduces systemic vascular resistance, systolic arterial pressure,
							and mean arterial pressure (afterload). Dilatation of the coronary arteries also occurs. The relative importance of preload reduction, 
							afterload reduction, and coronary dilatation remains undefined.




Pharmacodynamics
Dosing regimens for most chronically used drugs are designed to provide plasma concentrations that are 
									continu-ously greater than a minimally effective concentration. This strategy is inappropriate for organic nitrates. 
									Several well-controlled clinical trials have used exercise testing to assess the antianginal efficacy of continuously 
									delivered nitrates. In the large majority of these trials, active agents were indistinguishable from placebo after 24 
									hours (or less) of continuous therapy. Attempts to overcome tolerance by dose escalation, even to doses far in 
									excess of those used acutely, have consistently failed. Only after nitrates have been absent from the body for several
									hours has their antianginal efficacy been restored. The drug-free interval sufficient to avoid tolerance to isosorbide 
									mononitrate has not been completely defined. In the only regimen of twice-daily isosorbide mononitrate that has 
									been shown to avoid development of tolerance, the two doses of Ismo tablets are given 7 hours apart, so there is a 
									gap of 17 hours between the second dose of each day and the first dose of the next day. Taking account of the relatively
									long half-life of isosorbide mononitrate this result is consistent with those obtained for other organic nitrates. The same
									twice-daily regimen of Ismo tablets successfully avoided significant rebound/withdrawal effects. The incidence and 
									magnitude of such phenomena have appeared, in studies of other nitrates, to be highly dependent upon the schedule 
									of nitrate administration.






Pharmacokinetics
In humans, isosorbide mononitrate is not subject to first pass metabolism in the liver. The absolute bioavailability 
									of isosorbide mononitrate from Ismo tablets is nearly 100%. Maximum serum concentrations of isosorbide mononitrate
									are achieved 30 to 60 minutes after ingestion of Ismo. The volume of distribution of isosorbide mononitrate is 
									approximately 0.6 L/kg, and less than 4% is bound to plasma proteins. It is cleared from the serum by denitration to 
									isosorbide; glucuronidation to the mononitrate glucuronide; and denitration/hydration to sorbitol. None of these 
									metabolites is vasoactive. Less than 1% of administered isosorbide mononitrate is eliminated in the urine. The overall 
									elimination half-life of isosorbide mononitrate is about 5 hours; the rate of clearance is the same in healthy young adults
									, in patients with various degrees of renal, hepatic, or cardiac dysfunction, and in the elderly. In a single-dose study, the 
									pharmacokinetics of isosorbide mononitrate were dose-proportional up to at least 60 mg.






Clinical Trials
Controlled trials of single doses of Ismo tablets have demonstrated that antianginal activity is present about 1 hour 
									after dosing, with peak effect seen from 1 to 4 hours after dosing. In placebo-controlled trials lasting 2 to 3 weeks, 
									Ismo tablets were administered twice daily, in asymmetric regimens (with interdosing intervals of 7 and 17 hours) 
									designed to avoid tolerance. One trial tested doses of 10 mg and 20 mg; one trial tested doses of 20 mg, 40 mg, and 
									60 mg; and three trials tested only doses of 20 mg. In each trial, the subjects were persons with known chronic stable 
									angina, and the primary measure of efficacy was exercise tolerance on a standardized treadmill test. After initial dosing 
									and for at least 3 weeks, exercise tolerance in patients treated with Ismo 20 mg tablets was significantly greater than 
									that seen in patients treated with placebo, although there was some attenuation of effect with time. Treatment with Ismo 
									tablets was superior to placebo for at least 12 hours after the first dose (i.e., 5 hours after the second dose) of each day.
									Significant tolerance and rebound phenomena were not observed. The 10-mg dose was not unequivocally superior to 
									placebo, while the effect of the 40-mg dose was similar to that of the 20-mg dose. The 60-mg dose appeared to be less
									effective, and it was associated with a rebound phenomenon (early-morning worsening).




