
               
               
               
12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY

               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
12.1 Mechanism of Action

                     
                        Antithrombin (AT) plays a central role in the regulation of hemostasis. AT is the principal inhibitor of thrombin and Factor Xa5, the serine proteases that play pivotal roles in blood coagulation. AT neutralizes the activity of thrombin and Factor Xa by forming a complex which is rapidly removed from the circulation. The ability of antithrombin to inhibit thrombin and Factor Xa can be enhanced by greater than 300 to 1000 fold when AT is bound to heparin.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
12.2 Pharmacodynamics

                     
                        Hereditary AT deficiency causes an increased risk of venous thromboembolism (VTE). During high-risk situations such as surgery or trauma or for pregnant women, during the peri-partum period, the risk of development of VTEs as compared to the normal population in these situations is increased by a factor 10 to 506,7.
                        In hereditary antithrombin deficient patients ATryn restores (normalizes) plasma AT activity levels during peri-operative and peri-partum periods.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        In an open-label, single dose pharmacokinetic study, male and female patients (≥ 18 years of age) with hereditary AT deficiency, received either 50 (n = 9, all females) or 100 (n = 6, 2 males and 4 females) IU/kg ATryn intravenously. These patients were not in high-risk situations. The baseline corrected pharmacokinetic parameters for antithrombin (Recombinant) are summarized in Table 5.
                        


                        


Incremental recovery [mean (%CV)] was 2.24 (20.2) and 1.94 (14.8) %/IU/kg body weight for 50 and 100 IU/kg, respectively.
                        Population pharmacokinetic analysis of hereditary deficient patients in a high risk situation revealed that the clearance and volume of distribution in pregnant patients were (1.38 L/h and 14.3 L respectively) which are higher than non-pregnant patients (0.67 L/h and 7.7 L respectively). Therefore, distinct dosing formulae for surgical and pregnant patients should be used (see 2.2, Recommended Dose and Schedule).
                        As compared to plasma derived antithrombin, ATryn has a shorter half-life and more rapid clearance (approximately nine and seven times, respectively).
                        Pharmacokinetics may be influenced by concomitant heparin administration, as well as surgical procedures, delivery, or bleeding. AT activity monitoring (see 2.2 Recommended Dose and Schedule) should be performed to properly treat such patients.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         