
               
               
               
                  CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        Pharmacodynamics
                     
                     
                        Methylphenidate hydrochloride USP, the active ingredient in methylphenidate hydrochloride extended-release capsules (LA), is a central nervous system (CNS) stimulant. The mode of therapeutic action in Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) is not known. Methylphenidate is thought to block the reuptake of norepinephrine and dopamine into the presynaptic neuron and increase the release of these monoamines into the extraneuronal space. Methylphenidate is a racemic mixture comprised of the d- and l-threo enantiomers. The d-threo enantiomer is more pharmacologically active than the l-threo enantiomer.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        
                           
                              Absorption

                              
                           Methylphenidate hydrochloride extended-release capsules (LA) produce a bi-modal plasma concentration-time profile (i.e., 2 distinct peaks approximately 4 hours apart) when orally administered to children diagnosed with ADHD and to healthy adults. The initial rate of absorption for methylphenidate hydrochloride extended-release capsules (LA) is similar to that of methylphenidate hydrochloride tablets as shown by the similar rate parameters between the 2 formulations, i.e., initial lag time (Tlag), first peak concentration (Cmax1), and time to the first peak (Tmax1), which is reached in 1 to 3 hours. The mean time to the interpeak minimum (Tminip), and time to the second peak (Tmax2) are also similar for methylphenidate hydrochloride extended-release capsules (LA) given once daily and methylphenidate hydrochloride tablets given in 2 doses 4 hours apart (see Figure 1 and Table 1), although the ranges observed are greater for methylphenidate hydrochloride extended-release capsules (LA).
                        Methylphenidate hydrochloride extended-release capsules (LA) given once daily exhibit a lower second peak concentration (Cmax2), higher interpeak minimum concentrations (Cminip), and less peak and trough fluctuations than methylphenidate hydrochloride tablets given in 2 doses given 4 hours apart. This is due to an earlier onset and more prolonged absorption from the delayed-release beads (see Figure 1 and Table 1).
                        The relative bioavailability of methylphenidate hydrochloride extended-release capsules (LA) given once daily is comparable to the same total dose of methylphenidate hydrochloride tablets given in2 doses 4 hours apart in both children and in adults.
                        
                           Figure 1. Mean Plasma Concentration Time-Profile of Methylphenidate After a Single Dose of Methylphenidate Hydrochloride Extended-Release Capsules (LA) 40 mg q.d. and Methylphenidate Hydrochloride Tablets 20 mg Given in Two Doses Four Hours Apart
                        
                        


                        



                           
                              Dose Proportionality 

                              
                           After oral administration of methylphenidate hydrochloride extended-release capsules (LA) 20 mg and 40 mg capsules to adults there is a slight upward trend in the methylphenidate area under the curve (AUC) and peak plasma concentrations (Cmax1 and Cmax2).
                        
                           
                              Distribution

                              
                           Binding to plasma proteins is low (10% to 33%). The volume of distribution was 2.65±1.11 L/kg for d-methylphenidate and 1.80±0.91 L/kg for l-methylphenidate.
                        
                           
                              Metabolism

                              
                           The absolute oral bioavailability of methylphenidate in children was 22±8% for d-methylphenidate and 5±3% for l-methylphenidate, suggesting pronounced presystemic metabolism. Biotransformation of methylphenidate by the carboxylesterase CES1A1 is rapid and extensive leading to the main, de-esterified metabolite α-phenyl-2-piperidine acetic acid (ritalinic acid). Only small amounts of hydroxylated metabolites (e.g., hydroxymethylphenidate and hydroxyritalinic acid) are detectable in plasma. Therapeutic activity is principally due to the parent compound.
                        
                           
                              Elimination

                              
                           In studies with methylphenidate hydrochloride extended-release capsules (LA) and methylphenidate hydrochloride tablets in adults, methylphenidate from methylphenidate hydrochloride tablets is eliminated from plasma with an average half-life of about 3.5 hours, (range 1.3 to 7.7 hours). In children the average half-life is about 2.5 hours, with a range of about 1.5 to 5.0 hours. The rapid half-life in both children and adults may result in unmeasurable concentrations between the morning and mid-day doses with methylphenidate hydrochloride tablets. No accumulation of methylphenidate is expected following multiple once a day oral dosing with methylphenidate hydrochloride extended-release capsules (LA). The half-life of ritalinic acid is about 3 to 4 hours.
                        The systemic clearance is 0.40±0.12 L/h/kg for d-methylphenidate and 0.73±0.28 L/h/kg for l-methylphenidate. After oral administration of an immediate release formulation of methylphenidate, 78% to 97% of the dose is excreted in the urine and 1% to 3% in the feces in the form of metabolites within 48 to 96 hours. Only small quantities (<1%) of unchanged methylphenidate appear in the urine. Most of the dose is excreted in the urine as ritalinic acid (60% to 86%), the remainder being accounted for by minor metabolites.
                        
                           
                              Food Effects 

                              
                           Administration times relative to meals and meal composition may need to be individually titrated.
                        When methylphenidate hydrochloride extended-release capsules (LA) was administered with a high fat breakfast to adults, methylphenidate hydrochloride extended-release capsules (LA) had a longer lag time until absorption began and variable delays in the time until the first peak concentration, the time until the interpeak minimum, and the time until the second peak. The first peak concentration and the extent of absorption were unchanged after food relative to the fasting state, although the second peak was approximately 25% lower. The effect of a high fat lunch was not examined.
                        There were no differences in the pharmacokinetics of methylphenidate hydrochloride extended-release capsules (LA) when administered with applesauce, compared to administration in the fasting condition. There is no evidence of dose dumping in the presence or absence of food.
                        For patients unable to swallow the capsule, the contents may be sprinkled on applesauce and administered (see DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION ).
                        
                           
                              Alcohol Effect

                              
                           Alcohol may exacerbate the adverse CNS effects of psychoactive drugs, including methylphenidate hydrochloride tablets. It is therefore advisable for patients to abstain from alcohol during treatment. An in vitro study was conducted to explore the effect of alcohol on the release characteristics of methylphenidate from the methylphenidate hydrochloride extended-release (LA) 40 mg capsule dosage form. At an alcohol concentration of 40% there was a 98% release of methylphenidate in the first hour. The results with the 40 mg capsule are considered to be representative of the other available capsule strengths.
                        
                           
                              Special Populations 

                              
                           
                           
                              Age:
                            The pharmacokinetics of methylphenidate hydrochloride extended-release capsules (LA) was examined in 18 children with ADHD between 7 and 12 years of age. Fifteen of these children were between 10 and 12 years of age. The time until the between peak minimum, and the time until the second peak were delayed and more variable in children compared to adults. After a 20-mg dose of methylphenidate hydrochloride extended-release capsules (LA), concentrations in children were approximately twice the concentrations observed in 18 to 35 year old adults. This higher exposure is almost completely due to the smaller body size and total volume of distribution in children, as apparent clearance normalized to body weight is independent of age.
                        
                           
                              Gender:
                            There were no apparent gender differences in the pharmacokinetics of methylphenidate between healthy male and female adults when administered methylphenidate hydrochloride extended-release capsules (LA).
                        
                           
                              Renal Insufficiency:
                            Methylphenidate hydrochloride extended-release capsules (LA) have not been studied in renally-impaired patients. Renal insufficiency is expected to have minimal effect on the pharmacokinetics of methylphenidate since less than 1% of a radiolabeled dose is excreted in the urine as unchanged compound, and the major metabolite (ritalinic acid), has little or no pharmacologic activity.
                        
                           
                              Hepatic Insufficiency:
                            Methylphenidate hydrochloride extended-release capsules (LA) have not been studied in patients with hepatic insufficiency. Hepatic insufficiency is expected to have minimal effect on the pharmacokinetics of methylphenidate since it is metabolized primarily to ritalinic acid by nonmicrosomal hydrolytic esterases that are widely distributed throughout the body.
                        
                           CLINICAL STUDIES 

                           Methylphenidate hydrochloride extended-release capsules (LA) were evaluated in a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, parallel group clinical study in which 134 children, ages 6 to 12, with DSM-IV diagnoses of Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) received a single morning dose of methylphenidate hydrochloride extended-release capsules (LA) in the range of 10 to 40 mg/day, or placebo, for up to 2 weeks. The doses used were the optimal doses established in a previous individual dose titration phase. In that titration phase, 53 of 164 patients (32%) started on a daily dose of 10 mg and 111 of 164 patients (68%) started on a daily dose of 20 mg or higher. The patient’s regular schoolteacher completed the Conners ADHD/DSM-IV Scale for Teachers (CADS-T) at baseline and the end of each week. The CADS-T assesses symptoms of hyperactivity and inattention. The change from baseline of the (CADS-T) scores during the last week of treatment was analyzed as the primary efficacy parameter. Patients treated with methylphenidate hydrochloride extended-release capsules (LA) showed a statistically significant improvement in symptom scores from baseline over patients who received placebo. (See Figure 2.) This demonstrates that a single morning dose of methylphenidate hydrochloride extended-release capsules (LA) exerts a treatment effect in ADHD.
                        
                           Figure 2. CADS-T Total Subscale - Mean Change from Baseline*
                        
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           2d1ddec5-figure-02
                           
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           2d1ddec5-figure-03
                           
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         