
               
               
               Drug Interactions
               
                  ACE-inhibitors

                     
Reports suggest that NSAIDs may diminish the antihypertensive effect of ACE-inhibitors. This interaction should be given consideration in patients taking NSAIDs concomitantlywith ACE-inhibitors.
                  
                     
Antacids and Sucralfate

                     
Concomitant administration of some antacids (magnesium oxide or aluminum hydroxide) and sucralfate can delay the absorption of naproxen.

                     
Aspirin

                     
When naproxen as Naproxen Tablets, USP is administered with aspirin, its protein binding is reduced, although the clearance of free Naproxen Tablets, USP is not altered. Theclinical significance of this interaction is not known; however, as with other NSAIDs, concomitant administration of naproxen and aspirin is not generally recommended becauseof the potential of increased adverse effects.
                  Cholestyramine
                  As with other NSAIDs, concomitant administration of cholestyramine can delay the absorption of naproxen.
                  Diuretics
                  Clinical studies, as well as postmarketing observations, have shown that Naproxen Tablets, USP can reduce the natriuretic effect of furosemide and thiazides in some patients.This response has been attributed to inhibition of renal prostaglandin synthesis. During concomitant therapy with NSAIDs, the patient should be observed closely for signs ofrenal failure (see WARNINGS: Renal Effects), as well as to assure diuretic efficacy.Lithium
                  NSAIDs have produced an elevation of plasma lithium levels and a reduction in renal lithium clearance. The mean minimum lithium concentration increased 15% and the renalclearance was decreased by approximately 20%. These effects have been attributed to inhibition of renal prostaglandin synthesis by the NSAID. Thus, when NSAIDs and lithiumare administered concurrently, subjects should be observed carefully for signs of lithium toxicity.
                  Methotrexate
                  NSAIDs have been reported to competitively inhibit methotrexate accumulation in rabbit kidney slices. Naproxen and other nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs have beenreported to reduce the tubular secretion of methotrexate in an animal model. This may indicate that they could enhance the toxicity of methotrexate. Caution should be usedwhen NSAIDs are administered concomitantly with methotrexate.
                  Warfarin
                  The effects of warfarin and NSAIDs on GI bleeding are synergistic, such that users of both drugs together have a risk of serious GI bleeding higher than users of either drugalone. No significant interactions have been observed in clinical studies with naproxen and coumarin-type anticoagulants. However, caution is advised since interactions havebeen seen with other nonsteroidal agents of this class. The free fraction of warfarin may increase substantially in some subjects and naproxen interferes with platelet function.
                  Other Information Concerning Drug Interactions
                  Naproxen is highly bound to plasma albumin; it thus has a theoretical potential for interaction with other albumin-bound drugs such as coumarin-type anticoagulants,sulphonylureas, hydantoins, other NSAIDs, and aspirin. Patients simultaneously receiving naproxen and a hydantoin, sulphonamide or sulphonylurea should be observed foradjustment of dose if required.
                  Naproxen and other nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs can reduce the antihypertensive effect of propranolol and other beta-blockers.Probenecid given concurrently increases naproxen anion plasma levels and extends its plasma half-life significantly.
               
               
            
         