
               
               
               12CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1Mechanism of Action
                     
                        CONTRAVE has two components: naltrexone, an opioid antagonist, and bupropion, a relatively weak inhibitor of the neuronal reuptake of dopamine and norepinephrine. Nonclinical studies suggest that naltrexone and bupropion have effects on two separate areas of the brain involved in the regulation of food intake: the hypothalamus (appetite regulatory center) and the mesolimbic dopamine circuit (reward system). The exact neurochemical effects of CONTRAVE leading to weight loss are not fully understood.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        Combined, bupropion and naltrexone increased the firing rate of hypothalamic pro-opiomelanocortin (POMC) neurons in vitro, which are associated with regulation of appetite. The combination of bupropion and naltrexone also reduced food intake when injected directly into the ventral tegmental area of the mesolimbic circuit in mice, an area associated with regulation of reward pathways. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        
                           Absorption
                        
                        
                           
                              Naltrexone
                           
                        
                        Following single oral administration of CONTRAVE (two 8 mg naltrexone/90 mg bupropion tablets) to healthy subjects, mean peak naltrexone concentration (Cmax) was 1.4 ng/mL, time to peak concentration (Tmax) was 2 hours, and extent of exposure (AUC0-inf) was 8.4 ng∙hr/mL.
                        
                           
                              Bupropion
                           
                        
                        Following single oral administration of CONTRAVE (two 8 mg naltrexone/90 mg bupropion tablets) to healthy subjects, mean peak bupropion concentration (Cmax) was 168 ng/mL, time to peak concentration (Tmax) was three hours, and extent of exposure (AUC0-inf) was 1,607 ng∙hr/mL.
                        
                           Food Effect on Absorption
                        
                        When CONTRAVE was administered with a high-fat meal, the AUC and Cmax for naltrexone increased 2.1-fold and 3.7-fold, respectively, and the AUC and Cmax for bupropion increased 1.4-fold and 1.8-fold, respectively. At steady state, the food effect increased AUC and Cmax for naltrexone by 1.7-fold and 1.9-fold, respectively, and increased AUC and Cmax for bupropion by 1.1-fold and 1.3-fold, respectively. Thus, CONTRAVE should not be taken with high-fat meals because of the resulting significant increases in bupropion and naltrexone systemic exposure.
                        
                           Distribution 
                        
                        
                           
                              Naltrexone
                           
                        
                        Naltrexone is 21% plasma protein bound. The mean apparent volume of distribution at steady state for naltrexone (Vss/F) is 5,697 liters. 
                        
                           
                              Bupropion
                           
                        
                        Bupropion is 84% plasma protein bound. The mean apparent volume of distribution at steady state for bupropion (Vss/F) is 880 liters. 
                        
                           Metabolism and Excretion 
                        
                        
                           
                              Naltrexone
                           
                        
                        The major metabolite of naltrexone is 6-beta-naltrexol. The activity of naltrexone is believed to be the result of both the parent and the 6-beta-naltrexol metabolite. Though less potent, 6-beta-naltrexol is eliminated more slowly and thus circulates at much higher concentrations than naltrexone. Naltrexone and 6-beta-naltrexol are not metabolized by cytochrome P450 enzymes and in vitro studies indicate that there is no potential for inhibition or induction of important isozymes.
                        Naltrexone and its metabolites are excreted primarily by the kidney (53% to 79% of the dose). Urinary excretion of unchanged naltrexone accounts for less than 2% of an oral dose. Urinary excretion of unchanged and conjugated 6-beta-naltrexol accounts for 43% of an oral dose. The renal clearance for naltrexone ranges from 30 to 127 mL/min, suggesting that renal elimination is primarily by glomerular filtration. The renal clearance for 6-beta-naltrexol ranges from 230 to 369 mL/min suggesting an additional renal tubular secretory mechanism. Fecal excretion is a minor elimination pathway.
                        Following single oral administration of CONTRAVE tablets to healthy subjects, mean elimination half-life (T1/2) was approximately 5 hours for naltrexone. Following twice daily administration of CONTRAVE, naltrexone did not accumulate and its kinetics appeared linear. However, in comparison to naltrexone, 6-beta-naltrexol accumulates to a larger extent (accumulation ratio ~3).
                        
                           
                              Bupropion
                           
                        
                        Bupropion is extensively metabolized with three active metabolites: hydroxybupropion, threohydrobupropion and erythrohydrobupropion. The metabolites have longer elimination half-lives than bupropion and accumulate to a greater extent. Following bupropion administration, more than 90% of the exposure is a result of metabolites. In vitro findings suggest that CYP2B6 is the principal isozyme involved in the formation of hydroxybupropion whereas cytochrome P450 isozymes are not involved in the formation of the other active metabolites. Bupropion and its metabolites inhibit CYP2D6. Plasma protein binding of hydroxybupropion is similar to that of bupropion (84%) whereas the other two metabolites have approximately half the binding.
                        Following oral administration of 200 mg of 14C-bupropion in humans, 87% and 10% of the radioactive dose were recovered in the urine and feces, respectively. The fraction of the oral dose of bupropion excreted unchanged was 0.5%, a finding consistent with the extensive metabolism of bupropion.
                        Following single oral administration of CONTRAVE tablets to healthy subjects, mean elimination half-life (T½) was approximately 21 hours for bupropion. Following twice daily administration of CONTRAVE, metabolites of bupropion, and to a lesser extent unchanged bupropion, accumulate and reach steady-state concentrations in approximately one week.
                        
                           Specific Populations 
                        
                        
                           
                              Gender
                           
                        
                        Pooled analysis of CONTRAVE data suggested no clinically meaningful differences in the pharmacokinetic parameters of bupropion or naltrexone based on gender.
                        
                           
                              Race
                           
                        
                        Pooled analysis of CONTRAVE data suggested no clinically meaningful differences in the pharmacokinetic parameters of bupropion or naltrexone based on race. 
                        
                           
                              Elderly
                           
                        
                        The pharmacokinetics of CONTRAVE have not been evaluated in the geriatric population. The effects of age on the pharmacokinetics of naltrexone or bupropion and their metabolites have not been fully characterized. An exploration of steady-state bupropion concentrations from several depression efficacy studies involving patients dosed in a range of 300 to 750 mg/day, on a three times daily schedule, revealed no relationship between age (18 to 83 years) and plasma concentration of bupropion. A single-dose pharmacokinetic study demonstrated that the disposition of bupropion and its metabolites in elderly subjects was similar to that of younger subjects. These data suggest there is no prominent effect of age on bupropion concentration; however, another pharmacokinetic study, single and multiple dose, has suggested that the elderly are at increased risk for accumulation of bupropion and its metabolites [see Use in Specific Populations (8.5)].
                        
                           
                              Smokers
                           
                        
                        Pooled analysis of CONTRAVE data revealed no meaningful differences in the plasma concentrations of bupropion or naltrexone in smokers compared with nonsmokers. The effects of cigarette smoking on the pharmacokinetics of bupropion were studied in 34 healthy male and female volunteers; 17 were chronic cigarette smokers and 17 were nonsmokers. Following oral administration of a single 150 mg dose of bupropion, there was no statistically significant difference in Cmax, half-life, Tmax, AUC, or clearance of bupropion or its active metabolites between smokers and nonsmokers. 
                        
                           
                              Hepatic Impairment
                           
                        
                        Pharmacokinetic data are not available with CONTRAVE in patients with hepatic impairment. The following information is available for individual constituents:
                        
                           
                              Naltrexone
                           
                        
                        An increase in naltrexone AUC of approximately 5- and 10-fold in patients with compensated and decompensated liver cirrhosis, respectively, compared with subjects with normal liver function, has been reported. These data also suggest that alterations in naltrexone bioavailability are related to liver disease severity.
                        
                           
                              Bupropion
                           
                        
                        The effect of hepatic impairment on the pharmacokinetics of bupropion was characterized in two single-dose trials, one trial in patients with alcoholic liver disease and a second trial in patients with mild-to-severe cirrhosis. 
                        The first trial showed that the half-life of hydroxybupropion was significantly longer in eight patients with alcoholic liver disease than in eight healthy volunteers (32±14 hours vs 21±5 hours, respectively). Although not statistically significant, the AUCs for bupropion and hydroxybupropion were more variable and tended to be greater (by 53% to 57%) in patients with alcoholic liver disease. The differences in half-life for bupropion and the other metabolites in the two patient groups were minimal.
                        The second trial demonstrated no statistically significant differences in the pharmacokinetics of bupropion and its active metabolites in nine subjects with mild-to-moderate hepatic cirrhosis compared with eight healthy volunteers. However, more variability was observed in some of the pharmacokinetic parameters for bupropion (AUC, Cmax, and Tmax) and its active metabolites (t½) in subjects with mild-to-moderate hepatic cirrhosis. In subjects with severe hepatic cirrhosis, significant alterations in the pharmacokinetics of bupropion and its metabolites were seen (Table 4).
                        


                        


The dose of CONTRAVE should be reduced in patients with hepatic impairment [see Dosage and Administration (2.3) and Use in Specific Populations (8.7)].
                        
                           
                              Renal Impairment
                           
                        
                        A dedicated pharmacokinetic study has not been conducted for CONTRAVE in subjects with renal impairment. The following information is available for the individual constituents:
                        
                           
                              Naltrexone
                           
                        
                        Limited information is available for naltrexone in patients with moderate to severe renal impairment. In a study of seven patients with end-stage renal disease requiring dialysis, peak plasma concentrations of naltrexone were elevated at least 6-fold compared to healthy subjects. 
                        
                           
                              Bupropion
                           
                        
                        Limited information is available for bupropion in patients with moderate to severe renal impairment. An inter-trial comparison between normal subjects and patients with end-stage renal failure demonstrated that the bupropion Cmax and AUC values were comparable in the two groups, whereas the hydroxybupropion and threohydrobupropion metabolites had a 2.3- and 2.8-fold increase, respectively, in AUC for patients with end-stage renal failure. A second trial, comparing normal subjects and patients with moderate-to-severe renal impairment (GFR 30.9 ± 10.8 mL/min) showed that exposure after a single 150 mg dose of sustained-release bupropion was approximately 2-fold higher in patients with impaired renal function while levels of the hydroxybupropion and threo/erythrohydrobupropion (combined) metabolites were similar in the two groups. The elimination of bupropion and/or the major metabolites of bupropion may be reduced by impaired renal function. 
                        The dose of CONTRAVE should be reduced in patients with moderate or severe renal impairment. CONTRAVE is not recommended for use in patients with end-stage renal disease [see Dosage and Administration (2.2) and Use in Specific Populations (8.6)].
                        
                           Drug Interactions
                        
                        
                           
                              In Vitro Assessment of Drug Interactions
                           
                        
                        At therapeutically relevant concentrations, naltrexone and 6-beta-naltrexol are not major inhibitors of CYP isoforms CYP1A2, CYP2B6, CYP2C8, CYP2E1, CYP2C9, CYP2C19, CYP2D6 or CYP3A4. Both naltrexone and 6-beta-naltrexol are not major inducers of CYP isoforms CYP1A2, CYP2B6, or CYP3A4.
                        Bupropion and its metabolites (hydroxybupropion, erythrohydrobupropion, threohydrobupropion) are inhibitors of CYP2D6. 
                        
                           In vitro studies suggest that paroxetine, sertraline, norfluoxetine, fluvoxamine, and nelfinavir inhibit the hydroxylation of bupropion.
                        Bupropion (IC50 9.3 mcM) and its metabolites, hydroxybupropion (IC50 82 mcM) and threohydrobupropion and erythrohydrobupropion (1:1 mixture; IC50 7.8 mcM), inhibited the renal organic transporter OCT2 to a clinically relevant level. The systemic concentrations of substrate drugs transported by OCT2 are likely to increase as a result of reduced renal clearance when coadministered with CONTRAVE.
                        
                           
                              Effects of Naltrexone/Bupropion on the Pharmacokinetics of Other Drugs
                           
                        
                        Drug interaction between CONTRAVE and CYP2D6 substrates (metoprolol) or other drugs (atorvastatin, glyburide, lisinopril, nifedipine, valsartan) has been evaluated. In addition, drug interaction between bupropion, a component of CONTRAVE, and CYP2D6 substrates (desipramine) or other drugs (citalopram, lamotrigine) has also been evaluated. 
                        


                        



                           
                              Effects of Other Drugs on the Pharmacokinetics of Naltrexone/Bupropion 
                           
                        
                        Drug interactions between CYP2B6 inhibitors (ticlopidine, clopidogrel, prasugrel), CYP2B6 inducers (ritonavir, lopinavir) and bupropion (one of the CONTRAVE components), or between other drugs (atorvastatin, glyburide, metoprolol, lisinopril, nifedipine, valsartan) and CONTRAVE have been evaluated. While not systematically studied, carbamazepine, phenobarbital, or phenytoin may induce the metabolism of bupropion. 
                        


