
                     
                     
                     Drug Interactions
                     
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              CYP2D6 and CYP3A4 Inhibitors
                           
                           
                              Concomitant administration of CYP2D6 and/or CYP3A4 inhibitors (see 
                                    CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY, Pharmacokinetics
                                 ), such as quinidine, fluoxetine, paroxetine, and amitriptyline (CYP2D6 inhibitors), and ketoconazole and erythromycin (CYP3A4 inhibitors), may reduce metabolic clearance of tramadol, increasing the risk for serious adverse events including seizures and serotonin syndrome. 
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Serotonergic Drugs
                           
                           
                              There have been postmarketing reports of serotonin syndrome with use of tramadol and SSRIs/SNRIs or MAOIs and α2-adrenergic blockers. Caution is advised when tramadol hydrochloride and acetaminophen is coadministered with other drugs that may affect the serotonergic neurotransmitter systems, such as SSRIs, MAOIs, triptans, linezolid (an antibiotic which is a reversible non-selective MAOI), lithium, or St. John’s Wort. If concomitant treatment of tramadol hydrochloride and acetaminophen with a drug affecting the serotonergic neurotransmitter system is clinically warranted, careful observation of the patient is advised, particularly during treatment initiation and dose increases (see 
                                    WARNINGS, Serotonin Syndrome
                                 ).
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Triptans
                           
                           
                              Based on the mechanism of action of tramadol and the potential for serotonin syndrome, caution is advised when tramadol hydrochloride and acetaminophen is coadministered with a triptan. If concomitant treatment of tramadol hydrochloride and acetaminophen with a triptan is clinically warranted, careful observation of the patient is advised, particularly during treatment initiation and dose increases (see 
                                    WARNINGS, Serotonin Syndrome
                                 ).
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Use With Carbamazepine
                           
                           
                              Patients taking carbamazepine may have a significantly reduced analgesic effect of tramadol. Because carbamazepine increases tramadol metabolism and because of the seizure risk associated with tramadol, concomitant administration of tramadol hydrochloride and acetaminophen and carbamazepine is not recommended.
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Use With Quinidine
                           
                           
                              Tramadol is metabolized to M1 by CYP2D6. Quinidine is a selective inhibitor of that isoenzyme; so that concomitant administration of quinidine and tramadol results in increased concentrations of tramadol and reduced concentrations of M1. The clinical consequences of these findings are unknown. In vitro drug interaction studies in human liver microsomes indicate that tramadol has no effect on quinidine metabolism.
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Potential for Other Drugs to Affect Tramadol 
                           
                           
                              
                                 In vitro drug interaction studies in human liver microsomes indicate that concomitant administration with inhibitors of CYP2D6 such as fluoxetine, paroxetine, and amitriptyline could result in some inhibition of the metabolism of tramadol. Administration of CYP3A4 inhibitors, such as ketoconazole and erythromycin, or inducers, such as rifampin and St. John’s Wort, with tramadol hydrochloride and acetaminophen may affect the metabolism of tramadol, leading to altered tramadol exposure. 
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Potential for Tramadol to Affect Other Drugs 
                           
                           
                              In vitro studies indicate that tramadol is unlikely to inhibit the CYP3A4-mediated metabolism of other drugs when tramadol is administered concomitantly at therapeutic doses. Tramadol does not appear to induce its own metabolism in humans, since observed maximal plasma concentrations after multiple oral doses are higher than expected based on single-dose data. Tramadol is a mild inducer of selected drug metabolism pathways measured in animals.
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Use With Cimetidine
                           
                           
                              Concomitant administration of tramadol hydrochloride and acetaminophen and cimetidine has not been studied. Concomitant administration of tramadol and cimetidine does not result in clinically significant changes in tramadol pharmacokinetics. Therefore, no alteration of the tramadol hydrochloride and acetaminophen dosage regimen is recommended.
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Use With Digoxin
                           
                           
                              Postmarketing surveillance of tramadol has revealed rare reports of digoxin toxicity.
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Use With Warfarin-Like Compounds
                           
                           
                              Postmarketing surveillance of both tramadol and acetaminophen individual products have revealed rare alterations of warfarin effect, including elevation of prothrombin times.
                              While such changes have been generally of limited clinical significance for the individual products, periodic evaluation of prothrombin time should be performed when tramadol hydrochloride and acetaminophen and warfarin-like compounds are administered concurrently.
                           
                        
                     
                  
               