
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  Irinotecan is a derivative of camptothecin. 
            Camptothecins interact specifically with the enzyme 
            topoisomerase I which relieves torsional strain in DNA by 
            inducing reversible single-strand breaks. Irinotecan and 
            its active metabolite SN-38 bind to the topoisomerase I-DNA 
            complex and prevent religation of these single-strand 
            breaks. Current research suggests that the cytotoxicity of 
            irinotecan is due to double-strand DNA damage produced 
            during DNA synthesis when replication enzymes interact with 
            the ternary complex formed by topoisomerase I, DNA, and 
            either irinotecan or SN-38. Mammalian cells cannot 
            efficiently repair these double-strand breaks.
                  Irinotecan serves as a water-soluble precursor 
            of the lipophilic metabolite SN-38. SN 38 is formed from 
            irinotecan by carboxylesterase-mediated cleavage of the 
            carbamate bond between the camptothecin moiety and the 
            dipiperidino side chain. SN-38 is approximately 1000 times 
            as potent as irinotecan as an inhibitor of topoisomerase I 
            purified from human and rodent tumor cell lines. In vitro 
            cytotoxicity assays show that the potency of SN-38 relative 
            to irinotecan varies from 2- to 2000-fold. However, the 
            plasma area under the concentration versus time curve (AUC) 
            values for SN-38 are 2% to 8% of irinotecan and SN-38 is 
            95% bound to plasma proteins compared to approximately 50% 
            bound to plasma proteins for irinotecan hydrochloride injection (see 
            Pharmacokinetics). The precise contribution of SN-38 to the 
            activity of irinotecan is thus unknown. Both irinotecan and 
            SN-38 exist in an active lactone form and an inactive 
            hydroxy acid anion form. A pH-dependent equilibrium exists 
            between the two forms such that an acid pH promotes the 
            formation of the lactone, while a more basic pH favors the 
            hydroxy acid anion form.
                  Administration of irinotecan has resulted in 
            antitumor activity in mice bearing cancers of rodent origin 
            and in human carcinoma xenografts of various histological 
            types.
               
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        After intravenous infusion of irinotecan in 
                humans, irinotecan plasma concentrations decline in a 
                multiexponential manner, with a mean terminal 
                elimination half-life of about 6 to 12 hours. The mean 
                terminal elimination half-life of the active metabolite 
                SN-38 is about 10 to 20 hours. The half-lives of the 
                lactone (active) forms of irinotecan and SN-38 are 
                similar to those of total irinotecan and SN-38, as the 
                lactone and hydroxy acid forms are in 
                equilibrium.
                        Over the recommended dose range of 50 to 350 
                mg/m2, the AUC of irinotecan increases 
                linearly with dose; the AUC of SN-38 increases less 
                than proportionally with dose. Maximum concentrations 
                of the active metabolite SN-38 are generally seen 
                within 1 hour following the end of a 90-minute infusion 
                of irinotecan. Pharmacokinetic parameters for 
                irinotecan and SN-38 following a 90-minute infusion of 
                irinotecan at dose levels of 125 and 340 
                mg/m2 determined in two clinical studies in 
                patients with solid tumors are summarized in Table 
                1:
                        


                        




                  Cmax - Maximum plasma concentration
                  


                  AUC0-24 - Area under the plasma concentration-time 
                  curve from time
                  


                  0 to 24 hours after the end of the 90-minute infusion
                  


                  t1/2
                   - Terminal elimination half-life
                  


                  Vz
                   - Volume of distribution of terminal elimination 
                  phase
                  


                  CL -Total systemic clearance
                  

                        
                        Irinotecan exhibits moderate plasma protein 
                binding (30% to 68% bound). SN-38 is highly bound to 
                human plasma proteins (approximately 95% bound). The 
                plasma protein to which irinotecan and SN-38 
                predominantly binds is albumin.
                        
                           Metabolism and 
                Excretion: The metabolic conversion of 
                irinotecan to the active metabolite SN-38 is mediated 
                by carboxylesterase enzymes and primarily occurs in the 
                liver. SN-38 is subsequently conjugated predominantly 
                by the enzyme UDP-glucuronosyl transferase 1A1 (UGT1A1) 
                to form a glucuronide metabolite. UGT1A1 activity is 
                reduced in individuals with genetic polymorphisms that 
                lead to reduced enzyme activity such as the UGT1A1*28 
                polymorphism. Approximately 10% of the North American 
                population is homozygous for the UGT1A1*28 allele. In a 
                prospective study, in which irinotecan was administered 
                as a single-agent on a once-every-3-week schedule, 
                patients who were homozygous for UGT1A1*28 had a higher 
                exposure to SN-38 than patients with the wild-type 
                UGT1A1 allele (See WARNINGS and DOSAGE AND 
                ADMINISTRATION). SN-38 glucuronide had 1/50 to 1/100 
                the activity of SN-38 in cytotoxicity assays using two 
                cell lines in vitro. The disposition of irinotecan has 
                not been fully elucidated in humans. The urinary 
                excretion of irinotecan is 11% to 20%; SN 38, <1%; 
                and SN-38 glucuronide, 3%. The cumulative biliary and 
                urinary excretion of irinotecan and its metabolites 
                (SN-38 and SN-38 glucuronide) over a period of 48 hours 
                following administration of irinotecan in two patients 
                ranged from approximately 25% (100 mg/m2) to 
                50% (300 mg/m2).
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Pharmacokinetics in 
                  Special Populations
                           
                           
                              
                                 Geriatric: In studies using the weekly 
                    schedule, the terminal half-life of irinotecan was 
                    6.0 hours in patients who were 65 years or older 
                    and 5.5 hours in patients younger than 65 years. 
                    Dose-normalized AUC0-24 for SN-38 in 
                    patients who were at least 65 years of age was 11% 
                    higher than in patients younger than 65 years. No 
                    change in the starting dose is recommended for 
                    geriatric patients receiving the weekly dosage 
                    schedule of irinotecan. The pharmacokinetics of 
                    irinotecan given once every 3 weeks has not been 
                    studied in the geriatric population; a lower 
                    starting dose is recommended in patients 70 years 
                    or older based on clinical toxicity experience with 
                    this schedule (see DOSAGE AND 
                    ADMINISTRATION).
                              
                                 Pediatric: See 
                                    Pediatric Use
                                  under 
                                    PRECAUTIONS.
                              
                              
                                 Gender: The pharmacokinetics of 
                    irinotecan do not appear to be influenced by 
                    gender. Race: The influence of race on the 
                    pharmacokinetics of irinotecan has not been 
                    evaluated.
                              
                                 Hepatic 
                    Insufficiency: Irinotecan clearance is 
                    diminished in patients with hepatic dysfunction 
                    while exposure to the active metabolite SN-38 is 
                    increased relative to that in patients with normal 
                    hepatic function. The magnitude of these effects is 
                    proportional to the degree of liver impairment as 
                    measured by elevations in total bilirubin and 
                    transaminase concentrations. However, the 
                    tolerability of irinotecan in patients with hepatic 
                    dysfunction (bilirubin greater than 2 mg/dl) has 
                    not been assessed sufficiently, and no 
                    recommendations for dosing can be made. See DOSAGE 
                    AND ADMINISTRATION and PRECAUTIONS: Patients at 
                    Particular Risk Sections.
                              
                                 Renal 
                    Insufficiency: The influence of renal 
                    insufficiency on the pharmacokinetics of irinotecan 
                    has not been evaluated. Therefore, caution should 
                    be undertaken in patients with impaired renal 
                    function. Irinotecan is not recommended for use in 
                    patients on dialysis.
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         