
               
               
               
                  Drug-Drug 
              Interactions
               
               
                  
                     Anticonvulsants: Exposure to irinotecan and 
                its active metabolite SN-38 is substantially reduced in 
                adult and pediatric patients concomitantly receiving 
                the CYP3A4 enzyme-inducing anticonvulsants phenytoin, 
                phenobarbital or carbamazepine. The appropriate 
                starting dose for patients taking these anticonvulsants 
                has not been formally defined. The following drugs are 
                also CYP3A4 inducers: rifampin, rifabutin. For patients 
                requiring anticonvulsant treatment, consideration 
                should be given to substituting non-enzyme inducing 
                anticonvulsants at least 2 weeks prior to initiation of 
                irinotecan therapy. Dexamethasone does not appear to 
                alter the pharmacokinetics of irinotecan.
                  
                     St. John's 
                Wort: St. John's Wort is an inducer of CYP3A4 
                enzymes. Exposure to the active metabolite SN-38 is 
                reduced in patients receiving concomitant St. John's 
                Wort. St. John's Wort should be discontinued at least 2 
                weeks prior to the first cycle of irinotecan, and St. 
                John's Wort is contraindicated during irinotecan 
                therapy.
                  
                     Ketoconazole:Ketoconazole is a strong 
                inhibitor of CYP3A4 enzymes. Patients receiving 
                concomitant ketoconazole have increased exposure to 
                irinotecan and its active metabolite SN-38. Patients 
                should discontinue ketoconazole at least 1 week prior 
                to starting irinotecan therapy and ketoconazole is 
                contraindicated during irinotecan therapy.
                  
                     Neuromuscular 
                blocking agents. Interaction between 
                irinotecan and neuromuscular blocking agents cannot be 
                ruled out. Irinotecan has anticholinesterase activity 
                which may prolong the neuromuscular blocking effects of 
                suxamethonium and the neuromuscular blockade of 
                non-depolarizing drugs may be antagonized.
                  
                     Atazanavir 
                sulfate: Coadministration of atazanavir 
                sulfate, a CYP3A4 and UGT1A1 inhibitor has the 
                potential to increase systemic exposure of SN-38, the 
                active metabolite of irinotecan. Physicians should take 
                this into consideration when co-administering these 
                drugs.
               
               
            
         