
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           Strong CYP3A4 Inducers: Do not administer for at least 2 weeks prior to initiation of irinotecan therapy. (7.1)
                           Strong CYP3A4 Inhibitors: Discontinue at least 1 week prior to starting irinotecan therapy and do not use during irinotecan therapy. (7.2)
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 Strong CYP3A4 Inducers
                     
                        
                           Anticonvulsants and other strong inducers: Exposure to irinotecan and its active metabolite SN-38 is substantially reduced in adult and pediatric patients concomitantly receiving the CYP3A4 enzyme-inducing anticonvulsants phenytoin, phenobarbital or carbamazepine. The appropriate starting dose for patients taking these anticonvulsants or other strong inducers such as rifampin and rifabutin has not been defined.  Consideration should be given to substituting non-enzyme inducing therapies at least 2 weeks prior to initiation of irinotecan therapy. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 Strong CYP3A4 Inhibitors
                     
                        Ketoconazole is a strong inhibitor of CYP3A4 enzymes.  Patients receiving concomitant ketoconazole have increased exposure to irinotecan and its active metabolite SN-38.  Patients should discontinue ketoconazole at least 1 week prior to starting irinotecan therapy and ketoconazole is contraindicated during irinotecan therapy.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3 Atazanavir Sulfate
                     
                        Co-administration of atazanavir sulfate, a CYP3A4 and UGT1A1 inhibitor has the potential to increase systemic exposure to SN-38, the active metabolite of irinotecan.  Physicians should take this into consideration when co-administering these drugs.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4 Drug-Laboratory Test Interactions
                     
                        There are no known interactions between irinotecan hydrochlorideand laboratory tests.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         