
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        The mechanism of action of aripiprazole in the treatment of schizophrenia is unknown.
                        However, the efficacy of aripiprazole may be mediated through a combination of partial agonist activity at D2 and 5-HT1A receptors and antagonist activity at 5-HT2A receptors. Actions at receptors other than D2, 5-HT1A, and 5-HT2A may explain some of the other adverse reactions of aripiprazole (e.g., the orthostatic hypotension observed with aripiprazole may be explained by its antagonist activity at adrenergic alpha1 receptors).
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        Aripiprazole exhibits high affinity for dopamine D2 and D3, serotonin 5-HT1A and 5-HT2A receptors (Ki values of 0.34 nM, 0.8 nM, 1.7 nM, and 3.4 nM, respectively), moderate affinity for dopamine D4, serotonin 5-HT2C and 5-HT7, alpha1-adrenergic and histamine H1 receptors (Ki values of 44 nM, 15 nM, 39 nM, 57 nM, and 61 nM, respectively), and moderate affinity for the serotonin reuptake site (Ki=98 nM). Aripiprazole has no appreciable affinity for cholinergic muscarinic receptors (IC50>1000 nM). Aripiprazole functions as a partial agonist at the dopamine D2 and the serotonin 5-HT1A receptors, and as an antagonist at serotonin 5-HT2A receptor.
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Alcohol
                              
                              There was no significant difference between oral aripiprazole co-administered with ethanol and placebo co-administered with ethanol on performance of gross motor skills or stimulus response in healthy subjects. As with most psychoactive medications, patients should be advised to avoid alcohol while taking ABILIFY MAINTENA.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        ABILIFY MAINTENA activity is presumably primarily due to the parent drug, aripiprazole, and to a lesser extent, to its major metabolite, dehydro-aripiprazole, which has been shown to have affinities for D2 receptors similar to the parent drug and represents about 29% of the parent drug exposure in plasma.
                        Aripiprazole absorption into the systemic circulation is slow and prolonged following intramuscular injection due to low solubility of aripiprazole particles. Following a single dose administration of ABILIFY MAINTENA in the deltoid and gluteal muscle, the extent of absorption (AUCt, AUC∞) of aripiprazole was similar for both injection sites, but the rate of absorption (Cmax) was 31% higher following administration to the deltoid compared to the gluteal site. However, at steady state, AUC and Cmax were similar for both sites of injection. Following multiple intramuscular doses, the plasma concentrations of aripiprazole gradually rise to maximum plasma concentrations at a median Tmax of 5 - 7 days for the gluteal muscle and 4 days for the deltoid muscle. After gluteal administration, the mean apparent aripiprazole terminal elimination half-life was 29.9 days and 46.5 days after multiple injections for every 4-week injection of ABILIFY MAINTENA 300 mg and 400 mg, respectively. Steady state concentrations for the typical subject were attained by the fourth dose for both sites of administration. Approximate dose-proportional increases in aripiprazole and dehydro-aripiprazole exposure were observed after every four week ABILIFY MAINTENA injections of 300 mg and 400 mg.
                        Elimination of aripiprazole is mainly through hepatic metabolism involving two P450 isozymes, CYP2D6 and CYP3A4. Aripiprazole is not a substrate of CYP1A1, CYP1A2, CYP2A6, CYP2B6, CYP2C8, CYP2C9, CYP2C19, or CYP2E1 enzymes. Aripiprazole also does not undergo direct glucuronidation.
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                    Drug Interaction Studies
                                 
                              
                              No specific drug interaction studies have been performed with ABILIFY MAINTENA. The information below is obtained from studies with oral aripiprazole.
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    Effects of other drugs on the exposures of aripiprazole and dehydro-aripiprazole are summarized in Figure 19 and Figure 20, respectively. Based on simulation, a 4.5-fold increase in mean Cmax and AUC values at steady-state is expected when extensive metabolizers of CYP2D6 are administered with both strong CYP2D6 and CYP3A4 inhibitors. After oral administration, a 3-fold increase in mean Cmax and AUC values at steady-state is expected in poor metabolizers of CYP2D6 administered with strong CYP3A4 inhibitors.
                                    
                                       
                                           
                                          Figure 19: The effects of other drugs on aripiprazole pharmacokinetics
                                       
                                    
                                    
                                    
                                       
                                           
                                          Figure 20: The effects of other drugs on dehydro-aripiprazole pharmacokinetics 
                                       
                                    
                                    
                                    The effects of ABILIFY on the exposures of other drugs are summarized in Figure 21. A population PK analysis in patients with major depressive disorder showed no substantial change in plasma concentrations of fluoxetine (20 mg/day or 40 mg/day), paroxetine CR (37.5 mg/day or 50 mg/day), or sertraline (100 mg/day or 150 mg/day) dosed to steady-state. The steady-state plasma concentrations of fluoxetine and norfluoxetine increased by about 18% and 36%, respectively, and concentrations of paroxetine decreased by about 27%. The steady-state plasma concentrations of sertraline and desmethylsertraline were not substantially changed when these antidepressant therapies were coadministered with aripiprazole.
                                    
                                       
                                           
                                          Figure 21: The effects of oral aripiprazole on pharmacokinetics of other drugs 
                                       
                                    
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Figure19
                                       
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Figure 20
                                       
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Figure 21
                                       
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                    Studies in Specific Populations
                                 
                              
                              No specific pharmacokinetic studies have been performed with ABILIFY MAINTENA in specific populations. All the information is obtained from studies with oral aripiprazole.
                              Exposures of aripiprazole and dehydro-aripiprazole in specific populations are summarized in Figure 22 and Figure 23, respectively.  In addition, in pediatric patients (10 to 17 years of age) administered with oral aripiprazole (20 mg to 30 mg), the body weight corrected aripiprazole clearance was similar to the adults. 
                              
                                 Figure 22 Effects of intrinsic factors on aripiprazole pharmacokinetics 
                              
                              
                              
                                 Figure 23: Effects of intrinsic factors on dehydro-aripiprazole pharmacokinetics:
                              
                              
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Figure 22
                                 
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 Figure 23
                                 
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         