
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Rb-82 is analogous to potassium ion (K+) in its
biochemical behavior and is rapidly extracted by the myocardium proportional
to the blood flow.  Rb+ participates in the sodium-potassium (Na+/K+)
ion exchange pumps that are present in cell membranes.  The intracellular
uptake of Rb-82 requires maintenance of ionic gradient across cell
membranes. Rb-82 radioactivity is increased in viable myocardium reflecting
intracellular retention, while the tracer is cleared rapidly from
necrotic or infarcted tissue.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        In
human studies, myocardial activity was noted within the first minute
after peripheral intravenous injection of Rb-82.  When areas of infarction
or ischemia are present in the myocardium, they are visualized within
2-7 minutes after injection as photon-deficient, or “cold”, areas
on the myocardial scan.
In patients with reduced cardiac
function, transit of the injected dose from the peripheral infusion
site to the myocardium may be delayed [see Dosage and Administration (2.2)].
                        Blood flow brings Rb-82 to all areas of the body during the first
pass of circulation.  Accordingly, visible uptake is also observed
in other highly vascularized organs, such as the kidneys, liver, spleen
and lungs.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        With
a physical half-life of 75 seconds, Rb-82 is very rapidly converted
by radioactive decay into a trace amount of stable Kr-82 gas, which
is passively expired by the lungs.  Renal and hepatic excretion is
not anticipated to play an essential role in Rb-82 elimination, although
some of the Rb-82 dose may be excreted in the urine prior to radioactive
decay.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         