
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Technetium Tc 99m decays by isomeric transition, emitting a photon that can be detected for imaging purposes. 
                              [see Description  (11.1)]
                           
                        
                        Following subcutaneous injection, Technetium Tc 99m Sulfur Colloid enters the lymphatic capillaries and is transported with lymph to lymph nodes.  However, when there is massive nodal metastatic involvement, the normal transport to lymph nodes is lost because few normal cells remain in the node. [see Dosage and Administration (2.4)] 
                        
                        Following intraperitoneal injection, Technetium Tc 99m Sulfur Colloid mixes with the peritoneal fluid; rate of clearance from the cavity allows assessment of the patency of the shunt. Clearance varies from insignificant, which may occur with complete shunt blockage, to very rapid clearance with subsequent transfer into the systemic circulation when the shunt is patent.
                        Following intravenous injection, Technetium Tc 99m Sulfur Colloid is taken up by the reticuloendothelial system (RES), allowing RES rich structures to be imaged.
                        With oral administration, Technetium Tc 99m Sulfur Colloid is not absorbed accounting for  its function in  esophageal transit studies, gastroesophageal reflux scintigraphy, and for the detection of pulmonary aspiration of gastric contents.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        Following intravenous administration, Technetium Tc 99m Sulfur Colloid Injection is rapidly cleared from the blood by the reticuloendothelial system with a nominal half-life of approximately 2 1/2 minutes. Uptake of the radioactive colloid by organs of the RES is dependent upon both their relative blood flow rates and the functional capacity of the phagocytic cells. In the average patient 80 to 90% of the injected collodial particles are phagocytized by the Kupffer cells of the liver, 5 to 10% by the spleen and the balance by the bone marrow.
                        Following oral ingestion, Technetium Tc 99m Sulfur Colloid is distributed primarily through the gastrointestinal tract with elimination primarily through the feces.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         