
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
                  

                  Results from a pharmacokinetic sub-study demonstrated no pharmacokinetic interaction between peginterferon alfa-2a and ribavirin.
               
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           Nucleoside analogues: Closely monitor for toxicities. Discontinue nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors or reduce dose or discontinue interferon, ribavirin or both with worsening toxicities (7.1)
                           
                           Azathioprine: Concomitant use of azathioprine with ribavirin has been reported to induce severe pancytopenia and may increase the risk of azathioprine-related myelotoxicity (7.3)
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 Nucleoside Reverse Transcriptase Inhibitors (NRTIs)
                     
                        

                        
                           In vitro data indicate ribavirin reduces phosphorylation of lamivudine, stavudine, and zidovudine. However, no pharmacokinetic (e.g., plasma concentrations or intracellular triphosphorylated active metabolite concentrations) or pharmacodynamic (e.g., loss of HIV/HCV virologic suppression) interaction was observed when ribavirin and lamivudine (n=18), stavudine (n=10), or zidovudine (n=6) were coadministered as part of a multi-drug regimen to HCV/HIV coinfected patients.

                           
In Study NR15961 among the CHC/HIV coinfected cirrhotic patients receiving NRTIs, cases of hepatic decompensation (some fatal) were observed [see Warnings and Precautions (5.3)].

                           
Patients receiving peginterferon alfa-2a/ribavirin and NRTIs should be closely monitored for treatment-associated toxicities. Physicians should refer to prescribing information for the respective NRTIs for guidance regarding toxicity management. In addition, dose reduction or discontinuation of peginterferon alfa-2a, ribavirin or both should also be considered if worsening toxicities are observed, including hepatic decompensation (e.g., Child-Pugh greater than or equal to 6) [see Warnings and Precautions (5.3) and Dosage and Administration (2.3)].
                              

                              
Didanosine
 

                           Coadministration of  ribavirin and didanosine is contraindicated. Didanosine or its active metabolite (dideoxyadenosine 5’-triphosphate) concentrations are increased when didanosine is coadministered with ribavirin, which could cause or worsen clinical toxicities. Reports of fatal hepatic failure as well as peripheral neuropathy, pancreatitis, and symptomatic hyperlactatemia/lactic acidosis have been reported in clinical trials [see Contraindications (4)]. 

                           
                              
Zidovudine
 

                           In Study NR15961, patients who were administered zidovudine in combination with peginterferon alfa-2a/ribavirin developed severe neutropenia (ANC less than 500) and severe anemia (hemoglobin less than 8 g/dL) more frequently than similar patients not receiving zidovudine (neutropenia 15% vs. 9%) (anemia 5% vs. 1%). Discontinuation of zidovudine should be considered as medically appropriate.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 Drugs Metabolized by Cytochrome P450
                     
                        

                        
                           In vitro studies indicate that ribavirin does not inhibit CYP 2C9, CYP 2C19, CYP 2D6 or CYP 3A4.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3 Azathioprine
                     
                        

                        The use of ribavirin to treat chronic hepatitis C in patients receiving azathioprine has been reported to induce severe pancytopenia and may increase the risk of azathioprine-related myelotoxicity. Inosine monophosphate dehydrogenase (IMDH) is required for one of the metabolic pathways of azathioprine. Ribavirin is known to inhibit IMDH, thereby leading to accumulation of an azathioprine metabolite, 6-methylthioinosine monophosphate (6-MTITP), which is associated with myelotoxicity (neutropenia, thrombocytopenia, and anemia). Patients receiving azathioprine with ribavirin should have complete blood counts, including platelet counts, monitored weekly for the first month, twice monthly for the second and third months of treatment, then monthly or more frequently if dosage or other therapy changes are necessary [see Warnings and Precautions (5.6)].
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         