
                     
                     
                     Drug Interactions
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Dual Blockade of the Renin-Angiotensin System (RAS)
                           
                              Dual blockade of the RAS with angiotensin receptor blockers, ACE inhibitors, or aliskiren is associated with increased risks of hypotension, hyperkalemia, and changes in renal function (including acute renal failure) compared to monotherapy. Closely monitor blood pressure, renal function and electrolytes in patients on fosinopril and hydrochlorothiazide and other agents that affect the RAS.
                              Do not co-administer aliskiren with fosinopril and hydrochlorothiazide in patients with diabetes. Avoid use of aliskiren with fosinopril and hydrochlorothiazide in patients with renal impairment (GFR <60 ml/min).
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Potassium Supplements and Potassium-Sparing Diuretics
                           
                              As noted above ("Derangements of Serum Electrolytes"), the net effect of fosinopril sodium and hydrochlorothiazide may be to elevate a patient's serum potassium, to reduce it, or to leave it unchanged. Potassium-sparing diuretics (spironolactone, amiloride, triamterene, and others) or potassium supplements can increase the risk of hyperkalemia. If concomitant use of such agents is indicated, they should be given with caution, and the patient's serum potassium should be monitored frequently.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Lithium
                           
                              Increased serum lithium levels and symptoms of lithium toxicity have been reported in patients receiving ACE inhibitors during therapy with lithium. Because renal clearance of lithium is reduced by thiazides, the risk of lithium toxicity is presumably raised further when, as in therapy with fosinopril sodium and hydrochlorothiazide tablets, a thiazide diuretic is co-administered with the ACE inhibitor. Fosinopril sodium-hydrochlorothiazide and lithium should be coadministered with caution, and frequent monitoring of serum lithium levels is recommended.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Antacids
                           
                              In a clinical pharmacology study, serum levels and urinary excretion of fosinoprilat were reduced when fosinopril was co-administered with an antacid (aluminum hydroxide, magnesium hydroxide, and simethicone) suggesting that antacids may impair absorption of fosinopril. If concomitant administration of these agents is indicated, dosing should be separated by 2 hours.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Gold
                           
                              Nitritoid reactions (symptoms include facial flushing, nausea, vomiting, and hypotension) have been reported rarely in patients on therapy with injectable gold (sodium aurothiomalate) and concomitant ACE inhibitor therapy including fosinopril sodium and hydrochlorothiazide.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Other
                           
                              The bioavailability of unbound fosinoprilat is not altered by coadministration of fosinopril with aspirin, 
                                 chlorthalidone
                                 , cimetidine, digoxin, metoclopramide, 
                                 nifedipine
                                 , propranolol, 
                                 propantheline
                                 , or warfarin. Other ACE inhibitors have had less than additive effects with beta- adrenergic blockers, presumably because drugs of both classes lower blood pressure by inhibiting parts of the renin-angiotensin system.
                              Interaction studies with warfarin have failed to identify any clinically important effects of fosinopril on the serum concentration or clinical effects of the anticoagulant.
                              Insulin requirements in diabetic patients may be increased, decreased, or unchanged.
                              Thiazides may decrease arterial responsiveness to norepinephrine, but not enough to preclude effectiveness of the pressor agent for therapeutic use.
                              Thiazides may increase the responsiveness to tubocurarine.
                              The diuretic, natriuretic, and antihypertensive effects of thiazide diuretics may be reduced by concurrent administration of nonsteroidal
                                  anti-inflammatory agents; the effects (if any) of these agents on the antihypertensive effect of fosinopril sodium and hydrochlorothiazide have not been studied.
                              By alkalinizing the urine, hydrochlorothiazide may decrease the effectiveness of methenamine.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Cholestyramine and Colestipol Resins
                           
                              Absorption of hydrochlorothiazide is impaired in the presence of anionic exchange resins. Single doses of either cholestyramine or colestipol resins bind the hydrochlorothiazide and reduce its absorption from the gastrointestinal tract by up to 85% and 43%, respectively.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               