
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1	Mechanism of Action
                     
                        The active drug substance in DaTscan is N-ω-fluoropropyl-2β-carbomethoxy-3β-(4-[123I]iodophenyl)nortropane or ioflupane I 123. In vitro, ioflupane binds reversibly to the human recombinant dopamine transporter (DaT) (Ki = 0.62 nM; IC50 = 0.71 nM). Autoradiography of post-mortem human brain slices exposed to radiolabeled ioflupane shows concentration of the radiolabel in striatum (caudate nucleus and putamen). The specificity of the binding of ioflupane I 125 to dopamine transporter was demonstrated by competition studies with the DaT inhibitor GBR 12909 (a dopamine reuptake inhibitor), the serotonin  reuptake inhibitor citalopram, and the norepinephrine  reuptake inhibitor desipramine in post-mortem human brain slices exposed to radiolabeled ioflupane. Citalopram reduced binding in the neocortex and thalamus with only minor effects in the striatum. This indicated that the binding in the cortex and thalamus is mainly to the serotonin reuptake sites. Desipramine showed no effect on the level of striatal binding of ioflupane I 125, but reduced extrastriatal binding by 60 to 85%. The binding of ioflupane I 125 to the striatum was abolished in the presence of high concentrations of GBR 12909, indicating selectivity of ioflupane binding for the pre-synaptic DaT. 
                        Following administration of DaTscan to humans, radioactive decay of the iodine 123 emits gamma radiation which can be detected externally using gamma detectors, allowing visualization of the brain striata through SPECT imaging [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)
                           ].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        As DaTscan contains a very small quantity of ioflupane, no ioflupane pharmacologic effects are expected [see Description (11)
                           ].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        The pharmacokinetics of ioflupane I 123 were studied by monitoring radioactivity following intravenous injection; only 5% of the administered radioactivity remained in whole blood at 5 minutes post-injection.  Uptake in the brain reached approximately 7% of injected radioactivity at 10 minutes post-injection and decreased to 3% after 5 hours; striata to background ratios were relatively constant between 3 and 6 hours post-injection.  About 30% of the whole brain radioactivity was attributed to striatal uptake.  By 48 hours post-injection, approximately 60% of the injected radioactivity has been excreted in the urine, with fecal excretion estimated to be approximately 14%.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         