
                     
                     
                     INTERACTIONS
                     
                        Pyridoxine hydrochloride should not be given to patients receiving the drug levodopa, because the action of levodopa is antagonized by pyridoxine hydrochloride. However, pyridoxine hydrochloride may be used concurrently in patients receiving a preparation containing both carbidopa and levodopa.
                        
                           Drugs which may interact with folate include:
                        
                        
                           Antiepileptic drugs (AED): The AED class including, but not limited to, phenytoin, carbamazepine, primidone, valproic acid, phenobarbital and lamotrigine have been shown to impair folate absorption and increase the metabolism of circulating folate. Additionally, concurrent use of folic acid has been associated with enhanced phenytoin metabolism, lowering the level of this AED in the blood and allowing breakthrough seizures to occur.
                           Capecitabine: Folinic acid (5-formyltetrahydrofolate) may increase the toxicity of Capecitabine.
                           Cholestyramine: Reduces folic acid absorption and reduces serum folate levels.
                           Colestipol: Reduces folic acid absorption and reduces serum folate levels.
                           Cycloserine: Reduces folic acid absorption and reduces serum folate levels.
                           Dihydrofolate Reductase Inhibitors (DHFRI): DHFRIs block the conversion of folic acid to its active forms, and lower plasma and red blood cell folate levels. DHFRIs include aminopterin, methotrexate, pyrimethamine, triamterene, and trimethoprim.
                           Fluoxetine: Fluoxetine exerts a noncompetitive inhibition of the 5-methyltetrahydrofolate active transport in the intestine.
                           Isotretinoin: Reduced folate levels have occurred in some patients taking isotretinoin.
                           Nonsteroidal Anti-inflammatory Drugs (NSAIDs): NSAIDs have been shown to inhibit some folate dependent enzymes in laboratory experiments. NSAIDs include ibuprofen, naproxen, indomethacin and sulindac.
                           Oral Contraceptives: Serum folate levels may be depressed by oral contraceptive therapy.
                           Methylprednisolone: Reduced serum folate levels have been noted after treatment with methylprednisolone.
                           Pancreatic Enzymes: Reduced folate levels have occurred in some patients taking pancreatic extracts.
                           Pentamidine: Reduced folate levels have been seen with prolonged intravenous pentamidine.
                           Smoking and Alcohol: Reduced serum folate levels have been noted.
                           Sulfasalazine: Inhibits the absorption and metabolism of folic acid.
                           Metformin treatment in patients with type 2 diabetes decreases serum folate.
                           Warfarin can produce significant impairment in folate status after a 6-month therapy.
                        
                     
                     
                  
               