
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Cysview is an ester of the heme precursor, aminolevulinic acid.  After bladder instillation, Cysview enters the bladder mucosa and is proposed to enter the intracellular space of mucosal cells where it is used as a precursor in the formation of the photoactive intermediate protoporphyrin IX (PpIX) and other photoactive porphyrins (PAPs).  PpIX and PAPs are reported to accumulate preferentially in neoplastic cells as compared to normal urothelium, partly due to altered enzymatic activity in the neoplastic cells.  After excitation with light at wavelengths between 360 and 450 nm, PpIX and other PAPs return to a lower energy level by fluorescing, which can be detected and used for cystoscopic detection of lesions.  The fluorescence from tumor tissue appears bright red and demarcated, whereas the background normal tissue appears dark blue.  Similar processes may occur in inflamed cells.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        
                           In vitro studies have shown increased porphyrin fluorescence in normal urothelium after exposure to Cysview.  In the human bladder, a greater accumulation of porphyrins is proposed in neoplastic or inflamed cells, compared to normal urothelium.  After bladder instillation of Cysview for approximately 1 hour and subsequent illumination with blue light at wavelengths 360 – 450 nm, the porphyrins will fluoresce red [see Dosage and Administration (2.5)].
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        After bladder instillation of [14C]-labeled Cysview (100 mg) for approximately 1 hour in healthy volunteers, absolute bioavailability of  Cysview was 7% (90% confidence interval [CI]: 5%-10%).  The [14C]-labeled substance(s) showed biphasic elimination, with an initial elimination half-life of 39 minutes, followed by a terminal half-life of approximately 76 hours.  Whole blood analysis showed no evidence of significant binding of Cysview to erythrocytes.  An in vitro study showed that Cysview underwent rapid metabolism in human blood.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         