
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY

               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action

                     
                        The precise mechanism(s) by which levetiracetam exerts its antiepileptic effect is unknown. The antiepileptic activity of levetiracetam was assessed in a number of animal models of epileptic seizures. Levetiracetam did not inhibit single seizures induced by maximal stimulation with electrical current or different chemoconvulsants and showed only minimal activity in submaximal stimulation and in threshold tests. Protection was observed, however, against secondarily generalized activity from focal seizures induced by pilocarpine and kainic acid, two chemoconvulsants that induce seizures that mimic some features of human complex partial seizures with secondary generalization. Levetiracetam also displayed inhibitory properties in the kindling model in rats, another model of human complex partial seizures, both during kindling development and in the fully kindled state. The predictive value of these animal models for specific types of human epilepsy is uncertain.

                        
                           In vitro and in vivo recordings of epileptiform activity from the hippocampus have shown that levetiracetam inhibits burst firing without affecting normal neuronal excitability, suggesting that levetiracetam may selectively prevent hypersynchronization of epileptiform burst firing and propagation of seizure activity.

                        Levetiracetam at concentrations of up to 10 μM did not demonstrate binding affinity for a variety of known receptors, such as those associated with benzodiazepines, GABA (gamma-aminobutyric acid), glycine, NMDA (N-methyl-D-aspartate), re-uptake sites, and second messenger systems. Furthermore, in vitro studies have failed to find an effect of levetiracetam on neuronal voltage-gated sodium or T-type calcium currents and levetiracetam does not appear to directly facilitate GABAergic neurotransmission. However, in vitro studies have demonstrated that levetiracetam opposes the activity of negative modulators of GABA- and glycine-gated currents and partially inhibits N-type calcium currents in neuronal cells.

                        A saturable and stereoselective neuronal binding site in rat brain tissue has been described for levetiracetam. Experimental data indicate that this binding site is the synaptic vesicle protein SV2A, thought to be involved in the regulation of vesicle exocytosis. Although the molecular significance of levetiracetam binding to synaptic vesicle protein SV2A is not understood, levetiracetam and related analogs showed a rank order of affinity for SV2A which correlated with the potency of their antiseizure activity in audiogenic seizure-prone mice. These findings suggest that the interaction of levetiracetam with the SV2A protein may contribute to the antiepileptic mechanism of action of the drug.

                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics

                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Effects on QTc Interval
                              
                              The effect of levetiracetam on QTc prolongation was evaluated in a randomized, double-blind, positive-controlled (moxifloxacin 400 mg) and placebo-controlled crossover study of levetiracetam (1,000 mg or 5,000 mg) in 52 healthy subjects. The upper bound of the 90% confidence interval for the largest placebo-adjusted, baseline-corrected QTc was below 10 milliseconds. Therefore, there was no evidence of significant QTc prolongation in this study.

                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3  Pharmacokinetics

                     
                        Equivalent doses of intravenous (IV) levetiracetam and oral levetiracetam result in equivalent Cmax, Cmin, and total systemic exposure to levetiracetam when the IV levetiracetam is administered as a 15-minute infusion.

                        The pharmacokinetics of levetiracetam have been studied in healthy adult subjects, adults and pediatric patients with epilepsy, elderly subjects, and subjects with renal and hepatic impairment.

                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Overview
                              
                              Levetiracetam is rapidly and almost completely absorbed after oral administration. Levetiracetam injection and tablets are bioequivalent. The pharmacokinetics of levetiracetam are linear and time-invariant, with low intra- and inter-subject variability. Levetiracetam is not significantly protein-bound (<10% bound) and its volume of distribution is close to the volume of intracellular and extracellular water. Sixty-six percent (66%) of the dose is renally excreted unchanged. The major metabolic pathway of levetiracetam (24% of dose) is an enzymatic hydrolysis of the acetamide group. It is not liver cytochrome P450 dependent. The metabolites have no known pharmacological activity and are renally excreted. Plasma half-life of levetiracetam across studies is approximately 6 to 8 hours. It is increased in the elderly (primarily due to impaired renal clearance) and in subjects with renal impairment.

                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Distribution
                              
                              The equivalence of levetiracetam injection and the oral formulation was demonstrated in a bioavailability study of 17 healthy volunteers. In this study, levetiracetam 1,500 mg was diluted in 100 mL 0.9% sterile saline solution and was infused over 15 minutes. The selected infusion rate provided plasma concentrations of levetiracetam at the end of the infusion period similar to those achieved at Tmax after an equivalent oral dose. It is demonstrated that levetiracetam 1,500 mg intravenous infusion is equivalent to levetiracetam 3 x 500 mg oral tablets. The time independent pharmacokinetic profile of levetiracetam was demonstrated following 1,500 mg intravenous infusion for 4 days with BID dosing. The AUC(0-12) at steady-state was equivalent to AUCinf following an equivalent single dose.

                              Levetiracetam and its major metabolite are less than 10% bound to plasma proteins; clinically significant interactions with other drugs through competition for protein binding sites are therefore unlikely.

                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Metabolism
                              
                              Levetiracetam is not extensively metabolized in humans. The major metabolic pathway is the enzymatic hydrolysis of the acetamide group, which produces the carboxylic acid metabolite, ucb L057 (24% of dose) and is not dependent on any liver cytochrome P450 isoenzymes. The major metabolite is inactive in animal seizure models. Two minor metabolites were identified as the product of hydroxylation of the 2-oxo-pyrrolidine ring (2% of dose) and opening of the 2-oxo-pyrrolidine ring in position 5 (1% of dose). There is no enantiomeric interconversion of levetiracetam or its major metabolite.

                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Elimination
                              
                              Levetiracetam plasma half-life in adults is 7 ± 1 hour and is unaffected by either dose, route of administration or repeated administration. Levetiracetam is eliminated from the systemic circulation by renal excretion as unchanged drug which represents 66% of administered dose. The total body clearance is 0.96 mL/min/kg and the renal clearance is 0.6 mL/min/kg. The mechanism of excretion is glomerular filtration with subsequent partial tubular reabsorption. The metabolite ucb L057 is excreted by glomerular filtration and active tubular secretion with a renal clearance of 4 mL/min/kg. Levetiracetam elimination is correlated to creatinine clearance. Levetiracetam clearance is reduced in patients with renal impairment [see Dosage and Administration (2.6) and Use in Specific Populations (8.6)].

                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Specific Populations
                              
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Elderly
                                    
                                    Pharmacokinetics of levetiracetam were evaluated in 16 elderly subjects (age 61 to 88 years) with creatinine clearance ranging from 30 to 74 mL/min. Following oral administration of twice-daily dosing for 10 days, total body clearance decreased by 38% and the half-life was 2.5 hours longer in the elderly compared to healthy adults. This is most likely due to the decrease in renal function in these subjects.

                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Pediatric Patients
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                       
                                       
                                          
                                             
                                                Intravenous Formulation

                                                A population pharmacokinetic analysis for the intravenous formulation was conducted in 49 pediatric patients (1 month to < 16 years of age) weighing 3 to 79 kg. Patients received levetiracetam as a 15-minute IV infusion at doses between 14 mg/kg/day and 60 mg/kg/day twice daily. Plasma concentrations and model derived steady-state exposure AUC(0-12) were within the range of the exposure observed in pediatric patients receiving equivalent doses of the oral solution.

                                             
                                          
                                       
                                       
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                       
                                       
                                          
                                             
                                                Oral Formulations

                                                Pharmacokinetics of levetiracetam were evaluated in 24 pediatric patients (age 6 to 12 years) after single oral dose (20 mg/kg) of the immediate release formulation of levetiracetam. The body weight adjusted apparent clearance of levetiracetam was approximately 40% higher than in adults.

                                                
                                                   
A repeat dose pharmacokinetic study was conducted in pediatric patients (age 4 to 12 years) at doses of 20 mg/kg/day, 40 mg/kg/day, and 60 mg/kg/day of the immediate release formulation of levetiracetam. The evaluation of the pharmacokinetic profile of levetiracetam and its metabolite (ucb L057) in 14 pediatric patients demonstrated rapid absorption of levetiracetam at all doses, with a Tmax of about 1 hour and a t1/2 of 5 hours across all dosing levels. The pharmacokinetics of levetiracetam in pediatric patients was linear between 20 to 60 mg/kg/day. The potential interaction of levetiracetam with other AEDs was also evaluated in these patients. Levetiracetam had no significant effect on the plasma concentrations of carbamazepine, valproic acid, topiramate or lamotrigine. However, there was about a 22% increase of apparent clearance of levetiracetam when it was co-administered with an enzyme-inducing AED (e.g., carbamazepine).

                                                
                                                   
Following single dose administration (20 mg/kg) of a 10% oral solution to pediatric patients with epilepsy (1 month to < 4 years), levetiracetam was rapidly absorbed and peak plasma concentrations were observed approximately 1 hour after dosing. Levetiracetam half-life in pediatric patients 1 month to < 4 years with epilepsy was shorter (5.3 h) than in adults (7.2 h), and apparent clearance (1.5 mL/min/kg) was faster than in adults (0.96 mL/min/kg).

                                                
                                                   
Population pharmacokinetic analysis showed that body weight was significantly correlated to the clearance of levetiracetam in pediatric patients; clearance increased with an increase in body weight.

                                             
                                          
                                       
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Pregnancy
                                    
                                    Levetiracetam levels may decrease during pregnancy.

                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Gender
                                    
                                    Levetiracetam Cmax and AUC were 20% higher in women (N=11) compared to men (N=12). However, clearances adjusted for body weight were comparable.

                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Race
                                    
                                    Formal pharmacokinetic studies of the effects of race have not been conducted. Cross-study comparisons involving Caucasians (N=12) and Asians (N=12), however, show that pharmacokinetics of levetiracetam were comparable between the two races. Because levetiracetam is primarily renally excreted and there are no important racial differences in creatinine clearance, pharmacokinetic differences due to race are not expected.

                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Renal Impairment
                                    
                                    The disposition of levetiracetam was studied in adult subjects with varying degrees of renal function. Total body clearance of levetiracetam is reduced in patients with impaired renal function by 40% in the mild group (CLcr = 50 to 80 mL/min), 50% in the moderate group (CLcr = 30 to 50 mL/min) and 60% in the severe renal impairment group (CLcr <30 mL/min). Clearance of levetiracetam is correlated with creatinine clearance.

                                    In anuric (end stage renal disease) patients, the total body clearance decreased 70% compared to normal subjects (CLcr >80 mL/min). Approximately 50% of the pool of levetiracetam in the body is removed during a standard 4 hour hemodialysis procedure [see Dosage and Administration (2.7)].

                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Hepatic Impairment
                                    
                                    In subjects with mild (Child-Pugh A) to moderate (Child-Pugh B) hepatic impairment, the pharmacokinetics of levetiracetam were unchanged. In patients with severe hepatic impairment (Child-Pugh C), total body clearance was 50% that of normal subjects, but decreased renal clearance accounted for most of the decrease. No dose adjustment is needed for patients with hepatic impairment.

                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Drug Interactions
                              
                              
                                 In vitro data on metabolic interactions indicate that levetiracetam is unlikely to produce, or be subject to, pharmacokinetic interactions. Levetiracetam and its major metabolite, at concentrations well above Cmax levels achieved within the therapeutic dose range, are neither inhibitors of, nor high affinity substrates for, human liver cytochrome P450 isoforms, epoxide hydrolase or UDP-glucuronidation enzymes. In addition, levetiracetam does not affect the in vitro glucuronidation of valproic acid.

                              Potential pharmacokinetic interactions of or with levetiracetam were assessed in clinical pharmacokinetic studies (phenytoin, valproate, warfarin, digoxin, oral contraceptive, probenecid) and through pharmacokinetic screening in the placebo-controlled clinical studies in epilepsy patients.

                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Phenytoin
                                    
                                    Levetiracetam (3,000 mg daily) had no effect on the pharmacokinetic disposition of phenytoin in patients with refractory epilepsy. Pharmacokinetics of levetiracetam were also not affected by phenytoin.

                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Valproate
                                    
                                    Levetiracetam (1,500 mg twice daily) did not alter the pharmacokinetics of valproate in healthy volunteers. Valproate 500 mg twice daily did not modify the rate or extent of levetiracetam absorption or its plasma clearance or urinary excretion. There also was no effect on exposure to and the excretion of the primary metabolite, ucb L057.

                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Other Antiepileptic Drugs
                                    
                                    Potential drug interactions between levetiracetam and other AEDs (carbamazepine, gabapentin, lamotrigine, phenobarbital, phenytoin, primidone and valproate) were also assessed by evaluating the serum concentrations of levetiracetam and these AEDs during placebo-controlled clinical studies. These data indicate that levetiracetam does not influence the plasma concentration of other AEDs and that these AEDs do not influence the pharmacokinetics of levetiracetam.

                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Effect of AEDs in Pediatric Patients
                                    
                                    There was about a 22% increase of apparent total body clearance of levetiracetam when it was co-administered with enzyme-inducing AEDs. Dose adjustment is not recommended. Levetiracetam had no effect on plasma concentrations of carbamazepine, valproate, topiramate, or lamotrigine.

                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Oral Contraceptives
                                    
                                    Levetiracetam (500 mg twice daily) did not influence the pharmacokinetics of an oral contraceptive containing 0.03 mg ethinyl estradiol and 0.15 mg levonorgestrel, or of the luteinizing hormone and progesterone levels, indicating that impairment of contraceptive efficacy is unlikely. Coadministration of this oral contraceptive did not influence the pharmacokinetics of levetiracetam.

                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Digoxin
                                    
                                    Levetiracetam (1,000 mg twice daily) did not influence the pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics (ECG) of digoxin given as a 0.25 mg dose every day. Coadministration of digoxin did not influence the pharmacokinetics of levetiracetam.

                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Warfarin
                                    
                                    Levetiracetam (1,000 mg twice daily) did not influence the pharmacokinetics of R and S warfarin. Prothrombin time was not affected by levetiracetam. Coadministration of warfarin did not affect the pharmacokinetics of levetiracetam.

                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Probenecid
                                    
                                    Probenecid, a renal tubular secretion blocking agent, administered at a dose of 500 mg four times a day, did not change the pharmacokinetics of levetiracetam 1,000 mg twice daily. Css
                                       max of the metabolite, ucb L057, was approximately doubled in the presence of probenecid while the fraction of drug excreted unchanged in the urine remained the same. Renal clearance of ucb L057 in the presence of probenecid decreased 60%, probably related to competitive inhibition of tubular secretion of ucb L057. The effect of levetiracetam on probenecid was not studied.

                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         