
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        Methylphenidate is a mild central nervous system stimulant.
                        The mode of action in man is not completely understood, but methylphenidate presumably activates the brain stem arousal system and cortex to produce its stimulant effect.
                        There is neither specific evidence which clearly establishes the mechanism whereby methylphenidate produces its mental and behavioral effects in children, nor conclusive evidence regarding how these effects relate to the condition of the central nervous system.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Effects on QT Interval 
                     
                        The effect of Focalin® XR (dexmethylphenidate, the pharmacologically active d-enantiomer of methylphenidate) on the QT interval was evaluated in a double-blind, placebo- and open label active (moxifloxacin)-controlled study following single doses of Focalin® XR 40mg in 75 healthy volunteers. ECGs were collected up to 12 h post-dose. Frederica's method for heart rate correction was employed to derive the corrected QT interval (QTcF). The maximum mean prolongation of QTcF intervals was <5 ms, and the upper limit of the 90% confidence interval was below 10 ms for all time matched comparisons versus placebo. This was below the threshold of clinical concern and there was no evident-exposure response relationship.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        Methylphenidate hydrochloride in extended-release tablets is more slowly but as extensively absorbed as in the regular tablets. Bioavailability of the UCB methylphenidate hydrochloride extended-release tablet was compared to a sustained-release reference product and an immediate-release product. The extent of absorption for the three products was similar, and the rate of absorption of the two sustained-release products was not statistically different.
                        In another reported study with a brand of Methylphenidate HCl sustained-release, the time to peak rate in children was reported as 4.7 hours (1.3 - 8.2 hours) for the sustained-release tablet dosage form and 1.9 hours (0.3 - 4.4 hours) for immediate release tablets. An average of 67% of a sustained-release tablet dosage form was excreted in children compared to 86% in adults.
                        In a clinical study involving adult subjects who received Extended-release (ER) tablets, plasma concentrations of methylphenidate hydrochloride's major metabolite appeared to be greater in females than in males. No gender differences were observed for methylphenidate hydrochloride's plasma concentration in the same subjects.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         