
                     
                     
                     Drug Interactions
                     
                        Methylphenidate hydrochloride tablets should not be used in patients being treated (currently or within the proceeding two weeks) with MAO Inhibitors (see CONTRAINDICATIONS, Monoamine Oxidase Inhibitors).
                        Because of possible effects on blood pressure, Methylphenidate hydrochloride tablets should be used cautiously with pressor agents.
                        Methylphenidate may decrease the effectiveness of drugs used to treat hypertension.  Methylphenidate is metabolized primarily to ritalinic acid by de-esterification and not through oxidative pathways.
                        Human pharmacologic studies have shown that racemic methylphenidate may inhibit the metabolism of coumarin anticoagulants, anticonvulsants (e.g. phenobarbital, phenytoin, primidone), phenylbutazone, and tricyclic drugs (e.g. imipramine, clomipramine, desipramine). Downward dosage adjustments of these drugs may be required when given concomitantly with methylphenidate. It may be necessary to adjust the dosage and monitor plasma drug concentration (or, in case of coumarin, coagulation times), when initiating or discontinuing methylphenidate.
                        In theory, there is a possibility that the clearance of methylphenidate might be affected by urinary pH, either being increased with acidifying agents or decreased with alkalizing agents.  This should be considered when methylphenidate is given in combination with agents that alter urinary pH.
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Halogenated Anesthetics
                           
                              There is a risk of sudden blood pressure increase during surgery.  If surgery is planned, methylphenidate hydrochloride tablets should not be taken the day of the surgery.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               