
               
               
               
                  12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                     
                        Phentermine is a sympathomimetic amine with pharmacologic activity similar to the prototype drugs of this class used in obesity, amphetamine (d- and d l-amphetamine). Drugs of this class used in obesity are commonly known as “anorectics” or “anorexigenics.” It has not been established that the primary action of such drugs in treating obesity is one of appetite suppression since other central nervous system actions, or metabolic effects, may also be involved.
                                    l
                        
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                           
                           
                              Typical of amphetamines include central nervous system stimulation and elevation of blood pressure. Tachyphylaxis and tolerance have been demonstrated with all drugs of this class in which these phenomena have been looked for.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                           
                           
                              Following the administration of Phentermine, Phentermine reaches peak concentrations (Cmax) after 3 to 4.4 hours.
                              
                                 Specific Populations
                              
                              
                                 Renal Impairment
                              
                              Phentermine was not studied in patients with renal impairment. The literature reported cumulative urinary excretion of phentermine under uncontrolled urinary pH conditions is 62% to 85%. Exposure increases can be expected in patients with renal impairment. Use caution when administering phentermine to patients with renal impairment.
                              
                                 Drug Interactions
                              
                              In a single-dose study comparing the exposures after oral administration of a combination capsule of 15 mg Phentermine and 92 mg topiramate to the exposures after oral administration of a 15 mg Phentermine capsule or a 92 mg topiramate capsule, there is no significant topiramate exposure change in the presence of Phentermine. However, in the presence of topiramate, Phentermine C and AUC increase 13% and 42%, respectively.
                                            max
                              
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         