
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  Mechanism of ActionBreast cancer cell growth may be estrogen-dependent. Aromatase is 
the principal enzyme that converts androgens to estrogens both in pre- and 
postmenopausal women. While the main source of estrogen (primarily estradiol) is 
the ovary in premenopausal women, the principal source of circulating estrogens 
in postmenopausal women is from conversion of adrenal and ovarian androgens 
(androstenedione and testosterone) to estrogens (estrone and estradiol) by the 
aromatase enzyme in peripheral tissues. Estrogen deprivation through aromatase 
inhibition is an effective and selective treatment for some postmenopausal 
patients with hormone-dependent breast cancer.
                  Exemestane is an irreversible, steroidal aromatase inactivator, structurally 
related to the natural substrate androstenedione. It acts as a false substrate 
for the aromatase enzyme, and is processed to an intermediate that binds 
irreversibly to the active site of the enzyme causing its inactivation, an 
effect also known as "suicide inhibition." Exemestane significantly lowers 
circulating estrogen concentrations in postmenopausal women, but has no 
detectable effect on adrenal biosynthesis of corticosteroids or aldosterone. 
Exemestane has no effect on other enzymes involved in the steroidogenic pathway 
up to a concentration at least 600 times higher than that inhibiting the 
aromatase enzyme.
                  
                  
                  PharmacokineticsFollowing oral administration to healthy postmenopausal women, 
exemestane is rapidly absorbed. After maximum plasma concentration is reached, 
levels decline polyexponentially with a mean terminal half-life of about 24 
hours. Exemestane is extensively distributed and is cleared from the systemic 
circulation primarily by metabolism. The pharmacokinetics of exemestane are dose 
proportional after single (10 to 200 mg) or repeated oral doses (0.5 to 50 mg). 
Following repeated daily doses of exemestane 25 mg, plasma concentrations of 
unchanged drug are similar to levels measured after a single dose.
                  Pharmacokinetic parameters in postmenopausal women with advanced breast 
cancer following single or repeated doses have been compared with those in 
healthy, postmenopausal women. Exemestane appeared to be more rapidly absorbed 
in the women with breast cancer than in the healthy women, with a mean tmax of 1.2 hours in the women with breast cancer and 2.9 hours 
in the healthy women. After repeated dosing, the average oral clearance in women 
with advanced breast cancer was 45% lower than the oral clearance in healthy 
postmenopausal women, with corresponding higher systemic exposure. Mean AUC 
values following repeated doses in women with breast cancer (75.4 ng∙h/mL) were 
about twice those in healthy women (41.4 ng∙h/mL). 
                  
                  AbsorptionFollowing oral administration of radiolabeled exemestane, at 
least 42% of radioactivity was absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract. 
Exemestane plasma levels increased by approximately 40% after a high-fat 
breakfast. 
                  
                  DistributionExemestane is distributed extensively into tissues. Exemestane is 
90% bound to plasma proteins and the fraction bound is independent of the total 
concentration. Albumin and α1-acid glycoprotein both 
contribute to the binding. The distribution of exemestane and its metabolites 
into blood cells is negligible. 
                  
                  Metabolism and ExcretionFollowing administration of radiolabeled exemestane to healthy 
postmenopausal women, the cumulative amounts of radioactivity excreted in urine 
and feces were similar (42 ± 3% in urine and 42 ± 6% in feces over a 1-week 
collection period). The amount of drug excreted unchanged in urine was less than 
1% of the dose. Exemestane is extensively metabolized, with levels of the 
unchanged drug in plasma accounting for less than 10% of the total 
radioactivity. The initial steps in the metabolism of exemestane are oxidation 
of the methylene group in position 6 and reduction of the 17-keto group with 
subsequent formation of many secondary metabolites. Each metabolite accounts 
only for a limited amount of drug-related material. The metabolites are inactive 
or inhibit aromatase with decreased potency compared with the parent drug. One 
metabolite may have androgenic activity (see Pharmacodynamics, Other Endocrine Effects). 
Studies using human liver preparations indicate that cytochrome P-450 3A4 (CYP 
3A4) is the principal isoenzyme involved in the oxidation of exemestane. 
                  
                  
                  Special Populations 
                  GeriatricHealthy postmenopausal women aged 43 to 68 years were studied in 
the pharmacokinetic trials. Age-related alterations in exemestane 
pharmacokinetics were not seen over this age range.
                  
                  GenderThe pharmacokinetics of exemestane following administration of a 
single, 25-mg tablet to fasted healthy males (mean age 32 years) were similar to 
the pharmacokinetics of exemestane in fasted healthy postmenopausal women (mean 
age 55 years).
                  
                  RaceThe influence of race on exemestane pharmacokinetics has not been 
evaluated.
                  
                  Hepatic InsufficiencyThe pharmacokinetics of exemestane have been investigated in 
subjects with moderate or severe hepatic insufficiency (Childs-Pugh B or C). 
Following a single 25-mg oral dose, the AUC of exemestane was approximately 3 
times higher than that observed in healthy volunteers (see PRECAUTIONS). 
                  
                  Renal InsufficiencyThe AUC of exemestane after a single 25-mg dose was approximately 
3 times higher in subjects with moderate or severe renal insufficiency 
(creatinine clearance less than 35 mL/min/1.73 m2) compared 
with the AUC in healthy volunteers (see PRECAUTIONS).
                  
                  PediatricThe pharmacokinetics of exemestane have not been studied in 
pediatric patients.
                  
                  Drug-Drug InteractionsExemestane is metabolized by cytochrome P-450 3A4 (CYP 3A4) and 
aldoketoreductases. It does not inhibit any of the major CYP isoenzymes, 
including CYP 1A2, 2C9, 2D6, 2E1, and 3A4. In a clinical pharmacokinetic study, 
ketoconazole showed no significant influence on the pharmacokinetics of 
exemestane. Although no other formal drug-drug interaction studies have been 
conducted, significant effects on exemestane clearance by CYP isoenzymes 
inhibitors appear unlikely. In a pharmacokinetic interaction study of 10 healthy 
postmenopausal volunteers pretreated with potent CYP 3A4 inducer rifampicin 600 
mg daily for 14 days followed by a single dose of exemestane 25 mg, the mean 
plasma Cmax and AUC 0–∞ of 
exemestane were decreased by 41% and 54%, respectively (see PRECAUTIONS and DOSAGE AND 
ADMINISTRATION).
                  
                  
                  Pharmacodynamics
                  Effect on EstrogensMultiple doses of exemestane ranging from 0.5 to 600 mg/day were 
administered to postmenopausal women with advanced breast cancer. Plasma 
estrogen (estradiol, estrone, and estrone sulfate) suppression was seen starting 
at a 5-mg daily dose of exemestane, with a maximum suppression of at least 85% 
to 95% achieved at a 25-mg dose. Exemestane 25 mg daily reduced whole body 
aromatization (as measured by injecting radiolabeled androstenedione) by 98% in 
postmenopausal women with breast cancer. After a single dose of exemestane 25 
mg, the maximal suppression of circulating estrogens occurred 2 to 3 days after 
dosing and persisted for 4 to 5 days.
                  
                  Effect on CorticosteroidsIn multiple-dose trials of doses up to 200 mg daily, exemestane 
selectivity was assessed by examining its effect on adrenal steroids. Exemestane 
did not affect cortisol or aldosterone secretion at baseline or in response to 
ACTH at any dose. Thus, no glucocorticoid or mineralocorticoid replacement 
therapy is necessary with exemestane treatment.
                  
                  
                  Other Endocrine EffectsExemestane does not bind significantly to steroidal receptors, 
except for a slight affinity for the androgen receptor (0.28% relative to 
dihydrotestosterone). The binding affinity of its 17-dihydrometabolite for the 
androgen receptor, however, is 100-times that of the parent compound. Daily 
doses of exemestane up to 25 mg had no significant effect on circulating levels 
of androstenedione, dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate, or 17-hydroxyprogesterone, 
and were associated with small decreases in circulating levels of testosterone. 
Increases in testosterone and androstenedione levels have been observed at daily 
doses of 200 mg or more. A dose-dependent decrease in sex hormone binding 
globulin (SHBG) has been observed with daily exemestane doses of 2.5 mg or 
higher. Slight, nondose-dependent increases in serum luteinizing hormone (LH) 
and follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) levels have been observed even at low 
doses as a consequence of feedback at the pituitary level. Exemestane 25 mg 
daily had no significant effect on thyroid function [free triiodothyronine 
(FT3), free thyroxine (FT4) and thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH)]. 
                  
                  Coagulation and Lipid EffectsIn study 027 of postmenopausal women with early breast cancer 
treated with exemestane (N=73) or placebo (N=73), there was no change in the 
coagulation parameters activated partial thromboplastin time [APTT], prothrombin 
time [PT] and fibrinogen. Plasma HDL cholesterol was decreased 6–9% in 
exemestane treated patients; total cholesterol, LDL cholesterol, triglycerides, 
apolipoprotein-A1, apolipoprotein-B, and lipoprotein-a were unchanged. An 18% 
increase in homocysteine levels was also observed in exemestane treated patients 
compared with a 12% increase seen with placebo.
               
               
            
         