
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  Hydromorphone hydrochloride is a pure opioid agonist with the principal therapeutic activity of analgesia. A significant feature of the analgesia is that it can occur without loss of consciousness. Opioid analgesics also suppress the cough reflex and may cause respiratory depression, mood changes, mental clouding, euphoria, dysphoria, nausea, vomiting and electroencephalographic changes. Many of the effects described below are common to the class of mu-opioid analgesics, which includes morphine, oxycodone, hydrocodone, codeine, and fentanyl. In some instances, data may not exist to demonstrate that hydromorphone possesses similar or different effects than those observed with other opioid analgesics. However, in the absence of data to the contrary, it is assumed that hydromorphone would possess these effects.
                  
                     Central Nervous System: 
                  
                  The precise mode of analgesic action of opioid analgesics is unknown. However, specific CNS opiate receptors have been identified. Opioids are believed to express their pharmacological effects by combining with these receptors. 
                  Hydromorphone depresses the cough reflex by direct effect on the cough center in the medulla.
                  Hydromorphone produces respiratory depression by direct effect on brain stem respiratory centers. The mechanism of respiratory depression also involves a reduction in the responsiveness of the brain stem respiratory centers to increases in carbon dioxide tension.
                  Hydromorphone causes miosis. Pinpoint pupils are a common sign of opioid overdose but are not pathognomonic (e.g., pontine lesions of hemorrhagic or ischemic origin may produce similar findings). Marked mydriasis rather than miosis may be seen with hypoxia in the setting of hydromorphone overdose.
                  
                     Gastrointestinal Tract and Other Smooth Muscle: 
                  
                  Gastric, biliary and pancreatic secretions are decreased by opioids such as hydromorphone. Hydromorphone causes a reduction in motility associated with an increase in tone in the gastric antrum and duodenum. Digestion of food in the small intestine is delayed and propulsive contractions are decreased. Propulsive peristaltic waves in the colon are decreased, and tone may be increased to the point of spasm. The end result is constipation. Hydromorphone can cause a marked increase in biliary tract pressure as a result of spasm of the sphincter of Oddi.
                  
                     Cardiovascular System: 
                  
                  Hydromorphone may produce hypotension as a result of either peripheral vasodilation, release of histamine, or both. Other manifestations of histamine release and/or peripheral vasodilation may include pruritus, flushing, and red eyes.
                  Effects on the myocardium after intravenous administration of opioids are not significant in normal persons, vary with different opioid analgesic agents and vary with the hemodynamic state of the patient, state of hydration and sympathetic drive.
                  
                     Pharmacokinetics and Metabolism Distribution: 
                  
                  At therapeutic plasma levels, hydromorphone is approximately 8-19% bound to plasma proteins. After an intravenous bolus dose, the steady state of volume of distribution [mean (%cv)] is 302.9 (32%) liters.
                  
                     Metabolism: 
                  
                  Hydromorphone is extensively metabolized via glucuronidation in the liver, with greater than 95% of the dose metabolized to hydromorphone-3-glucuronide along with minor amounts of 6-hydroxy reduction metabolites.
                  
                     Elimination: 
                  
                  Only a small amount of the hydromorphone dose is excreted unchanged in the urine. Most of the dose is excreted as hydromorphone-3-glucuronide along with minor amounts of 6-hydroxy reduction metabolites. The systemic clearance is approximately 1.96 (20%) liters/minute. The terminal elimination half-life of hydromorphone after an intravenous dose is about 2.3 hours.
                  
                     
                        Special Populations
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Hepatic Impairment: 
                     
                  
                  After oral administration of hydromorphone at a single 4 mg dose, mean exposure to hydromorphone (Cmax and AUC∞) is increased 4 fold in patients with moderate (Child-Pugh Group B) hepatic impairment compared with subjects with normal hepatic function. Due to increased exposure of hydromorphone, patients with moderate hepatic impairment should be started at a lower dose and closely monitored during dose titration. The pharmacokinetics of hydromorphone in patients with severe hepatic impairment has not been studied. A further increase in Cmax and AUC of hydromorphone in this group is expected. As such, the starting dose should be even more conservative (see 
                        DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION
                     ).
                  
                     Renal Impairment: 
                  
                  After oral administration of hydromorphone at a single 4 mg dose, mean exposure to hydromorphone (Cmax and AUC0-48) is increased in patients with impaired renal function by 2-fold, in moderate (CLcr = 40 - 60 mL/min) renal impairment and 3-fold in severe (CLcr < 30 mL/min) renal impairment compared with normal subjects (CLcr > 80 mL/min). In addition, in patients with severe renal impairment hydromorphone appeared to be more slowly eliminated with a longer terminal elimination half-life (40 hr) compared to patients with normal renal function (15 hr). Patients with moderate renal impairment should be started on a lower dose. Starting doses for patients with severe renal impairment should be even lower.
                  Patients with renal impairment should be closely monitored during dose titration. (see 
                        DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION
                     ).
                  
                     Pediatrics: 
                  
                  Pharmacokinetics of hydromorphone have not been evaluated in children.
                  
                     Geriatric: 
                  
                  The effect of age on the pharmacokinetics of hydromorphone has not been adequately evaluated.
                  
                     Gender: 
                  
                  Gender has little effect on the pharmacokinetics of hydromorphone. Females appear to have a higher Cmax (25%) than males with comparable AUC0-24 values. The difference observed in Cmax may not be clinically relevant.
                  
                     Pregnancy and Nursing Mothers: 
                  
                  Hydromorphone crosses the placenta. Hydromorphone is also found in low levels in breast milk, and may cause respiratory compromise in newborns when administered during labor or delivery.
               
               
            
         