
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     General
                     
                        Pentosan polysulfate sodium is a low molecular weight heparin-like compound. It has anticoagulant and fibrinolytic effects. The mechanism of action of pentosan polysulfate sodium in interstitial cystitis is not known.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Pharmacokinetics
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Absorption
                           
                              In a clinical pharmacology study in which healthy female volunteers received a single oral 300 or 450 mg dose of pentosan polysulfate sodium containing radiolabeled drug as a solution under fasted conditions, maximal levels of plasma radioactivity were seen approximately at a median of 2 hours (range 0.6-120 hours) after dosing. Based on urinary excretion of radioactivity, a mean of approximately 6% of a radiolabeled oral dose of pentosan polysulfate sodium is absorbed and reaches the systemic circulation.
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Food Effects
                                 
                                    In clinical trials, ELMIRON® was administered with water 1 hour before or 2 hours after meals; the effect of food on absorption of pentosan polysulfate sodium is not known.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Distribution
                           
                              Preclinical studies with parenterally administered radiolabeled pentosan polysulfate sodium showed distribution to the uroepithelium of the genitourinary tract with lesser amounts found in the liver, spleen, lung, skin, periosteum, and bone marrow. Erythrocyte penetration is low in animals.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Metabolism
                           
                              The fraction of pentosan polysulfate sodium that is absorbed is metabolized by partial desulfation in the liver and spleen, and by partial depolymerization in the kidney to a large number of metabolites. Both the desulfation and depolymerization can be saturated with continued dosing.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Excretion
                           
                              Following administration of an oral solution of a 300 or 450 mg dose of pentosan polysulfate sodium containing radiolabeled drug to groups of healthy subjects, plasma radioactivity declined with mean half-lives of 27 and 20 hours, respectively. A large proportion of the orally administered dose of pentosan polysulfate sodium (mean 84% in the 300 mg group and 58% in the 450 mg group) is excreted in feces as unchanged drug. A mean of 6% of an oral dose is excreted in the urine, mostly as desulfated and depolymerized metabolites. Only a small fraction of the administered dose (mean 0.14%) is recovered as intact drug in urine.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Special Populations
                           
                              The pharmacokinetics of pentosan polysulfate sodium has not been studied in geriatric patients or in patients with hepatic or renal impairment. See also 
                                    PRECAUTIONS-Hepatic Insufficiency
                                 .
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Drug-Drug Interactions
                           
                              In a study in which healthy subjects received pentosan polysulfate sodium 100 mg capsule or placebo every 8 hours for 7 days, and were titrated with warfarin to an INR of 1.4 to 1.8, the pharmacokinetic parameters of R-warfarin and S-warfarin were similar in the absence and presence of pentosan polysulfate sodium. INR for warfarin + placebo and warfarin + pentosan polysulfate sodium were comparable. See also 
                                    PRECAUTIONS
                                  on the use of ELMIRON® in patients receiving other therapies with anticoagulant effects.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        The mechanism by which pentosan polysulfate sodium achieves its effects in patients is unknown. In preliminary clinical models, pentosan polysulfate sodium adhered to the bladder wall mucosal membrane. The drug may act as a buffer to control cell permeability preventing irritating solutes in the urine from reaching the cells.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         