
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
                  No drug interaction trials have been conducted using EPZICOM tablets [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
               
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              •Ethanol: Decreases elimination of abacavir. (7.1)
                           
                              •Methadone: An increased methadone dose may be required in a small number of patients. (7.3)
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 Ethanol
                     
                        
                           Abacavir
                        
                        Abacavir has no effect on the pharmacokinetic properties of ethanol. Ethanol decreases the elimination of abacavir causing an increase in overall exposure [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 Interferon- and Ribavirin-based Regimens
                     
                        
                           Lamivudine
                        
                        Although no evidence of a pharmacokinetic or pharmacodynamic interaction (e.g., loss of HIV-1/HCV virologic suppression) was seen when ribavirin was coadministered with lamivudine in HIV-1/HCV co-infected subjects, hepatic decompensation (some fatal) has occurred in HIV-1/HCV co-infected subjects receiving combination antiretroviral therapy for HIV-1 and interferon alfa with or without ribavirin [see Warnings and Precautions (5.4), Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3 Methadone
                     
                        
                           Abacavir
                        
                        The addition of methadone has no clinically significant effect on the pharmacokinetic properties of abacavir. In a trial of 11 HIV-1-infected subjects receiving methadone-maintenance therapy with 600 mg of ZIAGEN twice daily (twice the currently recommended dose), oral methadone clearance increased [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)]. This alteration will not result in a methadone dose modification in the majority of patients; however, an increased methadone dose may be required in a small number of patients.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4 Trimethoprim/Sulfamethoxazole (TMP/SMX)
                     
                        
                           Lamivudine
                        
                        No change in dose of either drug is recommended [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)]. There is no information regarding the effect on lamivudine pharmacokinetics of higher doses of TMP/SMX such as those used to treat PCP.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         