
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
                  Fluticasone furoate is cleared by extensive first-pass metabolism mediated by CYP3A4. In a drug interaction trial of intranasal fluticasone furoate and the CYP3A4 inhibitor ketoconazole given as a 200-mg once-daily dose for 7 days, 6 of 20 subjects receiving fluticasone furoate and ketoconazole had measurable but low levels of fluticasone furoate compared with 1 of 20 receiving fluticasone furoate and placebo. Based on this trial and the low systemic exposure, there was a 5% reduction in 24-hour serum cortisol levels with ketoconazole compared with placebo. The data from this trial should be carefully interpreted because the trial was conducted with ketoconazole 200 mg once daily rather than 400 mg, which is the maximum recommended dosage. Therefore, caution is required with the coadministration of VERAMYST Nasal Spray and ketoconazole or other potent CYP3A4 inhibitors.
                  Based on data with another glucocorticoid, fluticasone propionate, metabolized by CYP3A4, coadministration of VERAMYST Nasal Spray with the potent CYP3A4 inhibitor ritonavir is not recommended because of the risk of systemic effects secondary to increased exposure to fluticasone furoate. High exposure to corticosteroids increases the potential for systemic side effects, such as cortisol suppression.
                  Enzyme induction and inhibition data suggest that fluticasone furoate is unlikely to significantly alter the cytochrome P450-mediated metabolism of other compounds at clinically relevant intranasal dosages.
               
               
               
                  
                     
                        Potent inhibitors of cytochrome P450 3A4 (CYP3A4) may increase exposure to fluticasone furoate. 
                        
                           
                              •Coadministration of ritonavir is not recommended. (5.6, 7)
                           
                              •Use caution with coadministration of other potent CYP3A4 inhibitors, such as ketoconazole. (5.6, 7)
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         