
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  Oxybutynin chloride exerts a direct antispasmodic effect on smooth muscle and inhibits the muscarinic action of acetylcholine on smooth muscle. Oxybutynin chloride exhibits only one-fifth of the anticholinergic activity of atropine on the rabbit detrusor muscle, but 4 to 10 times the antispasmodic activity. No blocking effects occur at skeletal neuromuscular junctions or autonomic ganglia (antinicotinic effects). 
                  Oxybutynin chloride relaxes bladder smooth muscle. In patients with conditions characterized by involuntary bladder contractions, cystometric studies have demonstrated that oxybutynin increases bladder (vesical) capacity, diminishes the frequency of uninhibited contractions of the detrusor muscle, and delays the initial desire to void. Oxybutynin thus decreases urgency and the frequency of both incontinent episodes and voluntary urination. 
                  Antimuscarinic activity resides predominantly in the R-isomer. A metabolite, desethyloxybutynin, has pharmacological activity similar to that of oxybutynin in in vitro studies. 
               
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Pharmacokinetics
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Absorption
                           
                              Following the first dose of oxybutynin chloride extended-release tablets, oxybutynin plasma concentrations rise for 4 to 6 hours; thereafter steady concentrations are maintained for up to 24 hours, minimizing fluctuations between peak and trough concentrations associated with oxybutynin.
                              The relative bioavailabilities of R- and S-oxybutynin from oxybutynin chloride extended-release are 156% and 187%, respectively, compared with oxybutynin. The mean pharmacokinetic parameters for R- and S-oxybutynin are summarized in Table 1. The plasma concentration-time profiles for R- and S-oxybutynin are similar in shape; Figure 1 shows the profile for R-oxybutynin. 
                              


                              



                                 Figure 1. Mean R-oxybutynin plasma concentrations following a single dose of oxybutynin chloride ER 10 mg and oxybutynin 5 mg administered every 8 hours (n = 23 for each treatment).
                              
                              Steady-state oxybutynin plasma concentrations are achieved by Day 3 of repeated oxybutynin chloride extended-release dosing, with no observed drug accumulation or change in oxybutynin and desethyloxybutynin pharmacokinetic parameters. 
                              Oxybutynin chloride extended-release steady-state pharmacokinetics were studied in 19 children aged 5 to 15 years with detrusor overactivity associated with a neurological condition (e.g. spina bifida). The children were on oxybutynin chloride extended-release total daily dose ranging from 5 mg to 20 mg (0.10 to 0.77 mg/kg). Sparse sampling technique was used to obtain serum samples. When all available data are normalized to an equivalent of 5 mg per day oxybutynin chloride extended-release, the mean pharmacokinetic parameters derived for R- and S-oxybutynin and R- and S-desethyloxybutynin are summarized in Table 2. The plasma-time concentration profiles for R- and S-oxybutynin are similar in shape; Figure 2 shows the profile for R-oxybutynin when all available data are normalized to an equivalent of 5 mg per day.
                              


                              



                                 Figure 2. Mean ± SD R- and S-Oxybutynin and R- and S-Desethyloxybutynin Pharmacokinetic Parameters in Children Aged 5 to 15 Following Administration of 5 mg to 20 mg Oxybutynin Chloride Extended-release Tablets Once Daily (n=19) All Available Data Normalized to an Equivalent of Oxybutynin Chloride Extended-release Tablets 5 mg Once Daily
                              
                              

                              

                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Figure 1. Mean R-oxybutynin plasma concentrations following a single dose of oxybutynin chloride ER 10 mg and oxybutynin 5 mg administered every 8 hours (n = 23 for each treatment)
                                 
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 Figure 2. Mean ± SD R- and S-Oxybutynin and R- and S-Desethyloxybutynin Pharmacokinetic Parameters in Children Aged 5 to 15 Following Administration of 5 mg to 20 mg Oxybutynin Chloride Extended-release Tablets Once Daily (n=19) All Available Data Normalized to an Equivalent of Oxybutynin Chloride Extended-release Tablets 5 mg Once Daily
                                 
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Food Effects
                           
                              The rate and extent of absorption and metabolism of oxybutynin are similar under fed and fasted conditions.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Distribution
                           
                              Plasma concentrations of oxybutynin decline biexponentially following intravenous or oral administration. The volume of distribution is 193 L after intravenous administration of 5 mg oxybutynin chloride. 
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Metabolism
                           
                              Oxybutynin is metabolized primarily by the cytochrome P450 enzyme systems, particularly CYP3A4 found mostly in the liver and gut wall. Its metabolic products include phenylcyclohexylglycolic acid, which is pharmacologically inactive, and desethyloxybutynin, which is pharmacologically active. Following oxybutynin chloride extended-release administration, plasma concentrations of R- and S-desethyloxybutynin are 73% and 92%, respectively, of concentrations observed with oxybutynin.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Excretion
                           
                              Oxybutynin is extensively metabolized by the liver, with less than 0.1% of the administered dose excreted unchanged in the urine. Also, less than 0.1% of the administered dose is excreted as the metabolite desethyloxybutynin.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Dose Proportionality
                           
                              Pharmacokinetic parameters of oxybutynin and desethyloxybutynin (Cmax and AUC) following administration of 5 mg to 20 mg of oxybutynin chloride extended-release tablets are dose proportional. 
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Special Populations
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Geriatric
                                 
                                    The pharmacokinetics of oxybutynin chloride extended-release were similar in all patients studied (up to 78 years of age).
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Pediatric
                                 
                                    The pharmacokinetics of oxybutynin chloride extended-release were evaluated in 19 children aged 5 to 15 years with detrusor overactivity associated with a neurological condition (e.g., spina bifida). The pharmacokinetics of oxybutynin chloride extended-release in these pediatric patients were consistent with those reported for adults (see Tables 1 and 2, and Figures 1 and 2 above).
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Gender
                                 
                                    There are no significant differences in the pharmacokinetics of oxybutynin in healthy male and female volunteers following administration of oxybutynin chloride extended-release.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Race
                                 
                                    Available data suggest that there are no significant differences in the pharmacokinetics of oxybutynin based on race in healthy volunteers following administration of oxybutynin chloride extended-release.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Renal Insufficiency
                                 
                                    There is no experience with the use of oxybutynin chloride extended-release in patients with renal insufficiency. 
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 Hepatic Insufficiency
                                 
                                    There is no experience with the use of oxybutynin chloride extended-release in patients with hepatic insufficiency. 
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Drug-Drug Interactions
                           
                              See PRECAUTIONS: Drug Interactions.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Clinical Studies
                     
                        Oxybutynin chloride extended-release was evaluated for the treatment of patients with overactive bladder with symptoms of urge urinary incontinence, urgency, and frequency in three controlled studies and one open-label study. The majority of patients were Caucasian (89%) and female (91.9%) with a mean age of 59 years (range, 18 to 98 years). Entry criteria required that patients have urge or mixed incontinence (with a predominance of urge) as evidenced by ≥ 6 urge incontinence episodes per week and ≥ 10 micturitions per day. Study 1 was a fixed dose escalation design, whereas the other studies used a dose adjustment design in which each patient’s final dose was adjusted to a balance between improvement of incontinence symptoms and tolerability of side effects. Controlled studies included patients known to be responsive to oxybutynin or other anticholinergic medications, and these patients were maintained on a final dose for up to 2 weeks. 
                        The efficacy results for the three controlled trials are presented in the following tables and figures. 
                        
                           Number of Urge Urinary Incontinence Episodes Per Week
                        
                        
                           
                        
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           Study of Number of Urge Urinary Incontinence Episodes Per Week
                           
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         