
                     
                     
                     
                        Drug Interactions
                     
                     
                        If diazepam is to be combined with other centrally acting agents, careful consideration should be given to the pharmacology of the agents employed particularly with compounds that may potentiate or be potentiated by the action of diazepam, such as phenothiazines, antipsychotics, anxiolytics/sedatives, hypnotics, anticonvulsants, narcotic analgesics, anesthetics, sedative antihistamines, narcotics, barbiturates, MAO inhibitors and other antidepressants.
                                    Centrally Acting Agents
                                        

                           
                        
                        Concomitant use with alcohol is not recommended due to enhancement of the sedative effect.
                                    Alcohol
                                        

                           
                        
                        Diazepam peak concentrations are 30% lower when antacids are administered concurrently. However, there is no effect on the extent of absorption. The lower peak concentrations appear due to a slower rate of absorption, with the time required to achieve peak concentrations on average 20 - 25 minutes greater in the presence of antacids. However, this difference was not statistically significant.
                                    Antacids
                                        

                           
                        
                        There is a potentially relevant interaction between diazepam and compounds which inhibit certain hepatic enzymes (particularly cytochrome P450 3A and 2C19). Data indicate that these compounds influence the pharmacokinetics of diazepam and may lead to increased and prolonged sedation. At present, this reaction is known to occur with cimetidine, ketoconazole, fluvoxamine, fluoxetine, and omeprazole.
                                    Compounds Which Inhibit Certain Hepatic Enzymes
                                        

                           
                        
                        There have also been reports that the metabolic elimination of phenytoin is decreased by diazepam.
                                    Phenytoin
                                        

                           
                        
                     
                     
                  
               