
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           EXALGO is not intended for patients taking Monoamine oxidase (MAO) inhibitors or within 14 days of stopping such treatment (7).
                           Mixed agonist/antagonist opioid analgesics may reduce the analgesic effect of EXALGO and/or may precipitate withdrawal symptoms (7.3).
                           Medications with anticholinergic activity when used with EXALGO may increase risk of urinary retention and/or severe constipation (7.4).
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 CNS Depressants
                     
                        The concomitant use of EXALGO with central nervous system depressants such as hypnotics, sedatives, general anesthetics, antipsychotics and alcohol may cause additive depressant effects and respiratory depression. Additionally, hypotension and profound sedation or coma could occur. When this combination is indicated, the dose of one or both agents should be reduced. The concomitant use of alcohol should be avoided [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 Monoamine Oxidase (MAO) Inhibitors
                     
                        MAO inhibitors may cause CNS excitation or depression, hypotension or hypertension if co-administered with opioids including EXALGO. EXALGO is not intended for patients taking MAO inhibitors or within 14 days of stopping such treatment.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3 Mixed Agonist/Antagonist Opioid Analgesics
                     
                        The concomitant use of EXALGO with morphine agonist/antagonists (buprenorphone, nalbuphine, pentazocine) could lead to a reduction of the analgesic effect by competitive blocking of receptors, thus leading to risk of withdrawal symptoms. Therefore, this combination is not recommended.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4 Anticholinergics
                     
                        Anticholinergics or other medications with anticholinergic activity when used concurrently with EXALGO may result in increased risk of urinary retention and/or severe constipation, which may lead to paralytic ileus.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.5 Cytochrome P450 Enzymes
                     
                        In vitro data suggest that hydromorphone in clinically relevant concentrations has minimal potential to inhibit the activity of human hepatic CYP450 enzymes including CYP1A2, 2C9, 2C19, 2D6, 3A4, and 4A11.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         