
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                            Strong CYP3A4 Inducers: Do not administer strong CYP3A4 inducers with CAMPTOSAR. (7.2)
                            Strong CYP3A4 Inhibitors: Do not administer strong CYP3A4 inhibitors with CAMPTOSAR. (7.3)
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1   5-Fluorouracil (5-FU) and Leucovorin (LV)
                     
                        In a phase 1 clinical study involving irinotecan, 5-fluorouracil (5-FU), and leucovorin (LV) in 26 patients with solid tumors, the disposition of irinotecan was not substantially altered when the drugs were co-administered. Although the Cmax and AUC0–24 of SN-38, the active metabolite, were reduced (by 14% and 8%, respectively) when irinotecan was followed by 5-FU and LV administration compared with when irinotecan was given alone, this sequence of administration was used in the combination trials and is recommended [see Dosage and Administration (2)]. Formal in vivo or in vitro drug interaction studies to evaluate the influence of irinotecan on the disposition of 5-FU and LV have not been conducted.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2   Strong CYP3A4 Inducers
                     
                        Exposure to irinotecan or its active metabolite SN-38 is substantially reduced in adult and pediatric patients concomitantly receiving the CYP3A4 enzyme-inducing anticonvulsants phenytoin, phenobarbital, carbamazepine, or St. John's wort. The appropriate starting dose for patients taking these or other strong inducers such as rifampin and rifabutin has not been defined. Consider substituting non-enzyme inducing therapies at least 2 weeks prior to initiation of CAMPTOSAR therapy. Do not administer strong CYP3A4 inducers with CAMPTOSAR unless there are no therapeutic alternatives.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3  Strong CYP3A4 or UGT1A1 Inhibitors
                     
                        Irinotecan and its active metabolite, SN-38, are metabolized via the human cytochrome P450 3A4 isoenzyme (CYP3A4) and uridine diphosphate-glucuronosyl transferase 1A1 (UGT1A1), respectively, [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)]. Patients receiving concomitant ketoconazole, a CYP3A4 and UGT1A1 inhibitor, have increased exposure to irinotecan and its active metabolite SN-38. Coadministration of CAMPTOSAR with other inhibitors of CYP3A4 (e.g., clarithromycin, indinavir, itraconazole, lopinavir, nefazodone, nelfinavir, ritonavir, saquinavir, telaprevir, voriconazole) or UGT1A1 (e.g., atazanavir, gemfibrozil, indinavir) may increase systemic exposure to irinotecan or SN-38. Discontinue strong CYP3A4 inhibitors at least 1 week prior to starting CAMPTOSAR therapy. Do not administer strong CYP3A4 or UGT1A1 inhibitors with CAMPTOSAR unless there are no therapeutic alternatives.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         