
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY 
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action 
                     
                        
                           Codeine: Codeine is a semisynthetic narcotic antitussive and analgesic with multiple actions qualitatively similar to those of morphine. The precise mechanism of action of codeine and other opiates is not known; however, codeine is believed to act centrally on the cough center. In excessive doses, codeine will depress respiration. Codeine can produce miosis, euphoria, and physical and physiological dependence.
                        
                           Chlorpheniramine: Chlorpheniramine is a propylamine derivative antihistamine (H1-receptor antagonist) of the alkylamine class that also possesses anticholinergic and sedative activity. It prevents released histamine from dilating capillaries and causing edema of the respiratory mucosa.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics 
                     
                        
                           Absorption
                        
                        Pharmacokinetic (PK) parameters (Mean ± SD) for CODEINE PHOSPHATE AND CHLORPHENIRAMINE MALEATE ER TABLETS in fasting, healthy volunteers are shown in the table below.
                        


                        



                           Food Effect
                        
                        The presence of a high-fat, high-calorie meal did not significantly impact the PK parameters of CODEINE PHOSPHATE AND CHLORPHENIRAMINE MALEATE ER TABLETS.
                        
                           Distribution
                        
                        Codeine has been reported to have an apparent volume of distribution of approximately 3-6 L/kg, indicating extensive distribution of the drug into tissues. About 7-25% of codeine, reportedly, is bound to plasma proteins. Codeine passes the blood brain barrier and the placental barrier. Small amounts of codeine and its metabolite, morphine, are transferred to human breast milk.  
                        Chlorpheniramine is widely distributed throughout the tissues of the body, including the central nervous system. It reportedly has an apparent steady-state volume of distribution of approximately 3.2 L/kg in adults and children and is about 70% bound to plasma proteins. Chlorpheniramine and its metabolites likely cross the placental barrier and are excreted into human breast milk.
                        
                           Metabolism
                        
                        About 70-80% of the administered dose of codeine is metabolized by conjugation with glucuronic acid to codeine-6‑ glucuronide (C6G) and via O-demethylation to morphine (about 5-10%) and N-demethylation to norcodeine (about 10%) respectively. UDP-glucuronosyltransferase (UGT) 2B7 and 2B4 are the major enzymes mediating glucurodination of codeine to C6G. Cytochrome P-450 (CYP) 2D6 and CYP3A4 are the major enzymes mediating O-demethylation and N-demethylation of codeine respectively. Morphine and norcodeine are further metabolized by conjugation with glucuronic acid. Morphine and its M6 glucuronide conjugate are pharmacologically active. Whether C6G has pharmacological activity is unknown. Norcodeine and M3 glucuronide conjugate of morphine are generally not considered to be pharmacologically active. 
                        Chlorpheniramine is rapidly and extensively metabolized via demethylation in the liver, forming mono- and didesmethyl derivatives. Oxidative metabolism of chlorpheniramine is catalyzed by cytochrome P-450 2D6.
                        
                           Elimination
                        
                        Approximately 90% of the total dose of codeine is excreted through the kidneys, of which approximately 10% is unchanged codeine. Plasma half-life of codeine was observed to be about 4 hours with CODEINE PHOSPHATE AND CHLORPHENIRAMINE MALEATE ER TABLETS. 
                        Chlorpheniramine and its metabolites are primarily excreted through the kidneys, with large individual variation. Urinary excretion depends on urine pH and flow rate. Plasma half-life of chlorpheniramine was observed to be about 21 hours with CODEINE PHOSPHATE AND CHLORPHENIRAMINE MALEATE ER TABLETS. 
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         