
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           Drug Interactions: Drugs Metabolized by P450 2D6: The biochemical activity of the drug metabolizing isozyme cytochrome P450 2D6 (debrisoquin hydroxylase) is reduced in a subset of the Caucasian population (about 7-10% of Caucasians are so-called “poor metabolizers”); reliable estimates of the prevalence of reduced P450 2D6 isozyme activity among Asian, African and other populations are not yet available. Poor metabolizers have higher than expected plasma concentrations of tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs) when given usual doses. Depending on the fraction of drug metabolized by P450 2D6, the increase in plasma concentration may be small, or quite large (8-fold increase in plasma AUC of the TCA).
                        In addition, certain drugs inhibit the activity of this isozyme and make normal metabolizers resemble poor metabolizers. An individual who is stable on a given dose of TCA may become abruptly toxic when given one of these inhibiting drugs as concomitant therapy. The drugs that inhibit cytochrome P450 2D6 include some that are not metabolized by the enzyme (quinidine; cimetidine) and many that are substrates for P450 2D6 (many other antidepressants, phenothiazines, and the Type 1C antiarrhythmics propafenone and flecainide). While all the selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs), e.g., citalopram, escitalopram, fluoxetine, sertraline, and paroxetine, inhibit P450 2D6, they may vary in the extent of inhibition. The extent to which SSRI-TCA interactions may pose clinical problems will depend on the degree of inhibition and the pharmacokinetics of the SSRI involved. Nevertheless, caution is indicated in the coadministration of TCAs with any of the SSRIs and also in switching from one class to the other. Of particular importance, sufficient time must elapse before initiating TCA treatment in a patient being withdrawn from fluoxetine, given the long half-life of the parent and active metabolite (at least 5 weeks may be necessary).
                        Concomitant use of tricyclic antidepressants with drugs that can inhibit cytochrome P450 2D6 may require lower doses than usually prescribed for either the tricyclic antidepressant or the other drug. Furthermore, whenever one of these other drugs is withdrawn from co-therapy, an increased dose of tricyclic antidepressant may be required. It is desirable to monitor TCA plasma levels whenever a TCA is going to be coadministered with another drug known to be an inhibitor of P450 2D6.
                        Doxepin is primarily metabolized by CYP2D6 (with
CYP1A2 & CYP3A4 as minor pathways) inhibitors or substrates of
CYP2D6 (i.e., quinidine, selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors
[SSRIs]) may increase the plasma concentration of doxepin when
administered concomitantly. The extent of interaction depends on the
variability of effect on CYP2D6. The clinical significance of this
interaction with doxepin has not been systematically evaluated.
                        
                           MAO
Inhibitors: Serious side effects and even death have been reported
following the concomitant use of certain drugs with MAO inhibitors.
Therefore, MAO inhibitors should be discontinued at least two weeks
prior to the cautious initiation of therapy with doxepin. The exact
length of time may vary and is dependent upon the particular MAO
inhibitor being used, the length of time it has been administered, and
the dosage involved.
                        
                        
                           Cimetidine:
Cimetidine has been reported to produce clinically significant
fluctuations in steady-state serum concentrations of various tricyclic
antidepressants. Serious anticholinergic symptoms (i.e., severe dry
mouth, urinary retention and blurred vision) have been associated with
elevations in the serum levels of tricyclic antidepressant when
cimetidine therapy is initiated. Additionally, higher than expected
tricyclic antidepressant levels have been observed when they are begun
in patients already taking cimetidine. In patients who have been
reported to be well controlled on tricyclic antidepressants receiving
concurrent cimetidine therapy, discontinuation of cimetidine has been
reported to decrease established steady-state serum tricyclic
antidepressant levels and compromise their therapeutic effects.
                        
                           Alcohol:
It should be borne in mind that alcohol ingestion may increase the
danger inherent in any intentional or unintentional doxepin overdosage.
This is especially important in patients who may use alcohol
excessively. 

                        
                        
                           Tolazamide:
A case of severe hypoglycemia has been reported in a type II diabetic
patient maintained on tolazamide (1 gm/day) 11 days after the addition
of doxepin (75 mg/day).
                        
                           Drowsiness:
Since drowsiness may occur with the use of this drug, patients should
be warned of the possibility and cautioned against driving a car or
operating dangerous machinery while taking the drug. Patients should
also be cautioned that their response to alcohol may be potentiated. 

                        
                        Sedating
drugs may cause confusion and over sedation in the elderly; elderly
patients generally should be started on low doses of doxepin and
observed closely (see PRECAUTIONS – Geriatric Use).
                        
                           Suicide:
Since suicide is an inherent risk in any depressed patient and may
remain so until significant improvement has occurred, patients should
be closely supervised during the early course of therapy. Prescriptions
should be written for the smallest feasible amount. 

                        
                        
                           Psychosis:
Should increased symptoms of psychosis or shift to manic symptomatology
occur, it may be necessary to reduce dosage or add a major tranquilizer
to the dosage regimen.
                     
                  
               