
                     
                     
                     
                        Drug-Drug Interactions:

                     
                     
                        Dihydrocodeine with Other Central Nervous System Depressants:
                        Patients receiving other opioid analgesics, sedatives or hypnotics, muscle relaxants, general anesthetics, centrally acting anti-emetics, phenothiazines or other tranquilizers, or alcohol concomitantly with this combination product may exhibit additive depressant effects on the central nervous system. When such combined therapy is contemplated, the dose of one or both agents should be reduced.
                        Dihydrocodeine with Monoamine Oxidase Inhibitors:
                        Dihydrocodeine, like all opioid analgesics, interacts with monoamine oxidase inhibitors causing central nervous system excitation and hypertension.
                        Dihydrocodeine with Mixed Agonist/Antagonist Opioid Analgesics:
                        Agonist/antagonist analgesics (i.e., pentazocine, nalbuphine, butorphanol and buprenorphine) may reduce the analgesic effect of this combination product.
                        
                           Acetaminophen-Drug Interactions:
                        
                        Chronic and excessive consumption of alcohol may increase the hepatotoxic risk of acetaminophen. The potential for hepatotoxicity with acetaminophen also may be increased in patients receiving anticonvulsants that induce hepatic microsomal enzymes (including phenytoin, barbiturates, and carbamazepine) or isoniazide. Chronic ingestion of large doses of acetaminophen may slightly potentiate the effects of warfarin- and indandione- derivative anticoagulants. Severe hypothermia is possible in patients receiving acetaminophen concomitantly with phenothiazines.
                        
                           Caffeine-Drug Interactions:
                        
                        Caffeine may enhance the cardiac inotropic effects of beta-adrenergic stimulating agents. Coadministration of caffeine and disulfiram may lead to a substantial decrease in caffeine clearance. Caffeine may increase the metabolism of other drugs such as phenobarbital and aspirin. Caffeine accumulation may occur when products or foods containing caffeine are consumed concomitantly with quinolones such as ciprofloxacin.
                     
                     
                  
               