


12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY





12.1 Mechanism of Action
Palonosetron is a 5-HT3 receptor antagonist with a strong binding affinity for this receptor and little or no affinity for other receptors.  3 receptor antagonist with a strong binding affinity for this receptor and little or no affinity for other receptors.  Cancer chemotherapy may be associated with a high incidence of nausea and vomiting, particularly when certain agents, such as cisplatin, are used.  5-HT3 receptors are located on the nerve terminals of the vagus in the periphery and centrally in the chemoreceptor trigger zone of the area postrema.  It is thought that chemotherapeutic agents produce nausea and vomiting by releasing serotonin from the enterochromaffin cells of the small intestine and that the released serotonin then activates 5-HT3 receptors located on vagal afferents to initiate the vomiting reflex3 receptors are located on the nerve terminals of the vagus in the periphery and centrally in the chemoreceptor trigger zone of the area postrema.  It is thought that chemotherapeutic agents produce nausea and vomiting by releasing serotonin from the enterochromaffin cells of the small intestine and that the released serotonin then activates 5-HTPostoperative nausea and vomiting is influenced by multiple patient, surgical and anesthesia related factors and is triggered by release of 5-HT in a cascade of neuronal events involving both the central nervous system and the gastrointestinal tract.  The 5-HT3 receptor has been demonstrated to selectively participate in the emetic response.3 receptor has been demonstrated to selectively participate in the emetic response.







12.2	Pharmacodynamics
The effect of palonosetron on blood pressure, heart rate, and ECG parameters including QTc were comparable to ondansetron and dolasetron in CINV clinical trials.   In PONV clinical trials the effect of palonosetron on the QTc interval was no different from placebo. In non-clinical studies palonosetron possesses the ability to block ion channels involved in ventricular de- and re-polarization and to prolong action potential duration. The effect of palonosetron on QTc interval was evaluated in a double blind, randomized, parallel, placebo and positive (moxifloxacin) controlled trial in adult men and women. The objective was to evaluate the ECG effects of I.V. administered palonosetron at single doses of 0.25, 0.75 or 2.25 mg in 221 healthy subjects. The study demonstrated no significant effect on any ECG interval including QTc duration (cardiac repolarization) at doses up to 2.25 mg. 







12.3	Pharmacokinetics
After intravenous dosing of palonosetron in healthy subjects and cancer patients, an initial decline in plasma concentrations is followed by a slow elimination from the body.  Mean maximum plasma concentration (Cmax) and area under the concentration-time curve (AUC0-∞) are generally dose-proportional over the dose range of 0.3-90 mcg/kg in healthy subjects and in cancer patients. Following single I.V. dose of palonosetron at 3 mcg/kg (or 0.21 mg/70 kg) to six cancer patients, mean (±SD) maximum plasma concentration was estimated to be 5.6 ± 5.5 ng/mL and mean AUC was 35.8 ± 20.9 ng•hr/mL.max) and area under the concentration-time curve (AUCFollowing I.V. administration of palonosetron 0.25 mg once every other day for 3 doses in 11 cancer patients, the mean increase in plasma palonosetron concentration from Day 1 to Day 5 was 42±34%.  Following I.V. administration of palonosetron 0.25 mg once daily for 3 days in 12 healthy subjects, the mean (±SD) increase in plasma palonosetron concentration from Day 1 to Day 3 was 110±45%.After intravenous dosing of palonosetron in patients undergoing surgery (abdominal surgery or vaginal hysterectomy), the pharmacokinetic characteristics of palonosetron were similar to those observed in cancer patients.DistributionDistributionPalonosetron has a volume of distribution of approximately 8.3 ± 
2.5 L/kg.  Approximately 62% of palonosetron is bound to plasma proteins.MetabolismMetabolismPalonosetron is eliminated by multiple routes with approximately 50% metabolized to form two primary metabolites: N-oxide-palonosetron and 6-S-hydroxy-palonosetron.  These metabolites each have less than 1% of the 5-HT3 receptor antagonist activity of palonosetron.  In vitro metabolism studies have suggested that CYP2D6 and to a lesser extent, CYP3A4 and CYP1A2 are involved in the metabolism of palonosetron.  However, clinical pharmacokinetic parameters are not significantly different between poor and extensive metabolizers of CYP2D6 substrates.3 receptor antagonist activity of palonosetron.  EliminationEliminationAfter a single intravenous dose of 10 mcg/kg [14C]-palonosetron, approximately 80% of the dose was recovered within 144 hours in the urine with palonosetron representing approximately 40% of the administered dose.  In healthy subjects, the total body clearance of palonosetron was 160 ± 35 mL/h/kg and renal clearance was 66.5± 18.2 mL/h/kg.  Mean terminal elimination half-life is approximately 40 hours.14C]-palonosetron, approximately 80% of the dose was recovered within 144 hours in the urine with palonosetron representing approximately 40% of the administered dose.  In healthy subjects, the total body clearance of palonosetron was 160 ± 35 mL/h/kg and renal clearance was 66.5± 18.2 mL/h/kg.  Mean terminal elimination half-life is approximately 40 hours.Special PopulationsSpecial Populations[See USE IN SPECIFIC POPULATIONS (8.5 - 8.8)].[See USE IN SPECIFIC POPULATIONS (




