
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Angiotensin II is a potent vasoconstrictor formed from angiotensin
I in a reaction catalyzed by angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE, kininase
II). Angiotensin II is the principal pressor agent of the renin-angiotensin
system (RAS) and also stimulates aldosterone synthesis and secretion by adrenal
cortex, cardiac contraction, renal resorption of sodium, activity of the sympathetic
nervous system, and smooth muscle cell growth. Irbesartan blocks the vasoconstrictor
and aldosterone-secreting effects of angiotensin II by selectively binding
to the AT1 angiotensin II receptor. There is also an AT2
 receptor in many tissues, but it is not involved in cardiovascular homeostasis.
                        Irbesartan is a specific competitive antagonist of AT1 receptors
with a much greater affinity (more than 8500-fold) for the AT1 receptor
than for the AT2 receptor and no agonist activity.
                        Blockade of the AT1 receptor removes the
negative feedback of angiotensin II on renin secretion, but the resulting
increased plasma renin activity and circulating angiotensin II do not overcome
the effects of irbesartan on blood pressure.
                        Irbesartan does not inhibit ACE or renin or affect other hormone
receptors or ion channels known to be involved in the cardiovascular regulation
of blood pressure and sodium homeostasis. Because irbesartan does not inhibit
ACE, it does not affect the response to bradykinin; whether this has clinical
relevance is not known.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        Irbesartan is an orally active agent that does not require biotransformation into an active form. The oral absorption of irbesartan is rapid and complete with an average absolute bioavailability of 60% to 80%. Following oral administration of irbesartan, peak plasma concentrations of irbesartan are attained at 1.5 to 2 hours after dosing. Food does not affect the bioavailability of irbesartan.
                        Irbesartan exhibits linear pharmacokinetics over the therapeutic dose range.
                        The terminal elimination half-life of irbesartan averaged 11 to 15 hours. Steady-state concentrations are achieved within 3 days. Limited accumulation of irbesartan (<20%) is observed in plasma upon repeated once-daily dosing.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Metabolism and Elimination
                     
                        Irbesartan is metabolized via glucuronide conjugation and oxidation.
Following oral or intravenous administration of 14C-labeled
irbesartan, more than 80% of the circulating plasma radioactivity is attributable
to unchanged irbesartan. The primary circulating metabolite is the inactive
irbesartan glucuronide conjugate (approximately 6%). The remaining oxidative
metabolites do not add appreciably to irbesartan’s pharmacologic activity.
                        Irbesartan and its metabolites are excreted by both biliary and
renal routes. Following either oral or intravenous administration of 14C-labeled
irbesartan, about 20% of radioactivity is recovered in the urine and the remainder
in the feces, as irbesartan or irbesartan glucuronide.
                        
                           In vitro studies of irbesartan oxidation by cytochrome
P450 isoenzymes indicated irbesartan was oxidized primarily by 2C9; metabolism
by 3A4 was negligible. Irbesartan was neither metabolized by, nor did it substantially
induce or inhibit, isoenzymes commonly associated with drug metabolism (1A1,
1A2, 2A6, 2B6, 2D6, 2E1). There was no induction or inhibition of 3A4.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Distribution
                     
                        Irbesartan is 90% bound to serum proteins (primarily albumin and α1-acid glycoprotein) with negligible binding to cellular components of blood. The average volume of distribution is 53 liters to 93 liters. Total plasma and renal clearances are in the range of 157 mL/min to 176 mL/min and 3.0 mL/min to 3.5 mL/min, respectively. With repetitive dosing, irbesartan accumulates to no clinically relevant extent.
                        Studies in animals indicate that radiolabeled irbesartan weakly crosses the blood-brain barrier and placenta. Irbesartan is excreted in the milk of lactating rats.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Special Populations
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Gender
                           
                              No gender-related differences in pharmacokinetics were observed in healthy elderly (age 65 to 80 years) or in healthy young (age 18 to 40 years) subjects. In studies of hypertensive patients, there was no gender difference in half-life or accumulation, but somewhat higher plasma concentrations of irbesartan were observed in females (11 to 44%). No gender-related dosage adjustment is necessary.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Geriatric
                           
                              In elderly subjects (age 65 to 80 years), irbesartan elimination half-life was not significantly altered, but AUC and Cmax values were about 20% to 50% greater than those of young subjects (age 18 to 40 years). No dosage adjustment is necessary in the elderly.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Race
                           
                              In healthy black subjects, irbesartan AUC values were approximately
25% greater than whites; there were no differences in Cmax values.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Renal Insufficiency
                           
                              The pharmacokinetics of irbesartan were not altered in patients
with renal impairment or in patients on hemodialysis. Irbesartan is not removed
by hemodialysis. No dosage adjustment is necessary in patients with mild to
severe renal impairment unless a patient with renal impairment is also volume
depleted. (See 
                                    WARNINGS: Hypotension in Volume- or Salt-Depleted Patients
                                  and 
                                    DOSAGE AND
ADMINISTRATION
                                 .)
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Hepatic Insufficiency
                           
                              The pharmacokinetics of irbesartan following repeated oral administration
were not significantly affected in patients with mild to moderate cirrhosis
of the liver. No dosage adjustment is necessary in patients with hepatic insufficiency.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Drug Interactions
                           
                              (See 
                                    PRECAUTIONS: Drug Interactions
                                 .)
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        In healthy subjects, single oral irbesartan doses of up to 300
mg produced dose-dependent inhibition of the pressor effect of angiotensin
II infusions. Inhibition was complete (100%) 4 hours following oral doses
of 150 mg or 300 mg and partial inhibition was sustained for 24 hours (60%
and 40% at 300 mg and 150 mg, respectively).
                        In hypertensive patients, angiotensin II receptor inhibition following
chronic administration of irbesartan causes a 1.5- to 2-fold rise in angiotensin
II plasma concentration and a 2- to 3-fold increase in plasma renin levels.
Aldosterone plasma concentrations generally decline following irbesartan administration,
but serum potassium levels are not significantly affected at recommended doses.
                        In hypertensive patients, chronic oral doses of irbesartan (up to 300 mg) had no effect on glomerular filtration rate, renal plasma flow, or filtration fraction. In multiple dose studies in hypertensive patients, there were no clinically important effects on fasting triglycerides, total cholesterol, HDL-cholesterol, or fasting glucose concentrations. There was no effect on serum uric acid during chronic oral administration, and no uricosuric effect.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Clinical Studies
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Hypertension
                           
                              The antihypertensive effects of irbesartan were examined in 7 major placebo-controlled 8 to 12 week trials in patients with baseline diastolic blood pressures of 95 mmHg to 110 mmHg. Doses of 1 mg to 900 mg were included in these trials in order to fully explore the dose-range of irbesartan. These studies allowed comparison of once- or twice-daily regimens at 150 mg/day, comparisons of peak and trough effects, and comparisons of response by gender, age, and race. Two of the 7 placebo-controlled trials identified above examined the antihypertensive effects of irbesartan and hydrochlorothiazide in combination.
                              The 7 studies of irbesartan monotherapy included a total of 1915 patients randomized to irbesartan (1 to 900 mg) and 611 patients randomized to placebo. Once-daily doses of 150 mg and 300 mg provided statistically and clinically significant decreases in systolic and diastolic blood pressure with trough (24 hours post-dose) effects after 6 to 12 weeks of treatment compared to placebo, of about 8 to 10/5 to 6 mmHg and 8 to 12/5 to 8 mmHg, respectively. No further increase in effect was seen at dosages greater than 300 mg. The dose-response relationships for effects on systolic and diastolic pressure are shown in Figures 1 and 2.
                              
                              Once-daily administration of therapeutic doses of irbesartan gave peak effects at around 3 to 6 hours and, in one ambulatory blood pressure monitoring study, again around 14 hours. This was seen with both once-daily and twice-daily dosing. Trough-to-peak ratios for systolic and diastolic response were generally between 60% to 70%. In a continuous ambulatory blood pressure monitoring study, once-daily dosing with 150 mg gave trough and mean 24-hour responses similar to those observed in patients receiving twice-daily dosing at the same total daily dose.
                              In controlled trials, the addition of irbesartan to hydrochlorothiazide doses of 6.25 mg, 12.5 mg, or 25 mg produced further dose-related reductions in blood pressure similar to those achieved with the same monotherapy dose of irbesartan. HCTZ also had an approximately additive effect.
                              Analysis of age, gender, and race subgroups of patients showed that men and women, and patients over and under 65 years of age, had generally similar responses. Irbesartan was effective in reducing blood pressure regardless of race, although the effect was somewhat less in blacks (usually a low-renin population).
                              The effect of irbesartan is apparent after the first dose, and it is close to its full observed effect at 2 weeks. At the end of an 8-week exposure, about 2/3 of the antihypertensive effect was still present one week after the last dose. Rebound hypertension was not observed. There was essentially no change in average heart rate in irbesartan-treated patients in controlled trials.
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 figure-1-2.jpg
                                 
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Nephropathy in Type 2 Diabetic Patients
                              
                           
                           
                              The Irbesartan Diabetic Nephropathy Trial (IDNT) was a randomized, placebo- and active-controlled, double-blind, multicenter study conducted worldwide in 1715 patients with type 2 diabetes, hypertension (SeSBP >135 mmHg or SeDBP >85 mmHg), and nephropathy (serum creatinine 1.0 to 3.0 mg/dL in females or 1.2 to 3.0 mg/dL in males and proteinuria ≥900 mg/day). Patients were randomized to receive irbesartan 75 mg, amlodipine 2.5 mg, or matching placebo once-daily. Patients were titrated to a maintenance dose of irbesartan 300 mg, or amlodipine 10 mg, as tolerated. Additional antihypertensive agents (excluding ACE inhibitors, angiotensin II receptor antagonists and calcium channel blockers) were added as needed to achieve blood pressure goal (≤135/85 or 10 mmHg reduction in systolic blood pressure if higher than 160 mmHg) for patients in all groups.
                              The study population was 66.5% male, 72.9% below 65 years of age and 72% White, (Asian/Pacific Islander 5.0%, Black 13.3%, Hispanic 4.8%). The mean baseline seated systolic and diastolic blood pressures were 159 mmHg and 87 mmHg, respectively. The patients entered the trial with a mean serum creatinine of 1.7 mg/dL and mean proteinuria of 4144 mg/day.
                              The mean blood pressure achieved was 142/77 mmHg for irbesartan, 142/76 mmHg for amlodipine, and 145/79 mmHg for placebo. Overall, 83.0% of patients received the target dose of irbesartan more than 50% of the time. Patients were followed for a mean duration of 2.6 years.
                              The primary composite endpoint was the time to occurrence of any one of the following events: doubling of baseline serum creatinine, end-stage renal disease (ESRD; defined by serum creatinine ≥6 mg/dL, dialysis, or renal transplantation) or death. Treatment with irbesartan resulted in a 20% risk reduction versus placebo (p=0.0234) (see Figure 3 and Table 1). Treatment with irbesartan also reduced the occurrence of sustained doubling of serum creatinine as a separate endpoint (33%), but had no significant effect on ESRD alone and no effect on overall mortality (see Table 1).
                              
                                 Figure 3. IDNT: Kaplan-Meier Estimates Of Primary Endpoint 
                                 

                                 (Doubling of Serum Creatinine, End-Stage Renal Disease or All-Cause Mortality) 
                              
                              
                              The percentages of patients experiencing an event during the course of the study can be seen in Table 1 below:
                              


                              


The secondary endpoint of the study was a composite of cardiovascular mortality and morbidity (myocardial infarction, hospitalization for heart failure, stroke with permanent neurological deficit, amputation). There were no statistically significant differences among treatment groups in these endpoints. Compared with placebo, irbesartan significantly reduced proteinuria by about 27%, an effect that was evident within 3 months of starting therapy. Irbesartan significantly reduced the rate of loss of renal function (glomerular filtration rate), as measured by the reciprocal of the serum creatinine concentration, by 18.2%.
                              Table 2 presents results for demographic subgroups. Subgroup analyses are difficult to interpret and it is not known whether these observations represent true differences or chance effects. For the primary endpoint, irbesartan’s favorable effects were seen in patients also taking other antihypertensive medications (angiotensin II receptor antagonists, angiotensin-converting-enzyme inhibitors and calcium channel blockers were not allowed), oral hypoglycemic agents, and lipid-lowering agents.
                              


                           



                           
                           
                              
                                 figure-3.jpg
                                 
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         