
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           Monitor for signs of serotonin syndrome when NUCYNTA® ER is used concurrently with SSRIs, SNRIs, tricyclic antidepressants, or triptans. (7.4)
                           Mixed agonist/antagonist opioids (i.e., pentazocine, nalbuphine, and butorphanol): May reduce analgesic effect and/or precipitate withdrawal symptoms. (7.6)
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1   Alcohol
                     
                        Concomitant use of alcohol with NUCYNTA® ER can result in an increase of tapentadol plasma levels and potentially fatal overdose of tapentadol. Instruct patients not to consume alcoholic beverages or use prescription or non-prescription products containing alcohol while on NUCYNTA® ER therapy [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2   Monoamine Oxidase Inhibitors
                     
                        NUCYNTA® ER is contraindicated in patients who are receiving monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOI) or who have taken them within the last 14 days due to potential additive effects on norepinephrine levels, which may result in adverse cardiovascular events [see Contraindications (4)].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3   CNS Depressants
                     
                        The concomitant use of NUCYNTA® ER with other CNS depressants including sedatives, hypnotics, tranquilizers, general anesthetics, phenothiazines, other opioids, and alcohol can increase the risk of respiratory depression, profound sedation, coma and death. Monitor patients receiving CNS depressants and NUCYNTA® ER for signs of respiratory depression, sedation and hypotension.
                        When combined therapy with any of the above medications is considered, the dose of one or both agents should be reduced [see Dosage and Administration (2.2)
                            and 
                              Warnings and Precautions (5.4)].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4    Serotonergic Drugs
                     
                        There have been post-marketing reports of serotonin syndrome with the concomitant use of tapentadol and serotonergic drugs (e.g., SSRIs and SNRIs). Caution is advised when NUCYNTA® ER is co-administered with other drugs that may affect serotonergic neurotransmitter systems such as SSRIs, SNRIs, MAOIs, and triptans. If concomitant treatment of NUCYNTA® ER with a drug affecting the serotonergic neurotransmitter system is clinically warranted, careful observation of the patient is advised, particularly during treatment initiation and dose increases [see Warning and Precautions (5.10)].
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.5   Muscle Relaxants
                     
                        Tapentadol may enhance the neuromuscular blocking action of skeletal muscle relaxants and produce an increased degree of respiratory depression. Monitor patients receiving muscle relaxants and NUCYNTA® ER for signs of respiratory depression that may be greater than otherwise expected.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.6   Mixed Agonist/Antagonist Opioid Analgesics
                     
                        Mixed agonist/antagonist analgesics (i.e., pentazocine, nalbuphine, and butorphanol) and partial agonists (e.g., buprenorphine) may reduce the analgesic effect of NUCYNTA® ER or precipitate withdrawal symptoms. Avoid the use of mixed agonist/antagonist analgesics in patients receiving NUCYNTA® ER.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.7   Anticholinergics
                     
                        The use of NUCYNTA® ER with anticholinergic products may increase the risk of urinary retention and/or severe constipation, which may lead to paralytic ileus.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         