
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  
                     
                        Many drugs affect thyroid hormone pharmacokinetics and metabolism (e.g., absorption, synthesis, secretion, catabolism, protein binding, and target tissue response) and may alter the therapeutic response to TIROSINT (7)
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 Drugs Known to Affect Thyroid Hormone Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        Many drugs affect thyroid hormone pharmacokinetics (e.g., absorption, synthesis, secretion, catabolism, protein binding, and target tissue response) and may alter the therapeutic response to TIROSINT. In addition, thyroid hormones and thyroid status have varied effects on the pharmacokinetics and actions of other drugs.
                        A listing of drug interactions with L-thyroxine (T4) is provided in the following tables. These tables should not be seen as comprehensive due to the introduction of new drugs that interact with the thyroidal axis or the discovery of previously unknown interactions. The prescriber should be aware of this fact and should consult appropriate reference sources (e.g., prescribing information of newly approved drugs, medical literature) for additional information if a drug-drug interaction with levothyroxine is suspected.
                        





                     



                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 Antidiabetic Therapy
                     
                        Addition of levothyroxine to antidiabetic or insulin therapy may result in increased antidiabetic agent or insulin requirements. Careful monitoring of diabetic control is recommended, especially when thyroid therapy is started, changed, or discontinued. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3 Oral Anticoagulants
                     
                        Levothyroxine increases the response to oral anticoagulant therapy. Therefore, a decrease in the dose of anticoagulant may be warranted with correction of the hypothyroid state or when the TIROSINT dose is increased. Coagulation tests should be closely monitored to permit appropriate and timely dosage adjustments.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4 Digitalis Glycosides
                     
                        The therapeutic effects of digitalis glycosides may be reduced by levothyroxine. Serum digitalis glycoside levels may be decreased when a hypothyroid patient becomes euthyroid, necessitating an increase in the dose of digitalis glycosides.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.5 Antidepressant Therapy
                     
                        Concurrent use of tricyclic (e.g., Amitriptyline) or tetracyclic (e.g., Maprotiline) antidepressants and levothyroxine may increase the therapeutic and toxic effects of both drugs, possibly due to increased receptor sensitivity to catecholamines. Toxic effects may include increased risk of cardiac arrhythmias and central nervous system stimulation; onset of action of tricyclics may be accelerated. Administration of sertraline in patients stabilized on levothyroxine may result in increased levothyroxine requirements.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.6 Ketamine
                     
                        Concurrent use may produce marked hypertension and tachycardia; cautious administration to patients receiving thyroid hormone therapy is recommended.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.7 Sympathomimetics
                     
                        Concurrent use may increase the effects of sympathomimetics or thyroid hormone. Thyroid hormones may increase the risk of coronary insufficiency when sympathomimetic agents are administered to patients with coronary artery disease.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.8 Tyrosine-Kinase Inhibitors
                     
                        Concurrent use of tyrosine-kinase inhibitors such as imatinib may cause hypothyroidism. TSH levels should be closely monitored in such patients.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.9 Drug-Food Interactions
                     
                        Consumption of certain foods may affect levothyroxine sodium absorption thereby necessitating adjustments in dosing. Soybean flour, cotton seed meal, walnuts, and dietary fiber may bind and decrease the absorption of levothyroxine sodium from the GI tract.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.10 Drug-Laboratory Test Interactions
                     
                        Changes in TBG concentration must be considered when interpreting T4 and T3 values, which necessitates measurement and evaluation of unbound (free) hormone and/or determination of the free T4 index (FT4I). Pregnancy, infectious hepatitis, estrogens, estrogen-containing oral contraceptives, and acute intermittent porphyria increase TBG concentrations. Decreases in TBG concentrations are observed in nephrosis, severe hypoproteinemia, severe liver disease, acromegaly, and after androgen or corticosteroid therapy. Familial hyper- or hypo-thyroxine binding globulinemias have been described, with the incidence of TBG deficiency approximating 1 in 9000.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         