
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1	Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Clotrimazole is an azole antifungal [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.4)
                           ].
                        Betamethasone dipropionate is a corticosteroid. Corticosteroids play a role in cellular signaling, immune function, inflammation, and protein regulation; however, the precise mechanism of action for the treatment of tinea pedis, tinea cruris and tinea corporis is unknown.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2	Pharmacodynamics
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Vasoconstrictor Assay:
                              
                              Studies performed with clotrimazole and betamethasone dipropionate cream indicate that these topical combination antifungal/corticosteroids may have vasoconstrictor potencies in a range that is comparable to high-potency topical corticosteroids. However, similar blanching scores do not necessarily imply therapeutic equivalence.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3	Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        Skin penetration and systemic absorption of clotrimazole and betamethasone dipropionate following topical application of clotrimazole and betamethasone dipropionate cream has not been studied.
                        The extent of percutaneous absorption of topical corticosteroids is determined by many factors, including the vehicle, the integrity of the epidermal barrier, and the use of occlusive dressings. Topical corticosteroids can be absorbed from normal intact skin. Inflammation and/or other disease processes in the skin may increase percutaneous absorption of topical corticosteroids. Occlusive dressings substantially increase the percutaneous absorption of topical corticosteroids [see Dosage and Administration (2)].
                        
                        Once absorbed through the skin, the pharmacokinetics of topical corticosteroids are similar to systemically administered corticosteroids. Corticosteroids are bound to plasma proteins in varying degrees. Corticosteroids are metabolized primarily in the liver and are then excreted by the kidneys. Some of the topical corticosteroids and their metabolites are also excreted into the bile.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.4	Microbiology
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Mechanism of Action:
                              
                              Clotrimazole, an azole antifungal agent, inhibits 14-α-demethylation of lanosterol in fungi by binding to one of the cytochrome P-450 enzymes. This leads to the accumulation of 14-α-methylsterols and reduced concentrations of ergosterol, a sterol essential for a normal fungal cytoplasmic membrane. The methylsterols may affect the electron transport system, thereby inhibiting growth of fungi.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Activity In Vitro and In Vivo:
                              
                              Clotrimazole has been shown to be active against most strains of the following dermatophytes, both in vitro and in clinical infections, Epidermophyton floccosum, Trichophyton mentagrophytes, and Trichophyton rubrum [see Indications and Usage (1)].
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Drug Resistance:
                              
                              Strains of dermatophytes having a natural resistance to clotrimazole have not been reported. Resistance to azoles, including clotrimazole, has been reported in some Candida species.
                              No single-step or multiple-step resistance to clotrimazole has developed during successive passages of Trichophyton mentagrophytes.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         