
               
               
               7	DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           Coadministration with amiodarone may result in serious symptomatic bradycardia. Use of HARVONI with amiodarone is not recommended (5.1, 6.2, 7.2)
                           P-gp inducers (e.g., rifampin, St. John's wort): May alter concentrations of ledipasvir and sofosbuvir. Use of HARVONI with P-gp inducers is not recommended (5.2, 7, 12.3) 
                           Consult the full prescribing information prior to use for potential drug interactions (5.1, 5.2, 7, 12.3)
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1	Potential for Drug Interaction
                     
                        As HARVONI contains ledipasvir and sofosbuvir, any interactions that have been identified with these agents individually may occur with HARVONI.
                        After oral administration of HARVONI, sofosbuvir is rapidly absorbed and subject to extensive first-pass hepatic extraction. In clinical pharmacology studies, both sofosbuvir and the inactive metabolite GS-331007 were monitored for purposes of pharmacokinetic analyses.
                        Ledipasvir is an inhibitor of the drug transporters P-gp and breast cancer resistance protein (BCRP) and may increase intestinal absorption of coadministered substrates for these transporters.
                        Ledipasvir and sofosbuvir are substrates of drug transporters P-gp and BCRP while GS-331007 is not. P-gp inducers (e.g., rifampin or St. John's wort) may decrease ledipasvir and sofosbuvir plasma concentrations, leading to reduced therapeutic effect of HARVONI, and the use with P-gp inducers is not recommended with HARVONI [see Warnings and Precautions (5.2)].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2	Established and Potentially Significant Drug Interactions
                     
                        Table 3 provides a listing of established or potentially clinically significant drug interactions. The drug interactions described are based on studies conducted with either HARVONI, the components of HARVONI (ledipasvir and sofosbuvir) as individual agents, or are predicted drug interactions that may occur with HARVONI [see Warnings and Precautions (5.1, 5.2) and Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                        


                     



                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3	Drugs without Clinically Significant Interactions with HARVONI
                     
                        Based on drug interaction studies conducted with the components of HARVONI (ledipasvir or sofosbuvir) or HARVONI, no clinically significant drug interactions have been either observed or are expected when HARVONI is used with the following drugs individually [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)]: abacavir, atazanavir/ritonavir, cyclosporine, darunavir/ritonavir, efavirenz, emtricitabine, lamivudine, methadone, oral contraceptives, pravastatin, raltegravir, rilpivirine, tacrolimus, tenofovir disoproxil fumarate, or verapamil. See Table 3 for use of HARVONI with certain HIV antiretroviral regimens [see 
                           
                              Drug Interactions (7.2)].
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         