
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  
                     Clinical Pharmacology
                  
                  Following an intravenous dose of 1 gram, serum concentrations were 110 mcg/mL at 5 minutes, declining to less than 1 mcg/mL at 4 hours. The half-life after an intravenous dose is 41 to 59 minutes. Approximately 85 percent of cefoxitin is excreted unchanged by the kidneys over a 6-hour period, resulting in high urinary concentrations. Probenecid slows tubular excretion and produces higher serum levels and increases the duration of measurable serum concentrations.
                  Cefoxitin passes into pleural and joint fluids and is detectable in antibacterial concentrations in bile.
                  In a published study of geriatric patients ranging in age from 64 to 88 years with normal renal function for their age (creatinine clearance ranging from 31.5 to 174 mL/min), the half-life for cefoxitin ranged from 51 to 90 minutes, resulting in higher plasma concentrations than in younger adults. These changes were attributed to decreased renal function associated with the aging process. 
                  
                     Microbiology 
                  
                  
                     Mechanism of Action 
                  
                  Cefoxitin is a bactericidal agent that acts by inhibition of bacterial cell wall synthesis. Cefoxitin has activity in the presence of some beta-lactamases, both penicillinases and cephalosporinases, of Gram-negative and Gram-positive bacteria. 
                  
                     Mechanism of Resistance 
                  
                  Resistance to cefoxitin is primarily through hydrolysis by beta-lactamase, alteration of penicillin-binding proteins (PBPs), and decreased permeability. 
                  Cefoxitin has been shown to be active against most isolates of the following bacteria, both in vitro and in clinical infections as described in the INDICATIONS AND USAGE (1) section: 
                  Gram-positive bacteria 
                  
                     Staphylococcus aureus (methicillin-susceptible isolates only) 
                  
                     Staphylococcus epidermidis (methicillin-susceptible isolates only) 
                  
                     Streptococcus agalactiae 
                  
                  
                     Streptococcus pneumoniae 
                  
                  
                     Streptococcus pyogenes 
                  
                  Gram-negative bacteria 
                  
                     Escherichia coli 
                  
                  
                     Haemophilus influenzae 
                  
                  
                     Klebsiella spp. 
                  
                     Morganella morganii 
                  
                  
                     Neisseria gonorrhoeae 
                  
                  
                     Proteus mirabilis 
                  
                  
                     Proteus vulgaris 
                  
                  
                     Providencia spp. 
                  Anaerobic bacteria 
                  
                     Clostridium spp. 
                  
                     Peptococcus niger 
                  
                  
                     Peptostreptococcus spp. 
                  
                     Bacteroides spp. 
                  The following in vitro data are available, but their clinical significance is unknown. At least 90 percent of the following microorganisms exhibit an in vitro minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) less than or equal to the susceptible breakpoint for cefoxitin. However, the efficacy of cefoxitin in treating clinical infections due to these microorganisms has not been established in adequate and well-controlled clinical trials. 
                  Gram-negative bacteria 
                  
                     Eikenella corrodens (non-β-lactamase producers) 
                  Anaerobic bacteria 
                  
                     Clostridium perfringens 
                  
                  
                     Prevotella bivia 
                  
                  
                     Susceptibility Test Methods 
                  
                  When available, the clinical microbiology laboratory should provide the results of in vitro susceptibility test results for antimicrobial drug products used in resident hospitals to the physician as periodic reports that describe the susceptibility profile of nosocomial and community-acquired pathogens. These reports should aid the physician in selecting an antibacterial drug product for treatment. 
                  
                     Dilution Techniques 
                  
                  Quantitative methods are used to determine antimicrobial minimal inhibitory concentrations (MICs). These MICs provide estimates of the susceptibility of bacteria to antimicrobial compounds. The MICs should be determined using a standardized test method1,3. The MIC values should be interpreted according to the criteria provided in Table 1.
                  
                     Diffusion Techniques
                  
                  Quantitative methods that require measurement of zone diameters also provide reproducible estimates of the susceptibility of bacteria to antimicrobial compounds. The zone size provides an estimate of the susceptibility of bacteria to antimicrobial compounds. The zone size should be determined using a standardized test method2,3. This procedure uses paper disks impregnated with 30 mcg cefoxitin to test the susceptibility of microorganisms to cefoxitin. The disk diffusion interpretive criteria are provided in Table 1. 
                  
                     Table 1. Susceptibility Test Interpretive Criteria for Cefoxitin2,4
                     
                  
                  


                  



                     a The clinical effectiveness of cefoxitin for treating organisms that produce intermediate results
                  is unknown2.
                  
                     b Values derived using either Brucella blood or Wilkins Chalgren agar are considered equivalent. Values for agar and broth microdilution are considered equivalent4.
                  A report of Susceptible indicates that the antimicrobial is likely to inhibit growth of the pathogen if the antimicrobial compound reaches the concentration at the infection site necessary to inhibit growth of the pathogen. A report of Intermediate indicates that the result should be considered equivocal, and if the microorganism is not fully susceptible to alternative, clinically feasible drugs, the test should be repeated. This category implies possible clinical applicability in body sites where the drug is physiologically concentrated or in situations where high dosage of drug can be used. This category also provides a buffer zone which prevents small uncontrolled technical factors from causing major discrepancies in interpretation. A report of Resistant indicates that the antimicrobial is not likely to inhibit growth of the pathogen if the antimicrobial compound reaches the concentrations usually achievable at the infection site; other therapy should be selected.
                  
                     Quality Control
                  
                  Standardized susceptibility test procedures require the use of laboratory controls to monitor and ensure the accuracy and precision of the supplies and reagents used in the assay, and the techniques of the individual performing the test1,2,3,4. Standard Cefoxitin powder should provide the following range of MIC values noted in Table 2. For the diffusion technique using the 30 mcg disk, the criteria in Table 7 should be achieved.
                  Table 2. Acceptable Quality Control Ranges for Cefoxitin
                  


