
               
               
               12  CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1  Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Hereditary angioedema (HAE) is a rare genetic
disorder caused by mutations to C1-esterase-inhibitor (C1-INH) located
on Chromosome 11q and inherited as an autosomal dominant trait.  HAE
is characterized by low levels of C1-INH activity and low levels of
C4.  C1-INH functions to regulate the activation of the complement
and intrinsic coagulation (contact system pathway) and is a major
endogenous inhibitor of plasma kallikrein.  The kallikrein-kinin system
is a complex proteolytic cascade involved in the initiation of both
inflammatory and coagulation pathways.  One critical aspect of this
pathway is the conversion of High Molecular Weight (HMW) kininogen
to bradykinin by the protease plasma kallikrein.  In HAE, normal regulation
of plasma kallikrein activity and the classical complement cascade
is therefore not present.  During attacks, unregulated activity of
plasma kallikrein results in excessive bradykinin generation.  Bradykinin
is a vasodilator which is thought by some to be responsible for the
characteristic HAE symptoms of localized swelling, inflammation, and
pain.
                        KALBITOR is a
potent (Ki = 25 pM), selective, reversible inhibitor of plasma kallikrein.
 KALBITOR binds to plasma kallikrein and blocks its binding site,
inhibiting the conversion of HMW kininogen to bradykinin.  By directly
inhibiting plasma kallikrein, KALBITOR reduces the conversion of HMW
kininogen to bradykinin and thereby treats symptoms of the disease
during acute episodic attacks of HAE.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2  Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        No exposure-response relationships for KALBITOR
to components of the complement or kallikrein-kinin pathways have
been established.
                        The
effect of KALBITOR on activated partial thromboplastin time (aPTT)
was measured because of potential effect on the intrinsic coagulation
pathway.  Prolongation of aPTT has been observed following intravenous
dosing of KALBITOR at doses ≥20 mg/m
         
 
  2.
 At 80 mg administered intravenously in healthy subjects, aPTT values
were prolonged approximately two-fold over baseline values and returned
to normal by 4 hours post-dose.
        

 
                        For patients taking KALBITOR, no significant
QT prolongation has been seen.  In a randomized, placebo-controlled
trial (EDEMA4) studying the 30 mg subcutaneous dose versus placebo,
12-lead ECGs were obtained at baseline, 2 hours and 4 hours post-dose
(covering the time of expected C
         
 
  max), and at
follow-up (day 7).  ECGs were evaluated for PR interval, QRS complex,
and QTc interval.  KALBITOR had no significant effect on the QTc interval,
heart rate, or any other components of the ECG.
        

 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3  Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        Following the administration of a single 30
mg subcutaneous dose of KALBITOR to healthy subjects, a mean (± standard
deviation) maximum plasma concentration of 586 ± 106 ng/mL was observed
approximately 2 to 3 hours post-dose.  The mean area under the concentration-time
curve was 3017 ± 402 ng*hr/mL.  Following administration, plasma concentration
declined with a mean elimination half-life of 2.0 ± 0.5 hours.  Plasma
clearance was 153 ± 20 mL/min and the volume of distribution was 26.4
± 7.8 L.  Based on a population pharmacokinetic analysis, body weight,
age, and gender were not found to affect KALBITOR exposure significantly.
 Ecallantide is a small protein (7054 Da) and renal elimination in
the urine of treated subjects has been demonstrated.
                        No pharmacokinetic data are available in patients
or subjects with hepatic or renal impairment.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         