
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           NSAIDs: Use caution with NSAIDs. (7.1)
                           Nephrotoxic drugs: Concomitant use of these drugs and/or substances which are tubularly secreted may result in delayed clearance. (7.2)
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 Non-Steroidal Anti-Inflammatory Drugs (NSAIDs)
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Although ibuprofen (400 mg four times a day) can decrease the clearance of pemetrexed, it can be administered with ALIMTA in patients with normal renal function (creatinine clearance ≥80 mL/min). No dose adjustment of ALIMTA is needed with concomitant NSAIDs in patients with normal renal function [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                              Caution should be used when administering NSAIDs concurrently with ALIMTA to patients with mild to moderate renal insufficiency (creatinine clearance from 45 to 79 mL/min). NSAIDs with short elimination half-lives (e.g., diclofenac, indomethacin) should be avoided for a period of 2 days before, the day of, and 2 days following administration of ALIMTA.
                              In the absence of data regarding potential interaction between ALIMTA and NSAIDs with longer half-lives (e.g., meloxicam, nabumetone), patients taking these NSAIDs should interrupt dosing for at least 5 days before, the day of, and 2 days following ALIMTA administration. If concomitant administration of NSAIDs is necessary, patients should be monitored closely for toxicity, especially myelosuppression, renal, and gastrointestinal toxicity.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 Nephrotoxic Drugs
                     
                        ALIMTA is primarily eliminated unchanged renally as a result of glomerular filtration and tubular secretion. Concomitant administration of nephrotoxic drugs could result in delayed clearance of ALIMTA. Concomitant administration of substances that are also tubularly secreted (e.g., probenecid) could potentially result in delayed clearance of ALIMTA.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         