
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              •CYP3A4 Inhibitors: Avoid use of strong CYP3A4 inhibitors. If coadministration is warranted, reduce the dose of VOTRIENT to 400 mg. (7.1) 
                           
                              •CYP3A4 Inducers: Consider an alternate concomitant medication with no or minimal enzyme induction potential or avoid VOTRIENT. (7.1)
                           
                              •CYP Substrates: Concomitant use of VOTRIENT with agents with narrow therapeutic windows that are metabolized by CYP3A4, CYP2D6, or CYP2C8 is not recommended. (7.3)
                           
                              •Concomitant use of VOTRIENT and simvastatin increases the risk of ALT elevations and should be undertaken with caution and close monitoring. (7.4)
                           
                              •Drugs that Raise Gastric pH: Avoid concomitant use of VOTRIENT with drugs that raise gastric pH. Consider short-acting antacids in place of proton pump inhibitors (PPIs) and H2 receptor antagonists. Separate antacid and pazopanib dosing by several hours. (7.5)
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 Drugs that Inhibit or Induce Cytochrome P450 3A4 Enzymes
                     
                        In vitro studies suggested that the oxidative metabolism of pazopanib in human liver microsomes is mediated primarily by CYP3A4, with minor contributions from CYP1A2 and CYP2C8. Therefore, inhibitors and inducers of CYP3A4 may alter the metabolism of pazopanib.
                        
                           CYP3A4 Inhibitors: Coadministration of pazopanib with strong inhibitors of CYP3A4 (e.g., ketoconazole, ritonavir, clarithromycin) increases pazopanib concentrations and should be avoided. Consider an alternate concomitant medication with no or minimal potential to inhibit CYP3A4 [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)]. If coadministration of a strong CYP3A4 inhibitor is warranted, reduce the dose of VOTRIENT to 400 mg [see Dosage and Administration (2.2)]. Grapefruit or grapefruit juice should be avoided as it inhibits CYP3A4 activity and may also increase plasma concentrations of pazopanib. 
                        
                           CYP3A4 Inducers: CYP3A4 inducers such as rifampin may decrease plasma pazopanib concentrations. Consider an alternate concomitant medication with no or minimal enzyme induction potential. VOTRIENT should not be used if chronic use of strong CYP3A4 inducers cannot be avoided [see Dosage and Administration (2.2)].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 Drugs that Inhibit Transporters
                     
                        In vitro studies suggested that pazopanib is a substrate of P-glycoprotein (P-gp) and breast cancer resistance protein (BCRP). Therefore, absorption and subsequent elimination of pazopanib may be influenced by products that affect P-gp and BCRP.
                        Concomitant treatment with strong inhibitors of P-gp or BCRP should be avoided due to risk of increased exposure to pazopanib. Selection of alternative concomitant medicinal products with no or minimal potential to inhibit P-gp or BCRP should be considered.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3 Effects of Pazopanib on CYP Substrates
                     
                        Results from drug-drug interaction trials conducted in cancer patients suggest that pazopanib is a weak inhibitor of CYP3A4, CYP2C8, and CYP2D6 in vivo, but had no effect on CYP1A2, CYP2C9, or CYP2C19 [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                        
                        Concomitant use of VOTRIENT with agents with narrow therapeutic windows that are metabolized by CYP3A4, CYP2D6, or CYP2C8 is not recommended. Coadministration may result in inhibition of the metabolism of these products and create the potential for serious adverse events [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4 Effect of Concomitant Use of VOTRIENT and Simvastatin
                     
                        Concomitant use of VOTRIENT and simvastatin increases the incidence of ALT elevations. Across monotherapy studies with VOTRIENT, ALT >3 X ULN was reported in 126/895 (14%) of patients who did not use statins, compared with 11/41 (27%) of patients who had concomitant use of simvastatin. If a patient receiving concomitant simvastatin develops ALT elevations, follow dosing guidelines for VOTRIENT or consider alternatives to VOTRIENT [see Warnings and Precautions (5.1)]. Alternatively, consider discontinuing simvastatin [see Warnings and Precautions (5.1)]. Insufficient data are available to assess the risk of concomitant administration of alternative statins and VOTRIENT.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.5 Drugs that Raise Gastric pH
                     
                        In a drug interaction trial in patients with solid tumors, concomitant administration of pazopanib with esomeprazole, a proton pump inhibitor (PPI), decreased the exposure of pazopanib by approximately 40% (AUC and Cmax). Therefore, concomitant use of VOTRIENT with drugs that raise gastric pH should be avoided. If such drugs are needed, short-acting antacids should be considered in place of PPIs and H2 receptor antagonists. Separate antacid and pazopanib dosing by several hours to avoid a reduction in pazopanib exposure [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         