
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  Vancomycin is poorly absorbed after oral administration.
                  In subjects with normal kidney function, multiple IV dosing of 1 g of vancomycin (15 mg/kg) infused over 60 minutes produces mean plasma concentrations of approximately 63 mcg/mL immediately at the completion of infusion, mean plasma concentrations of approximately 23 mcg/mL two hours after infusion, and mean plasma concentrations of approximately 8 mcg/mL 11 hours after the end of the infusion.  Multiple dosing of 500 mg infused over 30 minutes produces mean plasma concentrations of about 49 mcg/mL at the completion of infusion, mean plasma concentrations of about 19 mcg/mL two hours after infusion, and mean plasma concentrations of about 10 mcg/mL six hours after infusion.  The plasma concentrations during multiple dosing are similar to those after a single dose.
                  The mean elimination half-life of vancomycin from plasma is four to six hours in subjects with normal renal function.  In the first 24 hours, about 75% of an administered dose of vancomycin is excreted in urine by glomerular filtration.  Mean plasma clearance is about 0.058 L/kg/hr, and mean renal clearance is about 0.048 L/kg/hr.  Renal dysfunction slows excretion of vancomycin. In anephric patients, the average half-life of elimination is 7.5 days.  The distribution coefficient is from 0.3 to 0.43 L/kg. There is no apparent metabolism of the drug.  About 60% of an intraperitoneal dose of vancomycin administered during peritoneal dialysis is absorbed systemically in six hours.  Serum concentrations of about 10 mcg/mL are achieved by intraperitoneal injection of 30 mg/kg of vancomycin.  Vancomycin is not effectively removed by either hemodialysis or peritoneal dialysis; there have been no reports of vancomycin clearance with hemoperfusion.  
                  Total systemic and renal clearance of vancomycin may be reduced in the elderly.
                  Vancomycin is approximately 55% serum protein bound as measured by ultrafiltration at vancomycin serum concentrations of 10 to 100 mcg/mL.  After IV administration of vancomycin inhibitory concentrations are present in pleural, pericardial, ascitic and synovial fluids; in urine; in peritoneal dialysis fluid; and in atrial appendage tissue.  Vancomycin does not readily diffuse across normal meninges into the spinal fluid; but, when the meninges are inflamed, penetration into the spinal fluid occurs.
               
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Microbiology
                     
                        The bactericidal action of vancomycin results primarily from inhibition of cell-wall biosynthesis.  In addition, vancomycin alters bacterial-cell-membrane permeability and RNA synthesis.  There is no cross-resistance between vancomycin and other antibiotics. 
                        Vancomycin is not active 
                              in vitro
                            against gram-negative bacilli, mycobacteria, or fungi.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Synergy
                     
                        The combination of vancomycin and an aminoglycoside acts synergistically 
                              in vitro 
                           against many strains of 
                              Staphylococcus aureus, Streptococcus bovis, 
                           enterococci, and the viridans group streptococci.
                        Vancomycin has been shown to be active against most strains of the following microorganisms, both 
                              in vitro 
                           and in clinical infections as described in 
                              
                                  INDICATIONS AND USAGE
                              
                           . 
                        
                           
                              Aerobic gram-positive microorganisms
                           
                        
                           Diphtheroids
                           Enterococci (e.g
                              ., Enterococcus faecalis
                           )
                           Staphylococci, including 
                              Staphylococcus aureus 
                           and 
                              Staphylococcus epidermidis
                           
                        
                           (including heterogeneous methicillin-resistant strains)
                        
                           
                                 Streptococcus bovis
                           
                        
                           Viridans group streptococci
                        The following 
                              in vitro 
                           data are available, 
                              but their clinical significance is unknown.
                            
                        Vancomycin exhibits 
                              in vitro 
                           MICs of 1 mcg/mL or less against most (≥90%) strains of streptococci listed below and MICs of 4 mcg/mL or less against most (≥90%) strains of other listed microorganisms; however, the safety and effectiveness of vancomycin in treating clinical infections due to these microorganisms have not been established in adequate and well-controlled clinical trials.
                        
                           
                              Aerobic gram-positive microorganisms
                           
                        
                        
                           
                                 Listeria monocytogenes
                           
                        
                        
                           
                                 Streptococcus pyogenes
                           
                        
                        
                           
                                 Streptococcus pneumoniae 
                           (including penicillin-resistant strains)
                        
                           
                                 Streptococcus agalactiae
                           
                        
                        
                           
                              Anaerobic gram-positive microorganisms
                           
                        
                        
                           
                                 Actinomyces 
                           species
                        
                           
                                 Lactobacillus 
                           species
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Susceptibility Tests

                     
                     
                        
                           
                              Dilution Techniques
                           
                        
                        Quantitative methods are used to determine antimicrobial minimum inhibitory concentrations (MICs).  These MICs provide estimates of the susceptibility of bacteria to antimicrobial compounds.  The MICs should be determined using a standardized procedure.  Standardized procedures are based on a dilution method1 (broth or agar) or equivalent with standardized inoculum concentrations and standardized concentrations of vancomycin powder.  The MIC values should be interpreted according to the following criteria:
                        For testing aerobic microorganismsa other than streptococci:
                        


                        


For testing streptococcia other than 
                              Streptococcus pneumoniae
                           :
                        


                        


The current absence of data on resistant strains precludes defining any categories other than “Susceptible”.
                        Strains yielding MIC results suggestive of a “nonsusceptible” category should be submitted to a reference laboratory for further testing.
                        A report of “Susceptible” indicates that the pathogen is likely to be inhibited if the antimicrobial compound in the blood reaches the concentrations usually achievable.  A report of “Intermediate” indicates that the result should be considered equivocal, and, if the microorganism is not fully susceptible to alternative, clinically feasible drugs, the test should be repeated.  This category implies possible clinical applicability in body sites where the drug is physiologically concentrated or in situations where high dosage of drug can be used.  This category also provides a buffer zone which prevents small uncontrolled technical factors from causing major discrepancies in interpretation.  A report of “Resistant” indicates that the pathogen is not likely to be inhibited if the antimicrobial compound in the blood reaches the concentrations usually achievable; other therapy should be selected.  Standardized susceptibility test procedures require the use of laboratory control microorganisms to control the technical aspects of the laboratory procedures.  Standard vancomycin powder should provide the following MIC values:
                        


                        



                           
                              Diffusion Techniques
                           
                        
                        Quantitative methods that require measurement of zone diameters also provide reproducible estimates of the susceptibility of bacteria to antimicrobial compounds.  One such standardized procedure2 requires the use of standardized inoculum concentrations.  This procedure uses paper disks impregnated with 30-mcg vancomycin to test the susceptibility of microorganisms to vancomycin.  
                        Reports from the laboratory providing results of the standard single-disk susceptibility test with a 30-mcg vancomycin disk should be interpreted according to the following criteria:
                        For testing aerobic microorganisms other than enterococci and streptococci:
                        


                        


For testing enterococcia,b:
                        


                        


For testing streptococcia other than 
                              Streptococcus pneumoniae
                           :
                        


                        


The current absence of data on resistant strains precludes defining any categories other than “Susceptible”.  Strains yielding zone diameter results suggestive of a “nonsusceptible” category should be submitted to a reference laboratory for further testing.
                        Interpretation should be as stated above for results using dilution techniques.  Interpretation involves correlation of the diameter obtained in the disk test with the MIC for vancomycin.
                        As with standardized dilution techniques, diffusion methods require the use of laboratory control microorganisms that are used to control the technical aspects of the laboratory procedures.  For the diffusion technique, the 30-mcg vancomycin disk should provide the following zone diameters in these laboratory test quality control strains:
                        


