
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        
                           Leuprolide Acetate for Depot Suspension 
                        
                        Leuprolide acetate for depot suspension is a long-acting GnRH analog. A single injection of leuprolide acetate for depot suspension results in an initial elevation followed by a prolonged suppression of pituitary gonadotropins. Repeated dosing at quarterly intervals results in decreased secretion of gonadal steroids; consequently, tissues and functions that depend on gonadal steroids for their maintenance become quiescent. This effect is reversible on discontinuation of drug therapy.
                        Leuprolide acetate is not active when given orally.
                        
                           Norethindrone Acetate 
                        
                        Norethindrone acetate induces secretory changes in an estrogen-primed endometrium. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2  Pharmacodynamics 
                     
                        In a pharmacokinetic/pharmacodynamic study of leuprolide acetate 11.25 mg for 3-month administration in healthy female subjects (N=20), the onset of estradiol suppression was observed for individual subjects between day 4 and week 4 after dosing.  By the third week following the injection, the mean estradiol concentration (8 pg/mL) was in the menopausal range. Throughout the remainder of the dosing period, mean serum estradiol levels ranged from the menopausal to the early follicular range.
                        Serum estradiol was suppressed to ≤20 pg/mL in all subjects within four weeks and remained suppressed (≤40 pg/mL) in 80% of subjects until the end of the 12-week dosing interval, at which time two of these subjects had a value between 40 and 50 pg/mL. Four additional subjects had at least two consecutive elevations of estradiol (range 43-240 pg/mL) levels during the 12-week dosing interval, but there was no indication of luteal function for any of the subjects during this period.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        
                           Absorption
                        
                        
                           Leuprolide Acetate for Depot Suspension 
                        
                        Following a single injection of the three month formulation of leuprolide acetate for depot suspension (11.25 mg) in female subjects, a mean plasma leuprolide concentration of 36.3 ng/mL was observed at 4 hours. Leuprolide appeared to be released at a constant rate following the onset of steady-state levels during the third week after dosing and mean levels then declined gradually to near the lower limit of detection by 12 weeks. The mean (± standard deviation) leuprolide concentration from 3 to 12 weeks was 0.23 ± 0.09 ng/mL. However, intact leuprolide and an inactive major metabolite could not be distinguished by the assay which was employed in the study. The initial burst, followed by the rapid decline to a steady-state level, was similar to the release pattern seen with the monthly formulation.
                        
                           Norethindrone Acetate
                        
                        Norethindrone acetate is deacetylated to norethindrone after oral administration, and the disposition of norethindrone acetate is indistinguishable from that of orally administered norethindrone. Norethindrone acetate is absorbed from norethindrone acetate tablets, with maximum plasma concentration of norethindrone generally occurring at about 2 hours post-dose (see Figure 8). The pharmacokinetic parameters of norethindrone following single oral administration of 5 mg norethindrone acetate under fasting conditions in 29 healthy female volunteers are summarized in Table 5.
                        


                        



                           Figure 8. Mean Norethindrone Plasma Concentration Profile after a Single Dose of 5 mg Norethindrone Acetate Administered to 29 Healthy Female Volunteers under Fasting Conditions 
                        
                        
                        
                           Effect of Food: 
                        
                        The effect of food administration on the pharmacokinetics of norethindrone acetate has not been studied.
                        
                           Distribution
                        
                        
                           Leuprolide Acetate for Depot Suspension 
                        
                        The mean steady-state volume of distribution of leuprolide following intravenous bolus administration to healthy male volunteers was 27 L. In vitro binding to human plasma proteins ranged from 43% to 49%. 
                        
                           Norethindrone Acetate
                        
                        Norethindrone is 36% bound to sex hormone-binding globulin (SHBG) and 61% bound to albumin. Volume of distribution of norethindrone is about 4 L/kg.
                        
                           Metabolism
                        
                        
                           Leuprolide Acetate for Depot Suspension
                        
                        In healthy male volunteers, a 1 mg bolus of leuprolide administered intravenously revealed that the mean systemic clearance was 7.6 L/h, with a terminal elimination half-life of approximately 3 hours based on a two compartment model.
                        In rats and dogs, administration of 14C-labeled leuprolide was shown to be metabolized to smaller inactive peptides, a pentapeptide (Metabolite I), tripeptides (Metabolites II and III) and a dipeptide (Metabolite IV). These fragments may be further catabolized. 
                        In a pharmacokinetic/pharmacodynamic study of endometriosis patients, intramuscular 11.25 mg leuprolide acetate for depot suspension (n=19) every 12 weeks or intramuscular 3.75 mg leuprolide acetate for depot suspension (n=15) every 4 weeks was administered for 24 weeks.  There was no statistically significant difference in changes of serum estradiol concentration from baseline between the 2 treatment groups.
                        M-I plasma concentrations measured in 5 prostate cancer patients reached maximum concentration 2 to 6 hours after dosing and were approximately 6% of the peak parent drug concentration.  One week after dosing, mean plasma M-I concentrations were approximately 20% of mean leuprolide concentrations.
                        
                           Norethindrone Acetate
                        
                        Norethindrone undergoes extensive biotransformation, primarily via reduction, followed by sulfate and glucuronide conjugation. The majority of metabolites in the circulation are sulfates, with glucuronides accounting for most of the urinary metabolites.
                        
                           Excretion
                        
                        
                           Leuprolide Acetate for Depot Suspension 
                        
                        Following administration of leuprolide acetate for depot suspension 3.75 mg for 1-month administration  to 3 patients, less than 5% of the dose was recovered as parent and M-I metabolite in the urine.
                        
                           Norethindrone Acetate
                        
                        Plasma clearance value for norethindrone is approximately 0.4 L/hr/kg. Norethindrone is excreted in both urine and feces, primarily as metabolites. The mean terminal elimination half-life of norethindrone following a single dose administration of norethindrone acetate is approximately 9 hours.
                        
                           Specific Populations
                        
                        
                           Hepatic Impairment
                        
                        The effect of hepatic disease on the disposition of norethindrone after norethindrone acetate administration has not been evaluated. However, norethindrone acetate is contraindicated in markedly impaired liver function or liver disease [see Contraindications (4)].
                        The pharmacokinetics of the leuprolide acetate for depot suspension in hepatically impaired patients has not been determined.
                        
                           Renal Impairment
                        
                        The effect of renal disease on the disposition of norethindrone after norethindrone acetate administration has not been evaluated. In pre-menopausal women with chronic renal failure undergoing peritoneal dialysis who received multiple doses of an oral contraceptive containing ethinyl estradiol and norethindrone, plasma norethindrone concentration was unchanged compared to concentrations in pre-menopausal women with normal renal function.
                        The pharmacokinetics of the leuprolide acetate for depot suspension in renally impaired patients has not been determined.
                        
                           Race 
                        
                        The effect of race on the disposition of norethindrone after norethindrone acetate administration has not been evaluated.
                        
                           Drug Interactions 
                        
                        
                           Leuprolide Acetate for Depot Suspension 
                        
                        Leuprolide acetate for depot suspension is a peptide that is primarily degraded by peptidase and not by cytochrome P-450 enzymes as noted in specific studies, and the drug is only about 46% bound to plasma proteins, drug interactions would not be expected to occur.
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           concentration vs time
                           
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         