
               
               
               12  CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Ziv-aflibercept acts as a soluble receptor that binds to human VEGF-A (equilibrium dissociation constant KD of 0.5 pM for VEGF-A165 and 0.36 pM for VEGF-A121), to human VEGF-B (KD of 1.92 pM), and to human PlGF (KD of 39 pM for PlGF-2).  By binding to these endogenous ligands, ziv-aflibercept can inhibit the binding and activation of their cognate receptors.  This inhibition can result in decreased neovascularization and decreased vascular permeability.
                        In animals, ziv-aflibercept was shown to inhibit the proliferation of endothelial cells, thereby inhibiting the growth of new blood vessels.  Ziv-aflibercept inhibited the growth of xenotransplanted colon tumors in mice. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        Plasma concentrations of free and VEGF-bound ziv-aflibercept were measured using specific enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays (ELISAs).  Free ziv-aflibercept concentrations appear to exhibit linear pharmacokinetics in the dose range of 2–9 mg/kg.  Following 4 mg/kg every two weeks intravenous administration of ZALTRAP, the elimination half-life of free ziv-aflibercept was approximately 6 days (range 4–7 days).  Steady state concentrations of free ziv-aflibercept were reached by the second dose.  The accumulation ratio for free ziv-aflibercept was approximately 1.2 after administration of 4 mg/kg every two weeks.
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Specific Populations
                              Based on a population pharmacokinetic analysis, age, race, and gender did not have a clinically important effect on the exposure of free ziv-aflibercept.  Patients weighing ≥100 kg had a 29% increase in systemic exposure compared to patients weighing 50 to 100 kg. 
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Hepatic impairment
                                    
                                    Based on a population pharmacokinetic analysis which included patients with mild (total bilirubin >1.0×–1.5× ULN and any SGOT/AST, n=63) and moderate (total bilirubin >1.5×–3× ULN and any SGOT/AST, n=5) hepatic impairment, there was no effect of total bilirubin, aspartate amino transferase, and alanine amino transferase on the clearance of free ziv-aflibercept.  There is no data available for patients with severe hepatic impairment (total bilirubin >3× ULN and any SGOT/AST).
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Renal impairment 
                                    
                                    Based on a population pharmacokinetic analysis which included patients with mild (CLCR 50–80 mL/min, n=549), moderate (CLCR 30–50 mL/min, n=96), and severe renal impairment (CLCR <30 mL/min, n=5), there was no clinically important effect of creatinine clearance on the clearance of free ziv-aflibercept.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.6 Cardiac Electrophysiology 
                     
                        The effect of 6 mg/kg intravenous ZALTRAP every three weeks on QTc interval was evaluated in 87 patients with solid tumors in a randomized, placebo-controlled study.  No large changes in the mean QT interval from baseline (i.e., greater than 20 ms as corrected for placebo) based on Fridericia correction method were detected in the study.  However, a small increase in the mean QTc interval (i.e., less than 10 ms) cannot be excluded due to limitations of the study design. 
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         