
               
               
               DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
                  
              Aspirin

                  
                  

                  

                  
              Methotrexate

                  NSAIDs have been reported to competitively inhibit methotrexate accumulation in rabbit kidney slices. This may indicate that they could enhance the toxicity of methotrexate. Caution should be used when NSAIDs are administered concomitantly with methotrexate.

                  

                  
              Cyclosporine

                  Diclofenac sodium delayed-release tablets, like other NSAIDs, may affect renal prostaglandins and increase the toxicity of certain drugs. Therefore, concomitant therapy with diclofenac sodium delayed-release tablets may increase cyclosporine's nephrotoxicity. Caution should be used when diclofenac sodium delayed-release tablets are administered concomitantly with cyclosporine.

                  

                  
              ACE-inhibitors

                  Reports suggest that NSAIDs may diminish the antihypertensive effect of ACE inhibitors. This interaction should be given consideration in patients taking NSAIDs concomitantly with ACE inhibitors.

                  

                  
              Furosemide

                  Clinical studies, as well as post-marketing observations, have shown that diclofenac sodium delayed-release tablets can reduce the natriuretic effect of furosemide and thiazides in some patients. This response has been attributed to inhibition of renal prostaglandin synthesis. During concomitant therapy with NSAIDs, the patient should be observed closely for signs of renal failure (seeWARNINGS: Renal Effects), as well as to assure diuretic efficacy.

                  

                  

                  
              Lithium

                  NSAIDs have produced an elevation of plasma lithium levels and a reduction in renal lithium clearance. The mean minimum lithium concentration increased 15% and the renal clearance was decreased by approximately 20%. These effects have been attributed to inhibition of renal prostaglandin synthesis by the NSAID. Thus, when NSAIDs and lithium are administered concurrently, subjects should be observed carefully for signs of lithium toxicity.

                  

                  
              Warfarin

                  The effects of warfarin and NSAIDs on GI bleeding are synergistic, such that users of both drugs together have a risk of serious GI bleeding higher than users of either drug alone.

                  

               
               
            
         