
               
               
               
                  
                     12
                      
                      
                     CLINICAL 
PHARMACOLOGY
                     
                     
                     12.1 
                     Mechanism of Action
                  
                  Angiotensin II is formed from angiotensin I in a reaction 
catalyzed by angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE, kininase II). Angiotensin II is 
the principal pressor agent of the renin-angiotensin system, with effects that 
include vasoconstriction, stimulation of synthesis and release of aldosterone, 
cardiac stimulation, and renal reabsorption of sodium. Valsartan blocks the 
vasoconstrictor and aldosterone-secreting effects of angiotensin II by 
selectively blocking the binding of angiotensin II to the AT1 receptor in many tissues, such as vascular smooth muscle and 
the adrenal gland. Its action is therefore independent of the pathways for 
angiotensin II synthesis.
                  There is also an AT2 receptor found in many tissues, 
but AT2 is not known to be associated with cardiovascular 
homeostasis. Valsartan has much greater affinity (about 20,000-fold) for the 
AT1 receptor than for the AT2 
receptor. The primary metabolite of valsartan is essentially inactive with an 
affinity for the AT1 receptor about one 200th that of 
valsartan itself.
                  Blockade of the renin-angiotensin system with ACE inhibitors, which inhibit 
the biosynthesis of angiotensin II from angiotensin I, is widely used in the 
treatment of hypertension. ACE inhibitors also inhibit the degradation of 
bradykinin, a reaction also catalyzed by ACE. Because valsartan does not inhibit 
ACE (kininase II) it does not affect the response to bradykinin. Whether this 
difference has clinical relevance is not yet known. Valsartan does not bind to 
or block other hormone receptors or ion channels known to be important in 
cardiovascular regulation.
                  Blockade of the angiotensin II receptor inhibits the negative regulatory 
feedback of angiotensin II on renin secretion, but the resulting increased 
plasma renin activity and angiotensin II circulating levels do not overcome the 
effect of valsartan on blood pressure.
                  Hydrochlorothiazide is a thiazide diuretic. Thiazides affect the renal 
tubular mechanisms of electrolyte reabsorption, directly increasing excretion of 
sodium and chloride in approximately equivalent amounts. Indirectly, the 
diuretic action of hydrochlorothiazide reduces plasma volume, with consequent 
increases in plasma renin activity, increases in aldosterone secretion, 
increases in urinary potassium loss, and decreases in serum potassium. The 
renin-aldosterone link is mediated by angiotensin II, so coadministration of an 
angiotensin II receptor antagonist tends to reverse the potassium loss 
associated with these diuretics.
                  The mechanism of the antihypertensive effect of thiazides is unknown.
                  
                  
                  12.2 
                  Pharmacodynamics
                  
                     Valsartan
                     : 
Valsartan inhibits the pressor effect of angiotensin II infusions. An 
oral dose of 80 mg inhibits the pressor effect by about 80% at peak with 
approximately 30% inhibition persisting for 24 hours. No information on the 
effect of larger doses is available.
                  Removal of the negative feedback of angiotensin II causes a 2- to 3-fold rise 
in plasma renin and consequent rise in angiotensin II plasma concentration in 
hypertensive patients. Minimal decreases in plasma aldosterone were observed 
after administration of valsartan; very little effect on serum potassium was 
observed.
                  In multiple-dose studies in hypertensive patients with stable renal 
insufficiency and patients with renovascular hypertension, valsartan had no 
clinically significant effects on glomerular filtration rate, filtration 
fraction, creatinine clearance, or renal plasma flow.
                  In multiple-dose studies in hypertensive patients, valsartan had no notable 
effects on total cholesterol, fasting triglycerides, fasting serum glucose, or 
uric acid.
                  
                     Hydrochlorothiazide: After oral administration of 
hydrochlorothiazide, diuresis begins within 2 hours, peaks in about 4 hours and 
lasts about 6 to 12 hours.
                  
                  
                  12.3 
                  Pharmacokinetics
                  
                     Valsartan
                     : 
Valsartan peak plasma concentration is reached 2 to 4 hours after dosing. 
Valsartan shows bi-exponential decay kinetics following intravenous 
administration, with an average elimination half-life of about 6 hours. Absolute 
bioavailability for the capsule formulation is about 25% (range 10%-35%). Food 
decreases the exposure (as measured by AUC) to valsartan by about 40% and peak 
plasma concentration (Cmax) by about 50%. AUC and Cmax values of valsartan increase approximately linearly with 
increasing dose over the clinical dosing range. Valsartan does not accumulate 
appreciably in plasma following repeated administration.
                  
                     Hydrochlorothiazide
                     : Thiazide 
diuretics are eliminated by the kidney, with a terminal half-life of 5-15 
hours.
                  
                     Geriatric
                     : 
Exposure (measured by AUC) to valsartan is higher by 70% and the 
half-life is longer by 35% in the elderly than in the young. No dosage 
adjustment is necessary [See 
                     Dosage and Administration (2.1
                     )].
                  
                     Gender
                     : 
Pharmacokinetics of valsartan does not differ significantly between males 
and females.
                  
                     Race
                     : 
Pharmacokinetic differences due to race have not been studied.
                  
                     Renal Insufficiency
                     : 
There is no apparent correlation between renal function (measured by 
creatinine clearance) and exposure (measured by AUC) to valsartan in patients 
with different degrees of renal impairment. Consequently, dose adjustment is not 
required in patients with mild-to-moderate renal dysfunction. No studies have 
been performed in patients with severe impairment of renal function (creatinine 
clearance greater than 10 mL/min). Valsartan is not removed from the plasma by 
hemodialysis. In the case of severe renal disease, exercise care with dosing of 
valsartan [See 
                     Dosage and 
Administration (2.1)].
                  In a study of patients with impaired renal function (mean creatinine 
clearance of 19 mL/min), the half-life of hydrochlorothiazide elimination was 
lengthened to 21 hours.
                  
                     Hepatic Insufficiency
                     : 
On average, patients with mild-to-moderate chronic liver disease have 
twice the exposure (measured by AUC values) to valsartan of healthy volunteers 
(matched by age, sex, and weight). In general, no dosage adjustment is needed in 
patients with mild-to-moderate liver disease. Care should be exercised in 
patients with liver disease [See 
                     Dosage and Administration (2.1)].
                  
                     Distribution
                  
                  
                     Valsartan
                     : The steady state 
volume of distribution of valsartan after intravenous administration is small 
(17 L), indicating that valsartan does not distribute into tissues extensively. 
Valsartan is highly bound to serum proteins (95%), mainly serum albumin.
                  
                     Hydrochlorothiazide
                     : 
Hydrochlorothiazide crosses the placental but not the blood-brain barrier 
and is excreted in breast milk.
                  
                     Metabolism
                  
                  
                     Valsartan
                     : The primary 
metabolite, accounting for about 9% of dose, is valeryl 4-hydroxy valsartan. The 
enzyme(s) responsible for valsartan metabolism have not been identified but do 
not seem to be CYP 450 isozymes.
                  
                     Hydrochlorothiazide
                     : Is not 
metabolized.
                  
                     Excretion
                  
                  
                     Valsartan
                     : Valsartan, when 
administered as an oral solution, is primarily recovered in feces (about 83% of 
dose) and urine (about 13% of dose). The recovery is mainly as unchanged drug, 
with only about 20% of dose recovered as metabolites.
                  Following intravenous administration, plasma clearance of valsartan is about 
2 L/h and its renal clearance is 0.62 L/h (about 30% of total clearance).
                  Hydrochlorothiazide: Hydrochlorothiazide is not 
metabolized but is eliminated rapidly by the kidney. At least 61% of the oral 
dose is eliminated as unchanged drug within 24 hours. The elimination half-life 
is between 5.8 and 18.9 hours
               
            
         