
               
               
               Drug Interactions:

               
                  When given concurrently the following drugs may interact with thiazide diuretics:

                  
                     Alcohol, barbiturates, or narcotics - potentiation of orthostatic hypotension may occur.

                  Antidiabetic drugs - (oral agents and insulin) dosage adjustment of the antidiabetic drug may be required.

                  Other antihypertensive drugs - additive effect or potentiation. 

                  Cholestyramine and colestipol resins - Cholestyramine and colestipol resins bind the hydrochlorothiazide and reduce its absorption from the gastrointestinal tract by up to 85 and 43 percent, respectively. 

                  Corticosteroid, ACTH - intensified electrolyte depletion, particularly hypokalemia. 

                  Pressor amines (e.g., norepinephrine) - possible decreased response to pressor amines but not sufficient to preclude their use. 

                  Skeletal muscle relaxants, nondepolarizing (e.g., tubocurarine) - possible increased responsiveness to the muscle relaxant. 

                  Lithium - generally should not be given with diuretics. Diuretic agents reduce the renal clearance of lithium and greatly increase the risk of lithium toxicity. Refer to the package insert for lithium preparations before use of such preparations with Hydrochlorothiazide Capsules. 

                  Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs - In some patients, the administration of a non-steroidal anti-inflammatory agent can reduce the diuretic, natriuretic, and antihypertensive effects of loop, potassiumsparing and thiazide diuretics. When Hydrochlorothiazide Capsules and non-steroidal anti-inflammatory agents are used concomitantly, the patients should be observed closely to determine if the desired effect of the diuretic is obtained. 

               
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Drug/Laboratory Test Interactions

                     
                        Thiazides should be discontinued before carrying out tests for parathyroid function (see PRECAUTIONS, General). 

                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Carcinogenesis, Mutagenesis, Impairment of Fertility:

                     
                        Two-year feeding studies in mice and rats conducted under the auspices of the National Toxicology Program (NTP) uncovered no evidence of a carcinogenic potential of hydrochlorothiazide in female mice (at doses of up to approximately 600 mg/kg/day) or in male and female rats (at doses of approximately 100 mg/kg/day). The NTP, however, found equivocal evidence for hepatocarcinogenicity in male mice. Hydrochlorothiazide was not genotoxic in vitro in the Ames mutagenicity assay of Salmonella typhimurium strains TA 98, TA 100, TA 1535, TA 1537, and TA 1538 and in the Chinese Hamster Ovary (CHO) test for chromosomal aberrations, or in vivo in assays using mouse germinal cell chromosomes, Chinese hamster bone marrow chromosomes, and the Drosophila sex-linked recessive lethal trait gene. Positive test results were obtained only in the in vitro CHO Sister Chromatid Exchange (clastogenicity) and in the Mouse Lymphoma Cell (mutagenicity) assays, using concentrations of hydrochlorothiazide from 43 to 1300 mcg/mL, and in the Aspergillus nidulans non-disjunction assay at an unspecified concentration. 

                        Hydrochlorothiazide had no adverse effects on the fertility of mice and rats of either sex in studies wherein these species were exposed, via their diet, to doses of up to 100 and 4 mg/kg, respectively, prior to conception and throughout gestation. 

                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Pregnancy:

                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Teratogenic Effects:

                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    Pregnancy Category B: Studies in which hydrochlorothiazide was orally administered to pregnant mice and rats during their respective periods of major organogenesis at doses up to 3000 and 1000 mg hydrochlorothiazide/kg, respectively, provided no evidence of harm to the fetus. 

                                    There are, however, no adequate and well-controlled studies in pregnant women. Because animal reproduction studies are not always predictive of human response, this drug should be used during pregnancy only if clearly needed. 

                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Nonteratogenic Effects:

                           
                              Thiazides cross the placental barrier and appear in cord blood. There is a risk of fetal or neonatal jaundice, thrombocytopenia, and possibly other adverse reactions that have occurred in adults. 

                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Nursing Mothers:

                     
                        Thiazides are excreted in breast milk. Because of the potential for serious adverse reactions in nursing infants, a decision should be made whether to discontinue nursing or to discontinue hydrochlorothiazide, taking into account the importance of the drug to the mother. 

                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Pediatric Use:

                     
                        Safety and effectiveness in pediatric patients have not been established.

                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Geriatric Use:

                     
                        A greater blood pressure reduction and an increase in side effects may be observed in the elderly (i.e. >65 years) with hydrochlorothiazide. Starting treatment with the lowest available dose of hydrochlorothiazide (12.5 mg) is therefore recommended. If further titration is required, 12.5 mg increments should be utilized. 

                     
                     
                  
               
            
         