
               
               
               12	CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1	Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Rifapentine, a cyclopentyl rifamycin, is an antimycobacterial agent [see 
                              Clinical Pharmacology, Microbiology (12.4)
                           ].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3	Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        When oral doses of PRIFTIN were administered once daily or once every 72 hours to healthy volunteers for 10 days, single dose AUC (0–∞) of rifapentine was similar to its steady-state AUCss (0–24h) or AUCss (0–72h) values, suggesting no significant auto-induction effect on steady-state pharmacokinetics of rifapentine. Steady-state conditions were achieved by day 10 following daily administration of PRIFTIN 600 mg. No plasma accumulation of rifapentine and 25-desacetyl rifapentine (active metabolite) is expected after once weekly administration of PRIFTIN.
                        The pharmacokinetic parameters of rifapentine and 25-desacetyl rifapentine on day 10 following oral administration of 600 mg PRIFTIN every 72 hours to healthy volunteers are described in Table 5.
                        


                        


The pharmacokinetic parameters of rifapentine and 25-desacetyl rifapentine following single-dose oral administration of 900 mg PRIFTIN in combination with 900 mg isoniazid in fed conditions are described in Table 6.
                        


                     



                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Absorption
                              
                              The absolute bioavailability of PRIFTIN has not been determined. The relative bioavailability (with an oral solution as a reference) of PRIFTIN after a single 600 mg dose to healthy adult volunteers was 70%. The maximum concentrations were achieved from 5 hours to 6 hours after administration of the 600 mg PRIFTIN dose.
                              The administration of PRIFTIN with a high fat meal increased rifapentine Cmax and AUC by 40% to 50% over that observed when PRIFTIN was administered under fasting conditions.
                              The administration of PRIFTIN (900 mg single dose) and isoniazid (900 mg single dose) with a low fat, high carbohydrate breakfast, led to a 47% and 51% increase in rifapentine Cmax and AUC, respectively. In contrast, the ingestion of the same meal decreased isoniazid Cmax and AUC by 46% and of 23%, respectively.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Distribution
                              
                              In a population pharmacokinetic analysis in 351 tuberculosis patients who received 600 mg PRIFTIN in combination with isoniazid, pyrazinamide and ethambutol, the estimated apparent volume of distribution was 70.2 ± 9.1 L. In healthy volunteers, rifapentine and 25-desacetyl rifapentine were 97.7% and 93.2% bound to plasma proteins, respectively. Rifapentine was mainly bound to albumin. Similar extent of protein binding was observed in healthy volunteers, asymptomatic HIV-infected subjects and hepatically impaired subjects.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Metabolism/Excretion
                              
                              Following a single 600 mg oral dose of radiolabeled rifapentine to healthy volunteers (n=4), 87% of the total 14C rifapentine was recovered in the urine (17%) and feces (70%). Greater than 80% of the total 14C rifapentine dose was excreted from the body within 7 days. Rifapentine was hydrolyzed by an esterase enzyme to form a microbiologically active 25-desacetyl rifapentine. Rifapentine and 25-desacetyl rifapentine accounted for 99% of the total radioactivity in plasma. Plasma AUC(0–∞) and Cmax values of the 25-desacetyl rifapentine metabolite were one-half and one-third those of the rifapentine, respectively. Based upon relative in vitro activities and AUC(0–∞) values, rifapentine and 25-desacetyl rifapentine potentially contributes 62% and 38% to the clinical activities against M. tuberculosis, respectively.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Specific Populations
                              
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Gender: In a population pharmacokinetics analysis of sparse blood samples obtained from 351 tuberculosis patients who received 600 mg PRIFTIN in combination with isoniazid, pyrazinamide and ethambutol, the estimated apparent oral clearance of PRIFTIN for males and females was 2.51 ± 0.14 L/h and 1.69 ± 0.41 L/h, respectively. The clinical significance of the difference in the estimated apparent oral clearance is not known.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Elderly: Following oral administration of a single 600 mg dose of PRIFTIN to elderly (65 years and older) male healthy volunteers (n=14), the pharmacokinetics of rifapentine and 25-desacetyl metabolite were similar to that observed for young (18 to 45 years) healthy male volunteers (n=20).
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Pediatric: In a pharmacokinetic study in pediatric patients (age 2 to 12 years), a single oral dose of 150 mg PRIFTIN was administered to those weighing less than 30 kg (n=11) and a single oral dose of 300 mg was administered to those weighing greater than30kg (n=12). The mean estimates of AUC and Cmax were approximately 30% to 50% lower in these pediatric patients than those observed in healthy adults administered single oral doses of 600 mg and 900 mg.
                                    A study compared the pharmacokinetics of rifapentine in pediatric patients (age 2 years to 11 years) with latent tuberculosis infection (n=80) receiving PRIFTIN once weekly based on weight (15 mg/kg–30 mg/kg, up to a maximum of 900 mg, see Table 1) to that of adults (n=77) receiving PRIFTIN 900 mg once weekly. Children who could not swallow whole tablets were administered crushed tablets mixed in soft food. Overall, the geometric mean AUC of rifapentine in this age group was 31% higher compared to adult patients receiving 900 mg PRIFTIN once weekly (720 versus 551 mcg*h/mL). The geometric mean AUC of rifapentine was 60% higher in children administered whole tablets (884 versus 551 mcg*h/mL) and 19% higher in children administered crushed tablets (656 versus 551 mcg*h/mL), as compared to exposures in adults. Pediatric patients administered crushed PRIFTIN tablets had 26% lower rifapentine exposures compared to those pediatric patients who were given whole tablets.
                                    Population pharmacokinetic analysis showed that rifapentine clearance adjusted to body weight decreased with increasing age of pediatric patients (2–18 years).
                                    In another pharmacokinetics study of PRIFTIN in healthy adolescents (age 12 to 15 years), 600 mg PRIFTIN was administered to those weighing ≥45 kg (n=10) and 450 mg was administered to those weighing less than 45 kg (n=2). The pharmacokinetics of rifapentine were similar to those observed in healthy adults.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Renal Impaired Patients: The pharmacokinetics of rifapentine have not been evaluated in renal impaired patients. Although only about 17% of an administered dose is excreted via the kidneys, the clinical significance of impaired renal function on the disposition of rifapentine and its 25-desacetyl metabolite is not known.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Hepatic Impaired Patients: Following oral administration of a single 600 mg dose of PRIFTIN to mild to severe hepatic impaired patients (n=15), the pharmacokinetics of rifapentine and 25-desacetyl metabolite were similar in patients with various degrees of hepatic impairment and to that observed in another study for healthy volunteers (n=12).
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Asymptomatic HIV-Infected Volunteers: Following oral administration of a single 600 mg dose of PRIFTIN to asymptomatic HIV-infected volunteers (n=15) under fasting conditions, mean Cmax and AUC(0–∞) of rifapentine were lower (20%–32%) than that observed in other studies in healthy volunteers (n=55). In a cross-study comparison, mean Cmax and AUC values of the 25-desacetyl rifapentine, when compared to healthy volunteers were higher (6%–21%) in one study (n=20), but lower (15%–16%) in a different study (n=40). The clinical significance of this observation is not known. Food (850 total calories: 33 g protein, 55 g fat, and 58 g carbohydrate) increases the mean AUC and Cmax of rifapentine observed under fasting conditions in asymptomatic HIV-infected volunteers by about 51% and 53%, respectively.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Drug-Drug Interactions:
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Isoniazid: Co-administration of PRIFTIN (900 mg single dose) and isoniazid (900 mg single dose), in fasted condition, did not result in any significant change in the exposure of rifapentine and isoniazid compared to when administered alone in fasted condition.
                                    Rifapentine is an inducer of cytochrome P4503A4 and 2C8/9. Therefore, it may increase the metabolism and decrease the activity of other co-administered drugs that are metabolized by these enzymes. Dosage adjustments of the co-administered drugs may be necessary if they are given concurrently with PRIFTIN [see Drug Interactions (7.4)].
                                    
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Indinavir: In a study in which 600 mg PRIFTIN was administered twice weekly for 14 days followed by PRIFTIN twice weekly plus 800 mg indinavir 3 times a day for an additional 14 days, indinavir Cmax decreased by 55% while AUC reduced by 70%. Clearance of indinavir increased by 3-fold in the presence of PRIFTIN while half-life did not change. But when indinavir was administered for 14 days followed by co-administration with PRIFTIN for an additional 14 days, indinavir did not affect the pharmacokinetics of rifapentine [see Warnings and Precautions (5.4) and Drug Interactions (7.1)].
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Fixed dose combination of efavirenz, emtricitabine and tenofovir: Once-weekly co-administration of 900 mg PRIFTIN with the antiretroviral fixed dose combination of efavirenz 600 mg, emtricitabine 200 mg and tenofovir disoproxyl fumarate 300mg in HIV- infected patients did not result in any substantial change in steady state exposures of efavirenz, emtricitabine, and tenofovir (Table7). A 15% decrease in efavirenz Cmin and AUC and a 13% decrease in tenofovir Cmin were observed with repeated weekly doses of PRIFTIN (Table 7). No clinically significant change in CD4 cell counts or viral loads were noted.
                                    


                                 



                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.4	Microbiology 
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Mechanism of Action
                              
                              Rifapentine, a cyclopentyl rifamycin, inhibits DNA-dependent RNA polymerase in susceptible strains of Mycobacterium tuberculosis but does not affect mammalian cells at concentrations that are active against these bacteria. At therapeutic levels, rifapentine inhibits RNA transcription by preventing the initiation of RNA chain formation. It forms a stable complex with bacterial DNA-dependent RNA polymerase, leading to repression of RNA synthesis and cell death. Rifapentine and its 25-desacetyl metabolite accumulate in human monocyte-derived macrophages and are bactericidal to both intracellular and extracellular M. tuberculosis bacilli.
                              
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Mechanism of Resistance 
                              
                              The mechanism of resistance to rifapentine appears to be similar to that of rifampin. Bacterial resistance to rifapentine is caused by an alteration in the target site, the beta subunit of the DNA-dependent RNA polymerase, caused by a one-step mutation in the rpoβ gene. The incidence of rifapentine resistant mutants in an otherwise susceptible population of M. tuberculosis strains is approximately one in 107 to 108 bacilli. Rifapentine resistance appears to be associated with monotherapy. Therefore, rifapentine should always be used in combination with other antituberculosis drugs.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Cross Resistance
                              
                              
                                 M. tuberculosis organisms resistant to other rifamycins are likely to be resistant to rifapentine. A high level of cross-resistance between rifamycin and rifapentine has been demonstrated with M. tuberculosis strains. Cross-resistance between rifapentine and non-rifamycin antimycobacterial agents has not been identified in clinical isolates.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Susceptibility Test Methods
                              
                              In vitro susceptibility tests should be performed according to published methods1. Susceptibility test interpretive criteria and quality control ranges for in vitro susceptibility testing of Rifapentine have not been established.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         