
               
               
               7	 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                            Protease Inhibitors and Reverse Transcriptase Inhibitors. (5.2, 7.1)
                            Hormonal Contraceptives:  Use another means of birth control. (7.3)
                            May increase metabolism and decrease the activity of drugs metabolized by cytochrome P450 3A4 and 2C8/9. Dosage adjustments may be necessary if given concomitantly. (7.4)
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 	Protease Inhibitors and Reverse Transcriptase Inhibitors
                     
                        Rifapentine is an inducer of CYP450 enzymes. Concomitant use of PRIFTIN with other drugs metabolized by these enzymes, such as protease inhibitors and certain reverse transcriptase inhibitors, may cause a significant decrease in plasma concentrations and loss of therapeutic effect of the protease inhibitor or reverse transcriptase inhibitor [see Warnings and Precautions (5.4)
                            and
                               Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 	Fixed Dose Combination of Efavirenz, Emtricitabine and Tenofovir
                     
                        Once-weekly co-administration of 900 mg PRIFTIN with the antiretroviral fixed dose combination of efavirenz 600 mg, emtricitabine 200 mg and tenofovir disoproxyl fumarate 300mg in HIV- infected patients did not result in any substantial change in steady state exposures of efavirenz, emtricitabine, and tenofovir. No clinically significant change in CD4 cell counts or viral loads were noted [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3 	Hormonal Contraceptives
                     
                        PRIFTIN may reduce the effectiveness of hormonal contraceptives. Therefore, patients using oral, transdermal patch, or other systemic hormonal contraceptives should be advised to change to non-hormonal methods of birth control.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4 	Cytochrome P450 3A4 and 2C8/9
                     
                        Rifapentine is an inducer of cytochromes P4503A4 and P4502C8/9. Therefore, PRIFTIN may increase the metabolism of other coadministered drugs that are metabolized by these enzymes. Induction of enzyme activities by PRIFTIN occurred within 4 days after the first dose. Enzyme activities returned to baseline levels 14 days after discontinuing PRIFTIN.
                        Rifampin has been reported to accelerate the metabolism and may reduce the activity of the following drugs; hence, PRIFTIN may also increase the metabolism and decrease the activity of these drugs. Dosage adjustments of the drugs in Table 4 or of other drugs metabolized by cytochrome P4503A4 or P4502C8/9 may be necessary if they are given concurrently with PRIFTIN.
                        


                     



                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.5	Other Interactions
                     
                        The conversion of PRIFTIN to 25-desacetyl rifapentine is mediated by an esterase enzyme. There is minimal potential for PRIFTIN metabolism to be inhibited or induced by another drug, based upon the characteristics of the esterase enzymes.
                        Since PRIFTIN is highly bound to albumin, drug displacement interactions may also occur [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)]. 
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.6	Interactions with Laboratory Tests
                     
                        Therapeutic concentrations of rifampin have been shown to inhibit standard microbiological assays for serum folate and Vitamin B12. Similar drug-laboratory interactions should be considered for PRIFTIN; thus, alternative assay methods should be considered.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         