
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
                  Consult the labeling of concurrently-used drugs to obtain further information about interactions with hormonal contraceptives or the potential for enzyme alterations.
               
               
               
                  
                     
                        Drugs or herbal products that induce certain enzymes (for example CYP3A4) may decrease the effectiveness of CHCs or increase breakthrough bleeding. Counsel patients to use a back-up or alternative method of contraception when enzyme inducers are used with CHCs. (7.1) 
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1Effects of Other Drugs on Combined Hormonal Contraceptives
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Substances Decreasing the Plasma Concentrations of CHCs and Potentially Diminishing the Efficacy of CHCs
                           
                           
                              Drugs or herbal products that induce certain enzymes, including cytochrome P450 3A4 (CYP3A4), may decrease the plasma concentrations of CHCs and potentially diminish the effectiveness of CHCs or increase breakthrough bleeding. Some drugs or herbal products that may decrease the effectiveness of hormonal contraceptives include phenytoin, barbiturates, carbamazepine, bosentan, felbamate, griseofulvin, oxcarbazepine, rifampicin, topiramate, rifabutin, rufinamide, aprepitant, and products containing St. John’s wort. Interactions between hormonal contraceptives and other drugs may lead to breakthrough bleeding and/or contraceptive failure. Counsel women to use an alternative method of contraception or a back-up method when enzyme inducers are used with CHCs, and to continue back-up contraception for 28 days after discontinuing the enzyme inducer to ensure contraceptive reliability.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Substances Increasing the Plasma Concentrations of CHCs
                           
                           
                              Coadministration of atorvastatin or rosuvastatin and certain CHCs containing EE increase AUC values for EE by approximately 20% to 25%. Ascorbic acid and acetaminophen may increase plasma EE concentrations, possibly by inhibition of conjugation. CYP3A4 inhibitors such as itraconazole, voriconazole, fluconazole, grapefruit juice, or ketoconazole may increase plasma hormone concentrations.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV)/Hepatitis C Virus (HCV) Protease Inhibitors and Non-Nucleoside Reverse Transcriptase Inhibitors
                           
                           
                              Significant changes (increase or decrease) in the plasma concentrations of estrogen and/or progestin have been noted in some cases of coadministration with HIV protease inhibitors (decrease [e.g., nelfinavir, ritonavir, darunavir/ritonavir, (fos)amprenavir/ritonavir, lopinavir/ritnoavir, and tipranavir/ritonavir] or increase [e.g., indinavir and  atazanavir/ritonavir])/HCV protease inhibitors or with non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors (decrease [e.g., nevirapine] or increase [e.g., etravirine]).
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 Effects of Combined Hormonal Contraceptives on Other Drugs
                     
                        CHCs containing EE may inhibit the metabolism of other compounds (e.g., cyclosporine, prednisolone, theophylline, tizanidine, and voriconazole) and increase their plasma concentrations. CHCs have been shown to decrease plasma concentrations of acetaminophen, clofibric acid, morphine, salicylic acid, and temazepam. Significant decrease in plasma concentration of lamotrigine has been shown, likely due to induction of lamotrigine glucuronidation. This may reduce seizure control; therefore, dosage adjustments of lamotrigine may be necessary.
                        Women on thyroid hormone replacement therapy may need increased doses of thyroid hormone because serum concentration of thyroid-binding globulin increases with use of CHCs [see Warnings and Precautions (5.12)].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3Interference with Laboratory Tests
                     
                        The use of contraceptive steroids may influence the results of certain laboratory tests, such as coagulation factors, lipids, glucose tolerance, and binding proteins. 
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         