
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        NGMN is the active progestin largely responsible for the progestational activity that occurs in women following application of Xulane. NGMN is also the primary active metabolite produced following oral administration of NGM, the progestin component of some oral contraceptive products.
                        Combination hormonal contraceptives act by suppression of gonadotropins. Although the primary mechanism of this action is inhibition of ovulation, other alterations include changes in the cervical mucus (which increase the difficulty of sperm entry into the uterus) and the endometrium (which reduce the likelihood of implantation).
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        One clinical trial assessed the return of hypothalamic-pituitary-ovarian axis function post-therapy and found that follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH), luteinizing hormone (LH), and estradiol mean values, though suppressed during therapy, returned to near baseline values during the 6 weeks post therapy.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Absorption
                           
                           
                              The systemic delivery rate of NGMN and EE from Xulane is approximately 150 mcg of NGMN and 35 mcg of EE per day based on a comparative analysis with intravenous (IV) data. Following a single application of Xulane, both NGMN and EE reach a plateau by approximately 48 hours. Pooled data from the three clinical studies have demonstrated that steady-state is reached within 2 weeks of application. In one of the clinical studies, Css concentrations across all subjects ranged from 0.305 to 1.53 ng/mL for NGMN and from 23 to 137 pg/mL for EE.
                              Absorption of NGMN and EE following application of Xulane to the buttock, upper outer arm, abdomen and upper torso (excluding breast) was examined. While absorption from the abdomen was slightly lower than from other sites, absorption from these anatomic sites was considered to be therapeutically equivalent.
                              The mean (%CV) PK parameters Css and AUC0-168 for NGMN and EE following a single buttock application of Xulane are summarized in Table 5.
                              In multiple dose studies, AUC0-168 for NGMN and EE was found to increase over time (Table 5). In a three-cycle study, these PK parameters reached steady-state conditions during Cycle 3 (Figures 3 and 4). Upon removal of the patch, serum levels of EE and NGMN reach very low or non-measurable levels within 3 days. 
                              


                              



                                 Figure 3:  Mean Serum NGMN Concentrations (ng/mL) in Healthy Female Volunteers Following Application of Xulane on the Buttock for Three Consecutive Cycles (Vertical arrow indicates time of patch removal)
                              
                              
                              
                                 Figure 4: Mean Serum EE Concentrations (pg/mL) in Healthy Female Volunteers Following Application of Xulane on the Buttock for Three Consecutive Cycles (Vertical arrow indicates time of patch removal.)
                              
                              
                              The absorption of NGMN and EE following application of Xulane was studied under conditions encountered in a health club (sauna, whirlpool and treadmill) and in a cold water bath. The results indicated that for NGMN, there were no significant treatment effects on Css or AUC when compared to normal wear. For EE, increased exposures were observed due to sauna, whirlpool and treadmill. There was no significant effect of cold water on these parameters.
                              Results from a study of consecutive Xulane wear for 7 days and 10 days indicated that serum concentrations of NGMN and EE dropped slightly during the first 6 hours after the patch replacement, and recovered within 12 hours. By Day 10 of patch administration, both NGMN and EE concentrations had decreased by approximately 25% when compared to Day 7 concentrations.
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Figure 3:  Mean Serum NGMN Concentrations (ng/mL) in Healthy Female Volunteers Following Application of Xulane on the Buttock for Three Consecutive Cycles (Vertical arrow indicates time of patch removal)
                                 
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 Figure 4: Mean Serum EE Concentrations (pg/mL) in Healthy Female Volunteers Following Application of Xulane on the Buttock for Three Consecutive Cycles (Vertical arrow indicates time of patch removal.)
                                 
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Metabolism
                           
                           
                              Since Xulane is applied transdermally, first-pass metabolism (via the gastrointestinal tract and/or liver) of NGMN and EE that would be expected with oral administration does not occur. Hepatic metabolism of NGMN occurs and metabolites include norgestrel, which is highly bound to SHBG, and various hydroxylated and conjugated metabolites. EE is also metabolized to various hydroxylated products and their glucuronide and sulfate conjugates.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Distribution
                           
                           
                              NGMN and norgestrel (a serum metabolite of NGMN) are highly bound (> 97%) to serum proteins. NGMN is bound to albumin and not to SHBG, while norgestrel is bound primarily to SHBG, which limits its biological activity. EE is extensively bound to serum albumin and induces an increase in the serum concentrations of SHBG (see Table 5).
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Elimination
                           
                           
                              Following removal of patches, the elimination kinetics of NGMN and EE were consistent for all studies with half-life values of approximately 28 hours and 17 hours, respectively. The metabolites of NGMN and EE are eliminated by renal and fecal pathways. 
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Transdermal versus Oral Contraceptives
                           
                           
                              The Xulane transdermal patch delivers EE and NGMN over a 7-day period while oral contraceptives (containing NGM 250 mcg / EE 35 mcg) are administered on a daily basis. Figures 5 and 6 present mean PK profiles for EE and NGMN following administration of an oral contraceptive (containing NGM 250 mcg / EE 35 mcg) compared to the 7-day transdermal Xulane patch (containing NGMN 4.86 mg / EE 0.53 mg) during Cycle 2 in 32 healthy female volunteers.
                              
                                 Figure 5:  Mean Serum Concentration-Time Profiles of NGMN Following Once Daily Administration of an Oral Contraceptive for two cycles or Application of Xulane for two cycles to the Buttock in Healthy Female Volunteers. [Oral contraceptive: Cycle 2, Days 15 to 21, Xulane: Cycle 2, Week 3]
                              
                              
                              
                                 Figure 6:  Mean Serum Concentration-Time Profiles of EE Following Once Daily Administration of an Oral Contraceptive for two cycles or Application of Xulane for two cycles to the Buttock in Healthy Female Volunteers. [Oral contraceptive: Cycle 2, Days 15 to 21, Xulane: Cycle 2, Week 3]
                              
                              
                              Table 6 provides the mean (%CV) for NGMN and EE pharmacokinetic (PK) parameters.
                              


                              


In general, overall exposure for NGMN and EE (AUC and Css) was higher in subjects treated with Xulane for both Cycle 1 and Cycle 2, compared to that for the oral contraceptive, while Cmax values were higher in subjects administered the oral contraceptive. Under steady-state conditions, AUC0-168 and Css for EE were approximately 55% and 60% higher, respectively, for the transdermal patch, and the Cmax was about 35% higher for the oral contraceptive, respectively. Inter-subject variability (%CV) for the PK parameters following delivery from Xulane was higher relative to the variability determined from the oral contraceptive. The mean PK profiles are different between the two products and caution should be exercised when making a direct comparison of these PK parameters.
                              In Table 7, percent change in concentrations (%CV) of markers of systemic estrogenic activity (Sex Hormone Binding Globulin [SHBG] and Corticosteroid Binding Globulin [CBG]) from Cycle 1 Day 1 to Cycle 1 Day 22 is presented. Percent change in SHBG concentrations was higher for Xulane users compared to women taking the oral contraceptive; percent change in CBG concentrations was similar for Xulane and oral contraceptive users. Within each group, the absolute values for SHBG were similar for Cycle 1, Day 22 and Cycle 2, Day 22.
                              


                           



                           
                           
                              
                                 Figure 5:  Mean Serum Concentration-Time Profiles of NGMN Following Once Daily Administration of an Oral Contraceptive for two cycles or Application of Xulane for two cycles to the Buttock in Healthy Female Volunteers. [Oral contraceptive: Cycle 2, Days 15 to 21, Xulane: Cycle 2, Week 3]
                                 
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 Figure 6:  Mean Serum Concentration-Time Profiles of EE Following Once Daily Administration of an Oral Contraceptive for two cycles or Application of Xulane for two cycles to the Buttock in Healthy Female Volunteers. [Oral contraceptive: Cycle 2, Days 15 to 21, Xulane: Cycle 2, Week 3]
                                 
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Drug Interactions
                           
                           
                              In a PK drug interaction study, oral administration of tetracycline HCl, 500 mg four times daily for 3 days prior to and 7 days during wear of Xulane did not significantly affect the PK of NGMN or EE.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              Use in Specific Populations
                           
                           
                              
                                 Effects of Age, Body Weight, Body Surface Area and Race
                              
                              The effects of age, body weight, body surface area and race on the PK of NGMN and EE were evaluated in 230 healthy women from nine pharmacokinetic studies of single 7-day applications of Xulane. For both NGMN and EE, increasing age, body weight and body surface area each were associated with slight decreases in Css and AUC values. However, only a small fraction (10% to 25%) of the overall variability in the PK of NGMN and EE following application of Xulane may be associated with any or all of the above demographic parameters. There was no significant effect of race with respect to Caucasians, Hispanics and Blacks. 
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         