
               
               
               12. CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY

               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action

                     
                        Atropine is a reversible antagonist of muscarine-like actions of acetyl-choline and is therefore classified as an antimuscarinic agent. Atropine is relatively selective for muscarinic receptors. Its potency at nicotinic receptors is much lower, and actions at non-muscarinic receptors are generally undetectable clinically. Atropine does not distinguish among the M1, M2, and M3 subgroups of muscarinic receptors.

                        The pupillary constrictor muscle depends on muscarinic cholinoceptor activation. This activation is blocked by topical atropine resulting in unopposed sympathetic dilator activity and mydriasis. Atropine also weakens the contraction of the ciliary muscle, or cycloplegia. Cycloplegia results in loss of the ability to accommodate such that the eye cannot focus for near vision.

                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics

                     
                        The onset of action after administration of atropine sulfate ophthalmic solution, USP 1%, is usually within 40 minutes with maximal effect being reached in about 2 hours. The effect can last for up to 2 weeks in a normal eye.

                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics

                     
                        The bioavailability of atropine sulfate ophthalmic solution, USP 1% was assessed in six healthy subjects, 24 to 29 years of age.  Subjects received either 0.3 mg atropine sulfate administered as bolus intravenous injection or 0.3 mg administered as 30 μl instilled unilaterally in the cul-de-sac of the eye.  Plasma l-hyoscyamine concentrations were determined over selected intervals up to eight hours after dose administration.

                        The mean bioavailability of topically applied atropine was 63.5 ± 29% (range 19 to 95%) with large inter-individual differences.  Mean maximum observed plasma concentration for the ophthalmic solution was 288 ± 73 pg/mL.  Maximum concentration was reached in 28 ± 27 min after administration.  Terminal half-life of l-hyoscamine was not affected by route of administration and was calculated to be 3 ± 1.2 hours (intravenous) and 2.5 ± 0.8 hours (topical ophthalmic).

                        In another placebo-controlled study, the systemic exposure to l-hyoscyamine, and the anti-cholinergic effects of atropine were investigated in eight ocular surgery patients 56 to 66 years of age, following single topical ocular 0.4 mg atropine dose (given as 40 microliters of atropine sulfate ophthalmic solution, USP 1%). The mean (± standard deviation (SD)) Cmax of l-hyoscyamine in these patients was 860 ± 402 pg/mL, achieved within 8 minutes of eyedrop instillation.

                        Following intravenous administration, the mean (± SD) elimination half-life (t1/2) of atropine was reported to be longer in pediatric subjects under 2 years (6.9 ± 3.3 hours) and in geriatric patients 65 to 75 years (10.0 ± 7.3 hours), compared to in children over 2 years (2.5 ± 1.2 hours) and in adults 16 to 58 years (3.0 ± 0.9 hours). (see 8.4 Pediatric Use).

                        Atropine is destroyed by enzymatic hydrolysis, particularly in the liver; from 13 to 50% is excreted unchanged in the urine. Traces are found in various secretions, including milk. The major metabolites of atropine are noratropine, atropin-n-oxide, tropine, and tropic acid. Atropine readily crosses the placental barrier and enters the fetal circulation, but is not found in amniotic fluid.

                        Atropine binds poorly (about 44%) to plasma protein, mainly to alpha-1 acid glycoprotein; age has no effect on the serum protein binding of atropine. Atropine binding to α-1 acid glycoprotein was concentration dependent (2 to 20 mcg/mL) and nonlinear in vitro and in vivo. There is no gender effect on the pharmacokinetics of atropine administered by injection.

                     
                     
                  
               
            
         