
                     
                     
                     Drug Interactions
                     
                        No formal clinical studies of drug interactions have been conducted with AmBisome. However, the following drugs are known to interact with amphotericin B and may interact with AmBisome:
                         
                        
                           Antineoplastic Agents
                        
                        Concurrent use of antineoplastic agents may enhance the potential for renal toxicity, bronchospasm, and hypotension. Antineoplastic agents should be given concomitantly with caution.
                        
                           Corticosteroids and Corticotropin (ACTH)
                        
                        Concurrent use of corticosteroids and ACTH may potentiate hypokalemia which could predispose the patient to cardiac dysfunction. If used concomitantly, serum electrolytes and cardiac function should be closely monitored.
                        
                           Digitalis Glycosides
                        
                        Concurrent use may induce hypokalemia and may potentiate digitalis toxicity. When administered concomitantly, serum potassium levels should be closely monitored.
                        
                           Flucytosine 
                        
                        Concurrent use of flucytosine may increase the toxicity of flucytosine by possibly increasing its cellular uptake and/or impairing its renal excretion. 
                        
                           Azoles (e.g. ketoconazole, miconazole, clotrimazole, fluconazole, etc.) 
                        
                        
                           In vitro and in vivo animal studies of the combination of amphotericin B and imidazoles suggest that imidazoles may induce fungal resistance to amphotericin B. Combination therapy should be administered with caution, especially in immunocompromised patients.
                        
                           Leukocyte Transfusions
                        
                        Acute pulmonary toxicity has been reported in patients simultaneously receiving intravenous amphotericin B and leukocyte transfusions.
                        
                           Other Nephrotoxic Medications
                        
                        Concurrent use of amphotericin B and other nephrotoxic medications may enhance the potential for drug-induced renal toxicity. Intensive monitoring of renal function is recommended in patients requiring any combination of nephrotoxic medications.
                        
                           Skeletal Muscle Relaxants 
                        
                        Amphotericin B-induced hypokalemia may enhance the curariform effect of skeletal muscle relaxants (e.g. tubocurarine) due to hypokalemia. When administered concomitantly, serum potassium levels should be closely monitored.
                     
                     
                  
               