
               
               
               
                  7     DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           Other adrenergic drugs may potentiate effect: Use with caution. (5.3, 7.1)

                           
                           Xanthine derivatives, steroids, diuretics or non-potassium sparing diuretics may potentiate hypokalemia or ECG changes.  Use with caution. (7.2, 7.3)

                           
                           MAO inhibitors, tricyclic antidepressants, and drugs that prolong QTc interval may potentiate effect on cardiovascular system. Use with extreme caution. (7.4)

                           
                           Beta-blockers may decrease effectiveness: Use with caution and only when medically necessary. (7.5)
                        
                        
		     
	
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1     Adrenergic Drugs
                     
                        If additional adrenergic drugs are to be administered by any route, they should be used with caution because the sympathetic effects of ARCAPTA NEOHALER may be potentiated [see W
                           arnings and Precautions
                            (5.3, 5.6, 5.7, 5.8)].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2     Xanthine Derivatives, Steroids, or Diuretics
                     
                        Concomitant treatment with xanthine derivatives, steroids, or diuretics may potentiate any hypokalemic effect of ARCAPTA NEOHALER [see W
                           arnings and Precautions
                            (5.8)].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3     Non-Potassium Sparing Diuretics
                     
                        The ECG changes or hypokalemia that may result from the administration of non-potassium sparing diuretics (such as loop or thiazide diuretics) can be acutely worsened by beta-agonists, especially when the recommended dose of the beta-agonist is exceeded. Although the clinical relevance of these effects is not known, caution is advised in the co-administration of ARCAPTA NEOHALER with non-potassium-sparing diuretics.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4     Monoamine Oxidase Inhibitors, Tricyclic Antidepressants, QTc Prolonging Drugs
                     
                        Indacaterol, as with other beta2-agonists, should be administered with extreme caution to patients being treated with monoamine oxidase inhibitors, tricyclic antidepressants, or other drugs known to prolong the QTc interval because the action of adrenergic agonists on the cardiovascular system may be potentiated by these agents. Drugs that are known to prolong the QTc interval may have an increased risk of ventricular arrhythmias.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.5     Beta-Blockers
                     
                        Beta-adrenergic receptor antagonists (beta-blockers) and ARCAPTA NEOHALER may interfere with the effect of each other when administered concurrently. Beta-blockers not only block the therapeutic effects of beta-agonists, but may produce severe bronchospasm in COPD patients. Therefore, patients with COPD should not normally be treated with beta-blockers. However, under certain circumstances, e.g. as prophylaxis after myocardial infarction, there may be no acceptable alternatives to the use of beta-blockers in patients with COPD. In this setting, cardioselective beta-blockers could be considered, although they should be administered with caution.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.6     Inhibitors of Cytochrome P450 3A4 and P-gp Efflux Transporter
                     
                        Drug interaction studies were carried out using potent and specific inhibitors of CYP3A4 and P-gp (i.e., ketoconazole, erythromycin, verapamil and ritonavir). The data suggest that systemic clearance is influenced by modulation of both P-gp and CYP3A4 activities and that the 1.9-fold AUC0-24 increase caused by the strong dual inhibitor ketoconazole reflects the impact of maximal combined inhibition. ARCAPTA NEOHALER was evaluated in clinical trials for up to one year at doses up to 600 mcg. No dose adjustment is warranted at the 75 mcg dose. [See Drug-drug Interaction (12.3)] 
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         