


Drug Interactions
Epirubicin when used in combination with other cytotoxic drugs may show on-treatment additive toxicity, especially hematologic and gastrointestinal effects.Concomitant use of epirubicin with other cardioactive compounds that could cause heart failure (e.g., calcium channel blockers), requires close monitoring of cardiac function throughout treatment.There are few data regarding the coadministration of radiation therapy and epirubicin. In adjuvant trials of epirubicin-containing CEF-120 or FEC-100 chemotherapies, breast irradiation was delayed until after chemotherapy was completed. This practice resulted in no apparent increase in local breast cancer recurrence relative to published accounts in the literature. A small number of patients received epirubicin-based chemotherapy concomitantly with radiation therapy but had chemotherapy interrupted in order to avoid potential overlapping toxicities. It is likely that use of epirubicin with radiotherapy may sensitize tissues to the cytotoxic actions of irradiation. Administration of epirubicin after previous radiation therapy may induce an inflammatory recall reaction at the site of the irradiation.Epirubicin is extensively metabolized by the liver. Changes in hepatic function induced by concomitant therapies may affect epirubicin metabolism, pharmacokinetics, therapeutic efficacy, and/or toxicity.The administration of epirubicin immediately prior to paclitaxel or docetaxel does not affect the pharmacokinetics of epirubicin but does result in increases in the systemic exposure to epirubicin's inactive metabolites epirubicinol and 7-deoxy doxorubicin aglycone (see CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY).  Administration of paclitaxel prior to epirubicin resulted in an increase in epirubicin AUC compared to when epirubicin was administered prior to paclitaxel. CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY).  Administration of paclitaxel prior to epirubicin resulted in an increase in epirubicin AUC compared to when epirubicin was administered prior to paclitaxel. Cimetidine increased the AUC of epirubicin by 50%. Cimetidine treatment should be stopped during treatment with epirubicin  (see CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY).CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY).


