
               
               
               
                  CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY

               
               
                  Mechanism of Action: Fomepizole is a competitive inhibitor of alcohol dehydrogenase. Alcohol dehydrogenase catalyzes the oxidation of ethanol to acetaldehyde. Alcohol dehydrogenase also catalyzes the initial steps in the metabolism of ethylene glycol and methanol to their toxic metabolites.
                  Ethylene glycol, the main component of most antifreezes and coolants, is metabolized to glycoaldehyde, which undergoes subsequent sequential oxidations to yield glycolate, glyoxylate, and oxalate. Glycolate and oxalate are the metabolic by-products primarily responsible for the metabolic acidosis and renal damage seen in ethylene glycol toxicosis. The lethal dose of ethylene glycol in humans is approximately 1.4 mL/kg.
                  Methanol, the main component of windshield wiper fluid, is slowly metabolized via alcohol dehydrogenase to formaldehyde with subsequent oxidation via formaldehyde dehydrogenase to yield formic acid. Formic acid is primarily responsible for the metabolic acidosis and visual disturbances (e.g., decreased visual acuity and potential blindness) associated with methanol poisoning. A lethal dose of methanol in humans is approximately 1-2 mL/kg.
                  Fomepizole has been shown in vitro to block alcohol dehydrogenase enzyme activity in dog, monkey, and human liver. The concentration of fomepizole at which alcohol dehydrogenase is inhibited by 50% in vitro is approximately 0.1 µmol/L.
                  In a study of dogs given a lethal dose of ethylene glycol, three animals each were administered fomepizole, ethanol, or left untreated (control group). The three animals in the untreated group became progressively obtunded, moribund, and died. At necropsy, all three dogs had severe renal tubular damage. Fomepizole or ethanol, given 3 hours after ethylene glycol ingestion, attenuated the metabolic acidosis and prevented the renal tubular damage associated with ethylene glycol intoxication.
                  Several studies have demonstrated that fomepizole plasma concentrations of approximately 10 µmol/L (0.82 mg/L) in monkeys are sufficient to inhibit methanol metabolism to formate, which is also mediated by alcohol dehydrogenase. Based on these results, concentrations of fomepizole in humans in the range of 100 to 300 µmol/L (8.6-24.6 mg/L) have been targeted to assure adequate plasma concentrations for the effective inhibition of alcohol dehydrogenase.
                  In healthy volunteers, oral doses of fomepizole (10-20 mg/kg) significantly reduced the rate of elimination of moderate doses of ethanol, which is also metabolized through the action of alcohol dehydrogenase (see PRECAUTIONS, Drug Interactions).
               
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           Pharmacokinetics

                        
                     
                     
                        The plasma half-life of Fomepizole Injection varies with dose, even in patients with normal renal function, and has not been calculated.
                        Distribution: After intravenous infusion, fomepizole rapidly distributes to total body water. The volume of distribution is between 0.6 L/kg and 1.02 L/kg.
                        
                           Metabolism:  In healthy volunteers, only 1-3.5% of the administered dose of fomepizole (7-20 mg/kg oral and IV) was excreted unchanged in the urine, indicating that metabolism is the major route of elimination. In humans, the primary metabolite of fomepizole is 4-carboxypyrazole (approximately 80-85% of administered dose), which is excreted in the urine. Other metabolites of fomepizole observed in the urine are 4-hydroxymethylpyrazole and the N-glucuronide conjugates of 4-carboxypyrazole and 4-hydroxymethylpyrazole.
                        
                           Excretion: The elimination of fomepizole is best characterized by Michaelis-Menten kinetics after acute doses, with saturable elimination occurring at therapeutic blood concentrations [100-300 µmol/L, 8.2-24.6 mg/L].
                        With multiple doses, fomepizole rapidly induces its own metabolism via the cytochrome P450 mixed-function oxidase system, which produces a significant increase in the elimination rate after about 30-40 hours. After enzyme induction, elimination follows first-order kinetics.
                        Special Populations:
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           Geriatric Use

                        
                     
                     
                        Fomepizole Injection has not been studied sufficiently to determine whether the pharmacokinetics differ for a geriatric population.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           Pediatric Use

                        
                     
                     
                        Fomepizole Injection has not been studied sufficiently to determine whether the pharmacokinetics differ for a pediatric population.
                        
                           Gender: Fomepizole has not been studied sufficiently to determine whether the pharmacokinetics differ between the genders.
                        
                           Renal Insufficiency: The metabolites of fomepizole are excreted renally. Definitive pharmacokinetic studies have not been done to assess pharmacokinetics in patients with renal impairment.
                        
                           Hepatic Insufficiency: Fomepizole is metabolized through the liver, but no definitive pharmacokinetic studies have been done in subjects with hepatic disease.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         