
               
               
               DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
                  

                  

                  In one survey, 2.3% of patients taking labetalol in combination 
with tricyclic antidepressants experienced tremor as compared to 0.7% reported 
to occur with labetalol alone. The contribution of each of the treatments to 
this adverse reaction is unknown but the possibility of a drug interaction 
cannot be excluded.
                  Drugs possessing beta-blocking properties can blunt the bronchodilator effect 
of beta-receptor agonist drugs in patients with bronchospasm; therefore, doses 
greater than the normal anti-asthmatic dose of beta-agonist bronchodilator drugs 
may be required.
                  Cimetidine has been shown to increase the bioavailability of labetalol. Since 
this could be explained either by enhanced absorption or by an alteration of 
hepatic metabolism of labetalol, special care should be used in establishing the 
dose required for blood pressure control in such patients.
                  Synergism has been shown between halothane anesthesia and intravenously 
administered labetalol. During controlled hypotensive anesthesia using labetalol 
in association with halothane, high concentrations (3% or above) of halothane 
should not be used because the degree of hypotension will be increased and 
because of the possibility of a large reduction in cardiac output and an 
increase in central venous pressure. The anesthesiologist should be informed 
when a patient is receiving labetalol.
                  Labetalol blunts the reflex tachycardia produced by nitroglycerin without 
preventing its hypotensive effect. If labetalol HCl is used with nitroglycerin 
in patients with angina pectoris, additional antihypertensive effects may 
occur.
                  Care should be taken if labetalol is used concomitantly with calcium 
antagonists of the verapamil type.
                  Both digitalis glycosides and beta-blockers slow antrioventricular conduction 
and decrease heart rate. Concomitant use can increase the risk of 
bradycardia.
                  
                  
                  Risk of Anaphylactic ReactionWhile taking beta-blockers, patients with a history of severe 
anaphylactic reaction to a variety of allergens may be more reactive to repeated 
challenge, either accidental, diagnostic, or therapeutic. Such patients may be 
unresponsive to the usual doses of epinephrine used to treat allergic 
reaction.
                  
                  
                  Drug/Laboratory Test InteractionsThe presence of labetalol metabolites in the urine may result in 
falsely elevated levels of urinary catecholamines, metanephrine, 
normetanephrine, and vanillylmandelic acid (VMA) when measured by fluorimetric 
or photometric methods. In screening patients suspected of having a 
pheochromocytoma and being treated with labetalol, a specific method, such as a 
high performance liquid chromatographic assay with solid phase extraction (e.g., 
J Chromatogr 385:241,1987) should be employed in 
determining levels of catecholamines.
                  Labetalol has also been reported to produce a false-positive test for 
amphetamine when screening urine for the presence of drugs using the 
commercially available assay methods Toxi-Lab A ® 
(thin-layer chromatographic assay) and Emit-d.a.u.® 
(radioenzymatic assay). When patients being treated with labetalol have a 
positive urine test for amphetamine using these techniques, confirmation should 
be made by using more specific methods, such as a gas chromatographic-mass 
spectrometer technique.
                  
                  
                  Carcinogenesis, Mutagenesis, Impairment of 
FertilityLong-term oral dosing studies with labetalol for 18 months in 
mice and for 2 years in rats showed no evidence of carcinogenesis. Studies with 
labetalol, using dominant lethal assays in rats and mice, and exposing 
microorganisms according to modified Ames tests, showed no evidence of 
mutagenesis.
                  

               
               
            
         