
               
               
               7	DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           Abatacept: Increased risk of serious infection (5.1, 5.5, 7.2)
                           Anakinra:  Increased risk of serious infection (5.1, 5.6, 7.2).
                           Live vaccines/therapeutic infectious agents: Avoid use with SIMPONI (5.9, 7.3).
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1      Methotrexate
                     
                        For the treatment of RA, SIMPONI should be used with methotrexate (MTX) [see Clinical Studies (14.1)]. Since the presence or absence of concomitant MTX did not appear to influence the efficacy or safety of SIMPONI in the treatment of PsA or AS, SIMPONI can be used with or without MTX in the treatment of PsA and AS [see Clinical Studies (14.2, 14.3) and Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2       Biological Products for RA, PsA, and/or AS
                     
                        An increased risk of serious infections has been seen in clinical RA trials of other TNF-blockers used in combination with anakinra or abatacept, with no added benefit; therefore, use of SIMPONI with abatacept or anakinra is not recommended [see Warnings and Precautions (5.5, 5.6)]. A higher rate of serious infections has also been observed in RA patients treated with rituximab who received subsequent treatment with a TNF-blocker. The concomitant use of SIMPONI with biologics approved to treat RA, PsA, or AS is not recommended because of the possibility of an increased risk of infection.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3       Live Vaccines/Therapeutic Infectious Agents
                     
                        Live vaccines should not be given concurrently with SIMPONI [see Warnings and Precautions (5.9)].
                        Therapeutic infectious agents should not be given concurrently with SIMPONI [see Warnings and Precautions (5.9)].
                        Infants born to women treated with SIMPONI during their pregnancy may be at increased risk of infection for up to 6 months. Administration of live vaccines to infants exposed to SIMPONI in utero is not recommended for 6 months following the mother's last SIMPONI injection during pregnancy [see Use in Specific Populations (8.1)].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4       Cytochrome P450 Substrates
                     
                        The formation of CYP450 enzymes may be suppressed by increased levels of cytokines (e.g., TNFα) during chronic inflammation. Therefore, it is expected that for a molecule that antagonizes cytokine activity, such as golimumab, the formation of CYP450 enzymes could be normalized. Upon initiation or discontinuation of SIMPONI in patients being treated with CYP450 substrates with a narrow therapeutic index, monitoring of the effect (e.g., warfarin) or drug concentration (e.g., cyclosporine or theophylline) is recommended and the individual dose of the drug product may be adjusted as needed.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         