
               
               
               12	CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1	Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Golimumab is a human monoclonal antibody that binds to both the soluble and transmembrane bioactive forms of human TNFα. This interaction prevents the binding of TNFα to its receptors, thereby inhibiting the biological activity of TNFα (a cytokine protein). There was no evidence of the golimumab antibody binding to other TNF superfamily ligands; in particular, the golimumab antibody did not bind or neutralize human lymphotoxin. Golimumab did not lyse human monocytes expressing transmembrane TNF in the presence of complement or effector cells.
                        Elevated TNFα levels in the blood, synovium, and joints have been implicated in the pathophysiology of several chronic inflammatory diseases such as rheumatoid arthritis, psoriatic arthritis, and ankylosing spondylitis. TNFα is an important mediator of the articular inflammation that is characteristic of these diseases. The exact mechanism by which golimumab  treats ulcerative colitis is unknown. Golimumab modulated the in vitro biological effects mediated by TNF in several bioassays, including the expression of adhesion proteins responsible for leukocyte infiltration (E-selectin, ICAM-1 and VCAM-1) and the secretion of proinflammatory cytokines (IL-6, IL-8, G-CSF and GM-CSF).
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2	Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        In clinical trials, decreases in C-reactive protein (CRP), interleukin (IL)-6, matrix metalloproteinase 3 (MMP-3), intercellular adhesion molecule (ICAM)-1 and vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) were observed following SIMPONI administration in patients with RA, PsA, and AS.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3	Pharmacokinetics
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Absorption
                              
                              Following subcutaneous administration of SIMPONI to healthy subjects and patients with active RA, the median time to reach maximum serum concentrations (Tmax) ranged from 2 to 6 days. A subcutaneous injection of 50 mg SIMPONI to healthy subjects produced a mean ± standard deviation maximum serum concentration (Cmax) of 3.2 ± 1.4 µg/mL.
                              By cross-trial comparisons of mean AUCinf values following an IV or subcutaneous administration of SIMPONI, the absolute bioavailability of subcutaneous SIMPONI was estimated to be approximately 53%.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Distribution
                              
                              Following a single IV administration over the dose range of 0.1 to 10.0 mg/kg in patients with active RA, mean volume of distribution ranged from 58 to 126 mL/kg. The volume of distribution for SIMPONI indicates that SIMPONI is distributed primarily in the circulatory system with limited extravascular distribution.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Metabolism
                              
                              The exact metabolic pathway of golimumab is unknown.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Elimination
                              
                              Following a single IV administration over the dose range of 0.1 to 10.0 mg/kg in patients with active RA, mean systemic clearance of SIMPONI was estimated to be 4.9 to 6.7 mL/day/kg.
                              Median terminal half-life values were estimated to be approximately 2 weeks in healthy subjects and patients with active RA, PsA or AS.
                              Population PK analyses indicated that concomitant use of NSAIDs, oral corticosteroids, or sulfasalazine did not influence the apparent clearance of SIMPONI.
                              Patients who developed anti-golimumab antibodies generally had lower steady-state serum trough concentrations of SIMPONI.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Dose linearity
                              
                              SIMPONI exhibited dose-proportional pharmacokinetics (PK) in patients with active RA over the dose range of 0.1 to 10 mg/kg following a single intravenous (IV) dose. Following a single SC dose in healthy subjects, dose proportional pharmacokinetics were also observed over a dose range of 50 mg to 400 mg.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Single dose versus multiple doses
                              
                              When 50 mg SIMPONI was administered subcutaneous to patients with RA, PsA, or AS every 4 weeks, serum concentrations appeared to reach steady state by Week 12. With concomitant use of methotrexate (MTX), treatment with 50 mg SIMPONI subcutaneous every 4 weeks resulted in a mean steady-state trough serum concentration of approximately 0.4–0.6 µg/mL in patients with active RA, approximately 0.5 µg/mL in patients with active PsA, and approximately 0.8 µg/mL in patients with active AS. Patients with RA, PsA, and AS treated with SIMPONI 50 mg and MTX had approximately 52%, 36% and 21% higher mean steady-state trough concentrations of golimumab, respectively compared with those treated with SIMPONI 50 mg without MTX. The presence of MTX also decreased anti-golimumab antibody incidence from 7% to 2% [see Adverse Reactions (6.1)]. For RA, SIMPONI should be used with MTX. In the PsA and AS trials, the presence or absence of concomitant MTX did not appear to influence clinical efficacy and safety parameters [see Drug Interactions (7.1) and Clinical Studies (14.1)].
                              When induction doses of 200 mg and 100 mg SIMPONI at week 0 and 2, respectively, followed by maintenance doses of 100 mg SIMPONI every 4 weeks were administered subcutaneously in patients with UC, serum golimumab concentrations reached steady state by week 8 after the first maintenance dose. Treatment with 100 mg SIMPONI subcutaneous every 4 weeks during maintenance resulted in a mean steady-state trough serum concentration of approximately 1.8 ± 1.1 µg/mL.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Effect of weight on pharmacokinetics
                              
                              Population PK analyses showed there was a trend toward higher apparent clearance of SIMPONI with increasing weight. Treatment with the recommended maintenance dose regimen of SIMPONI 100 mg in UC patients did not result in meaningful differences in clinical efficacy among different weight groups. Across the PsA and AS populations, no meaningful differences in clinical efficacy were observed among the subgroups by weight quartile. The RA trial in MTX-experienced and TNF-blocker-naïve patients (Trial RA-2) did show evidence of a reduction in clinical efficacy with increasing body weight, but this effect was observed for both tested doses of SIMPONI (50 mg and 100 mg). There is no need to adjust the dosage of SIMPONI based on a patient's weight.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Special populations
                              
                              Population PK analyses suggested no PK differences between male and female patients after body weight adjustment in the RA, PsA and UC trials. In the AS trial, female patients showed 13% higher apparent clearance than male patients after body weight adjustment. Subgroup analysis based on gender showed that both female and male patients achieved clinically significant response at the proposed clinical dose. Dosage adjustment based on gender is not needed.
                              Population PK analyses indicated that PK parameters of SIMPONI were not influenced by age in adult patients. Patients with age ≥ 65 years had apparent clearance of SIMPONI similar to patients with age < 65 years. No ethnicity-related PK differences were observed between Caucasians and Asians, and there were too few patients of other races to assess for PK differences.
                              No formal trial of the effect of renal or hepatic impairment on the PK of golimumab was conducted.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         