
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              •Strong CYP2C8 inhibitors (e.g., gemfibrozil) increase pioglitazone concentrations. Limit pioglitazone dose to 15 mg daily. (2.3, 7.1)
                           
                              •CYP2C8 inducers (e.g., rifampin) may decrease pioglitazone concentrations. (7.2)
                           
                              •Certain medications may affect glucose metabolism, requiring DUETACT dose adjustment and close monitoring of blood glucose (7.3).
                           
                              •Miconazole: Severe hypoglycemia can occur when DUETACT and oral miconazole are used concomitantly. (7.4)
                           
                              •CYP2C9 interactions: Inhibitors and inducers may affect glycemic control by altering glimepiride plasma concentrations. (7.5)
                           
                              •Colesevelam: Coadministration may reduce glimepiride absorption. DUETACT should be administered at least 4 hours prior to colesevelam. (2.4, 7.6)
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 Strong CYP2C8 Inhibitors
                     
                        
                           Pioglitazone
                        
                        An inhibitor of CYP2C8 (e.g., gemfibrozil) significantly increases the exposure (area under the serum concentration-time curve or AUC) and half-life (t½) of pioglitazone. Therefore, the maximum recommended dose of pioglitazone is 15 mg daily if used in combination with gemfibrozil or other strong CYP2C8 inhibitors. Since the minimum dose of pioglitazone in DUETACT exceeds 15 mg, patients taking concomitant strong CYP2C8 inhibitors should switch to individual components of DUETACT, unless the prescribing health care provider determines that the benefit of DUETACT clearly outweighs the risk of increased pioglitazone exposure [see Dosage and Administration (2.3) and Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 CYP2C8 Inducers
                     
                        
                           Pioglitazone
                        
                        An inducer of CYP2C8 (e.g., rifampin) may significantly decrease the exposure (AUC) of pioglitazone. Therefore, if an inducer of CYP2C8 is started or stopped during treatment with pioglitazone, changes in diabetes treatment may be needed based on clinical response without exceeding the maximum recommended daily dose of 45 mg for pioglitazone [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3 Drugs Affecting Glucose Metabolism
                     
                        
                           Glimepiride
                        
                        A number of medications affect glucose metabolism and may require DUETACT dose adjustment and particularly close monitoring for hypoglycemia or worsening glycemic control.
                        The following are examples of medications that may increase the glucose-lowering effect of sulfonylureas including glimepiride, a component of DUETACT, increasing the susceptibility to and/or intensity of hypoglycemia: oral anti-diabetic medications, pramlintide acetate, insulin, angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors, H2 receptor antagonists, fibrates, propoxyphene, pentoxifylline, somatostatin analogs, anabolic steroids and androgens, cyclophosphamide, phenyramidol, guanethidine, fluconazole, sulfinpyrazone, tetracyclines, clarithromycin, disopyramide, quinolones, and those drugs that are highly protein-bound, such as fluoxetine, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, salicylates, sulfonamides, chloramphenicol, coumarins, probenecid and monoamine oxidase inhibitors. When these medications are administered to a patient receiving DUETACT, monitor the patient closely for hypoglycemia. When these medications are withdrawn from a patient receiving DUETACT, monitor the patient closely for worsening glycemic control.
                        The following are examples of medications that may reduce the glucose-lowering effect of sulfonylureas including glimepiride, leading to worsening glycemic control: danazol, glucagon, somatropin, protease inhibitors, atypical antipsychotic medications (e.g., olanzapine and clozapine), barbiturates, diazoxide, laxatives, rifampin, thiazides and other diuretics, corticosteroids, phenothiazines, thyroid hormones, estrogens, oral contraceptives, phenytoin, nicotinic acid, sympathomimetics (e.g., epinephrine, albuterol, terbutaline), and isoniazid. When these medications are administered to a patient receiving DUETACT, monitor the patient closely for worsening glycemic control. When these medications are withdrawn from a patient receiving DUETACT, monitor the patient closely for hypoglycemia.
                        Beta-blockers, clonidine, and reserpine may lead to either potentiation or weakening of DUETACT’s glucose-lowering effect. 
                        Both acute and chronic alcohol intake may potentiate or weaken the glucose-lowering action of DUETACT in an unpredictable fashion. 
                        The signs of hypoglycemia may be reduced or absent in patients taking sympatholytic drugs such as beta-blockers, clonidine, guanethidine, and reserpine.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4 Miconazole
                     
                        
                           Glimepiride
                        
                        A potential interaction between oral miconazole and sulfonylureas leading to severe hypoglycemia has been reported. Whether this interaction also occurs with other dosage forms of miconazole is not known.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.5 CYP2C9 Interactions
                     
                        
                           Glimepiride
                        
                        There may be an interaction between glimepiride and inhibitors (e.g., fluconazole) and inducers (e.g., rifampin) of CYP2C9. Fluconazole may inhibit the metabolism of glimepiride, causing increased plasma concentrations of glimepiride which may lead to hypoglycemia. Rifampin may induce the metabolism of glimepiride, causing decreased plasma concentrations of glimepiride which may lead to worsening glycemic control.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.6 Concomitant Administration of Colesevelam
                     
                        
                           Glimepiride
                        
                        Colesevelam can reduce the maximum plasma concentrations and total exposure of glimepiride when the two are coadministered. However, absorption is not reduced when glimepiride is administered four hours prior to colesevelam. Therefore, DUETACT should be administered at least four hours prior to colesevelam [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         