
               
               
               12. CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        The mechanism of action of fluvoxamine maleate in obsessive compulsive disorder is presumed to be linked to its specific serotonin reuptake inhibition in brain neurons. Fluvoxamine has been shown to be a potent inhibitor of the serotonin reuptake transporter in preclinical studies, both in vitro and in vivo.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        In in vitro studies, fluvoxamine maleate had no significant affinity for histaminergic, alpha or beta adrenergic, muscarinic, or dopaminergic receptors. Antagonism of some of these receptors is thought to be associated with various sedative, cardiovascular, anticholinergic, and extrapyramidal effects of some psychotropic drugs.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        
                           
                              Bioavailability:
                            A single-dose crossover study in 28 healthy subjects was conducted to compare the pharmacokinetics of fluvoxamine after administration of fluvoxamine maleate extended-release capsules and immediate-release fluvoxamine maleate tablets.
                        In the single-dose crossover study, mean Cmax was 38% lower and relative bioavailability was 84% for fluvoxamine maleate extended-release capsules versus immediate-release fluvoxamine maleate tablets.
                        In a multiple-dose proportionality study, fluvoxamine maleate extended-release capsules were administered over a dose range of 100 mg/day to 300 mg/day to 20 healthy volunteers. Steady-state plasma concentrations were achieved within a week of dosing. Mean maximum plasma concentrations were 47 ng/mL, 161 ng/mL, and 319 ng/mL, respectively, at the 100 mg, 200 mg, and 300 mg administered dose levels. Fluvoxamine exhibited nonlinear pharmacokinetics producing disproportionately higher concentrations over the dose range. The AUC and Cmax values increased 5.7-fold following the 3-fold increase in dose from 100 mg to 300 mg.
                        Food caused the mean AUC and Cmax of fluvoxamine to increase only slightly; therefore, administration of fluvoxamine maleate extended-release capsules with food does not significantly affect the absorption of fluvoxamine.
                        
                           
                              Distribution/Protein Binding:
                            The mean apparent volume of distribution for fluvoxamine is approximately 25 L/kg, suggesting extensive tissue distribution.
                        Approximately 80% of fluvoxamine is bound to plasma protein, mostly albumin, over a concentration range of 20 to 2000 ng/mL.
                        
                           
                              Metabolism:
                            Fluvoxamine maleate is extensively metabolized by the liver; the main metabolic routes are oxidative demethylation and deamination. Nine metabolites were identified following a 5 mg radiolabelled dose of fluvoxamine maleate, constituting approximately 85% of the urinary excretion products of fluvoxamine. The main human metabolite was fluvoxamine acid which, together with its N-acetylated analog, accounted for about 60% of the urinary excretion products. A third metabolite, fluvoxethanol, formed by oxidative deamination, accounted for about 10%. Fluvoxamine acid and fluvoxethanol were tested in an in vitro assay of serotonin and norepinephrine reuptake inhibition in rats; they were inactive except for a weak effect of the former metabolite on inhibition of serotonin uptake (1 to 2 orders of magnitude less potent than the parent compound). Approximately 2% of fluvoxamine was excreted in urine unchanged (see 
                              DRUG INTERACTIONS
                            [7]).
                        
                           
                              Elimination:
                            Following a14C-labelled oral dose of fluvoxamine maleate (5 mg), an average of 94% of drug-related products was recovered in the urine within 71 hours.
                        After administration of a 100 mg, single oral dose of fluvoxamine maleate extended-release capsules, the mean plasma half-life of fluvoxamine in healthy male and female volunteers was 16.3 hours.
                        
                           
                              Gender:
                            In a study with 15 male and 13 female healthy volunteers who were administered fluvoxamine maleate extended-release capsules 100 mg, AUC and Cmax of fluvoxamine were increased by approximately 60% in females compared to males. There were no differences in the elimination half-life between males and females.
                        
                           
                              Elderly Subjects:
                            In a study using immediate-release fluvoxamine maleate tablets at 50 mg and 100 mg and comparing elderly (ages 66 to 73 years) and young subjects (ages 19 to 35 years), mean maximum plasma concentrations in the elderly were 40% higher. The multiple-dose elimination half-life of fluvoxamine was 17.4 hours and 25.9 hours in the elderly compared to 13.6 hours and 15.6 hours in the young subjects at steady state for 50 mg and 100 mg doses, respectively.
                        In elderly patients administered immediate-release fluvoxamine maleate tablets, the clearance of fluvoxamine was reduced by about 50%; therefore, fluvoxamine maleate extended-release capsules should be slowly titrated during initiation of therapy (see 
                              DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION
                            [2.3]).
                        
                           
                              Pediatric Subjects:
                            The pharmacokinetics of fluvoxamine maleate extended-release capsules have not been evaluated in pediatric patients. However, the multiple-dose pharmacokinetics of fluvoxamine were determined in male and female children (ages 6 to 11) and adolescents (ages 12 to 17). Steady-state plasma fluvoxamine concentrations were 2- to 3-fold higher in children than in adolescents. AUC and Cmax in children were 1.5- to 2.7-fold higher than that in adolescents (see Table 4). As in adults, both children and adolescents exhibited nonlinear multiple-dose pharmacokinetics. Female children showed significantly higher AUC (0 to 12) and Cmax compared to male children and, therefore, lower doses of immediate-release fluvoxamine maleate tablets may produce therapeutic benefit (see Table 5). No gender differences were observed in adolescents. Steady-state plasma fluvoxamine concentrations were similar in adults and adolescents at a dose of 300 mg/day, indicating that fluvoxamine exposure was similar in these two populations (see Table 4). Dose adjustment in adolescents (up to the adult maximum dose of 300 mg) may be indicated to achieve therapeutic benefit.
                        



                        



                           
                              Hepatic and Renal Disease:
                            A cross-study comparison (healthy subjects versus patients with hepatic dysfunction) using immediate-release fluvoxamine maleate tablets suggested a 30% decrease in fluvoxamine clearance in association with hepatic dysfunction. The mean minimum plasma concentrations in renally impaired patients (creatinine clearance of 5 mL/min to 45 mL/min) after 4 weeks and 6 weeks of treatment (50 mg given twice daily, N =13) were comparable to each other, suggesting no accumulation of fluvoxamine in these patients (see 
                              WARNINGS AND PRECAUTIONS–Use in Patients with Concomitant Illness
                           
                            [5.15]).
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         