
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           Efficacy of live attenuated virus vaccines may be impaired by immune globulin administration; revaccination may be necessary. (7.1)
                           Antibodies in HepaGam B may interfere with some serological tests (7.2)
                           Maltose in HepaGam B may interfere with non-glucose specific blood glucose testing systems. (7.3)
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 Live Attenuated Virus Vaccines
                     
                        Immune globulin administration may impair the efficacy of live attenuated virus vaccines such as measles, rubella, mumps and varicella1,2,7.  Vaccination with live virus vaccines should be deferred until approximately three months after administration of HepaGam B, Hepatitis B Immune Globulin Intravenous (Human).  Persons who received HepaGam B less than 14 days after live virus vaccination should be revaccinated 3 months after the administration of the immune globulin, unless serologic test results indicate that antibodies were produced1,2.
                        There are no available data on drug interactions of HepaGam B with other medications.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 Drug-Laboratory Interactions:  Serological Testing
                     
                        Antibodies present in HepaGam B may interfere with some serological tests. After administration of immune globulins like HepaGam B, a transitory increase of passively transferred antibodies in the patient’s blood may result in misleading positive results in serological testing (e.g. Coombs' test).
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3 Drug-Laboratory Interactions:  Blood Glucose Testing
                     
                        HepaGam B contains maltose which can interfere with certain types of blood glucose monitoring systems.  [See Warnings and Precautions (5.3).]  Only testing systems that are glucose-specific should be used in patients receiving HepaGam B. This interference can result in falsely elevated glucose readings that can lead to untreated hypoglycemia or to inappropriate insulin administration, resulting in life-threatening hypoglycemia. 
                        The product information of the blood glucose testing system, including that of the test strips, should be carefully reviewed to determine if the system is appropriate for use with maltose-containing parenteral products.  If any uncertainty exists, contact the manufacturer of the testing system to determine if the system is appropriate for use with maltose-containing parenteral products.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         