
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  Mechanism of Action
Micropuncture studies in anima ls have shown that torsemide acts from within the lumen of the thick
ascending portion of the loop of Henle, where it inhibits the Na'/K'/2CI'-carrier system. Clinical
pharmacology studies have confirmed this site of action in humans, and effects in other segments of
the nephron have not been demonstrated. Diuretic activity thus correlates better with the rate of drug
excretion in the urine than with the concentration in the blood.
Torsemide increases the urinary excretion of sodium, chloride, and water, but it does not significantly
alterglomerular filtration rate, renal plasma flow, or acid-base balance.

                     
Pharmacokinetics and Metabolism
The volume of distribution of torsemide is 12 liters to 15 liters in normal adults or in patients with mild
to moderate renal failure or congestive heart failure. In patients with hepatic cirrhosis, the volume of
distribution is approximately doubled.
In normal subjects the elimination half- life of torsemide is approximately 3.5 hours. Torsemide is cleared
from the circulation by both hepatic metabolism (approximately 80% of total clearance) and excretion
into the urine (approximately 20% of total clearance in patients w ith normal renal function). The major
metabolite in humans is the carboxylic acid derivative, which is biologically inactive. Two of the lesser
metabolites possess some diuretic activity, but for practical purposes metabolism terminates the action
of the drug.
Because torsemide is extensively bound to plasma protein (> 990%), very little enters tubular urine via
glomerular filtration. Most renal clearance of torsemide occurs via active secretion of the drug by the
proximal tubules into tubular urine.
In patients with decompensated congestive heart failure, hepatic and renal clearance are both reduced,
probably because of hepatic congestion and decreased renal plasma flow, respectively. The total
clearance of torsemide is approximately 50% of that seen in healthy volunteers, and the plasma half-life
and AUC are correspondingly increased. Because of reduced renal clearance, a smaller fraction of any
given dose is delivered to the intraluminal site of action, so at any given dose there is less natriuresis in
patients with congestive heart failure than in normal subjects.
In patients with renal failure, renal clearance of torsemide is markedly decreased but total plasma
clearance is not significantly altered. A smaller fraction of the administered dose is delivered to the
intraluminal site of action, and the natriuretic action of any given dose of diuretic is reduced. A diuretic
response in renal failure may still be achieved if patients are given higher doses. The total plasma
clearance and elimination half-life of torsemide remain normal under the conditions of impaired renal
function because metabolic elimination by the liver remains intact.
In patients with hepatic cirrhosis, the volume of distribution, plasma half-life, and renal clearance are all
increased, but total clearance is unchanged.
The pharmacokinetic profile of torsemide in healthy elderly subjects is similar to that in young subjects
except for a decrease in renal clearance related to the decline in renal function that commonly occurs
with aging. However, total plasma clearance and elimination half-life remain unchanged.

                     
Clinical Effects
The diuretic effect s of torsemide begin within 10 minutes of intravenous dosing and peak within the first
hour. With intravenous administration diuresis lasts about 6 to 8 h ours. In healthy subjects given single
doses, the dose-response relationship for sodium excretion is linear over the dose range o f 2.5 mg to 20
mg. The increase in potassium excretion is negligible after a single dose of up to 10 mg and only slight
(5 mEq to 15 mEq) after a single dose o f 20 mg.

                     
Congestive Heart Failure
Torsemide has been studied in controlled trials in patients with New York Heart Association Class II to
Class IV congestive heart failure . Patients who received 10 mg to 20 mg o f daily torsemide in these
studies achieved significantly greater reductions in weight and edema than did patients who received
placebo.

                     
Nonanuric Renal Failure
In single-dose studies in patients with nonanuric renal failure, high doses of torsemide (20 mg to 200
mg) caused marked increases in water and sodium excretion . In patients with nonanuric renal failure,
severe enough to require hemodialys is, chronic treatment with up to 200 mg of daily torsemide has
not been shown to change steady-state fluid retention . When patients in a study of acute renal failure
received total daily doses of 520 mg to 1200 m g o f to rsemide, 19% experienced seizures. Ninety-six
patients were treated in this study; 6/32 treated with torsemide experienced seizures, 6/32 treated
with comparably high doses of furosemide experienced seizures, and 1/32 treated with placebo
experienced a seizure.

                     
Hepatic Cirrhosis
When given with aldosterone antagonists, torsemide also caused increases in sodium and fluid
excretion in patients with edema or ascites due to hepatic cirrhosis. Urinary sodium excretion rate
relative to the urinary excretion rate of torsemide is less in cirrhotic patients than in healthy subjects
(possibly because of the hyperaldosteronism and resultant sodium retention that are characteristic of
portal hypertension and ascites). However, because of the increased renal clearance of torsemide in
patients with hepatic cirrhosis, these factors tend to balance each other, and the result is an overall
natriuretic response that is similar to that seen in healthy subjects. Chronic use of any diuretic in hepatic
disease has not been studied in adequate and well-controlled trials.

                     
Essential Hypertension
In patients with essential hypertenSion, torsemide has been shown in controlled studies to lower blood
pressure when administered once a day at doses of 5 mg to 10 mg. The antihypertensive effect is near
maximal after 4 to 6 weeks of treatment, but it may continue to increase for up to 12 weeks. Systolic and
diastolicsupine and standing blood pressures are all reduced. There is no significant orthostatic effect,
and there is only a minimal peak-trough difference in blood pressure reduction .
The antihypertensive effects of torsemide are, like those of other diuretics, on the average greater in
black patients (a low-renin population) than in non black patients.
When torsemide is first administered, daily urinary sodium excretion increases for a t least a week. With
chronic administration, however, daily sodium loss comes into balance with dietary sodium intake. If
the administration of torsemide is suddenly stopped, blood pressure returns to pretreatment levels over
several days, without over shoot.
Torsemide has been administered together with j3-adrenergic blocking agents, ACE inhibitors, and
calcium-channel blockers. Adverse drug interactions have not been observed, and special dosage
adjustment has not been necessary.
               
               
            
         