
               
               
               DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
                  In patients with essential hypertension, torsemide has been administered together with beta-blockers,
ACE inhibitors, and calcium-channel blockers, In patients with congestive heart failure, torsemide has
been administered together with digitalis glycosides, ACE inhibitors, and o rganic nitrates. None of these
combined uses was associated with new or unexpected adverse events.
Torsemide does not affect the protein binding of glyburide or of wartarin, the anticoagulant effect of
phenprocoumon (a related coumarin derivative), or the pharmacokinetics of digoxin or carvedilol (a
vasodilator/beta-blocker). In hea lthy subjects, coadministration of torsemide was associated with
significant reduction in the renal clearance of spironolactone, with corresponding increases in the AUC.
However, clinical experience indicates that dosage adjustment of either agent is not required ,
Because torsemide and salicylates compete fo r secretion by rena l tubules, patients receiving high
doses of salicylates may experience salicylate toxicity when torsemide is concomitantly administe red ,
Also, although possible inte ractions between torsemide and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory agents
(including aspirin) have not been studied, coadministration of these agents with another loop diuretic
(furosemide) has occasionally been associated with renal dysfunction,
The natriuretic effect of torsemide (like that of many other diuretics) is partially inhibited by the
concomitant administration of indomethacin. This effect has been demonstrated for torsemide under
conditions of dietary sodium restriction (50 mEq/day) but not in the presence of normal sodium intake
(150 mEq/day).
The pharmacokinetic profile and diuretic activity of torsemide are not altered by cimetidine or
s pironolactone, Coadministration of digoxin is reported to increase the area under the curve for
torsemide by 50%, but dose adjustment of torsemide is not necessary.
Concomitant use of torsemide and cholestyramine has not been studied in humans but, in a study
in animals, coadministration of cholestyramine decreased the absorption of orally administered
torsemide. If torsemide and c holestyramine are used concomitantfy, simultaneous administration is
not recommended.
Coadministration of probenecid reduces secretion of torsemide into the proximal tubule and thereby
decreases the diuretic activity of torsemide.
Other diuretics are known to reduce the renal clearance of lithium, inducing a high risk of lithium
toxicity, so coadministration of lithium and diuretics should be undertaken with great caution, if at all.
Coadministration of lithium and torsemide has not been studied.
Other diuretics have been reported to increase the ototoxic potential of aminoglycoside antibiotics and
of ethacrynic acid, especially in the presence of impaired renal function. These potential interactions
with torsemide have not been studied.
Carcinogenesis, Mutagenesis, Impairment of Fertility
No overall increase in tumor incidence was found when torsemide was given to rats and mice
throughout their lives at doses up to 9 mg/kg/day (rats) and 32 mg/kg/day (mice). On a body-weight
basis, these doses are 27 to 96 times a human dose of 20 mg; on a body-surface-area basis, they are
5 to 8 times this dose. In the rat study, the high-dose female group demonstrated renal tubular injury,
interstitial inflammation, and a statistically significant increase in renal adenomas and carcinomas. The
tumor incidence in this group was, however, not much higher than the incidence sometimes seen in
historical controls. Similar signs of chronic non· neoplastic renal injury have been reported in high·dose
animal studies of other diuretics such as furosemide and hydrochlorothiazide.
No mutagenic activity was detected in any of a variety of in vivo and in vitro tests of torsemide and
its major human metabolite. The tests included the Ames test in bacteria (with and without metabolic
activation), tests for chromosome aberrations and sister-chromatid exchanges in human lymphocytes,
tests for various nuclear anomalies in cells found in hamster and murine bone marrow, tests for
unscheduled DNA synthesis in mice and rats, and others.
In doses up to 25 mg/kg/day (75 times a human dose of 20 mg on a body-weight basis; 13 times this
dose on a body·surface·area basis), torsemide had no adverse effect on the reproductive performance
of male or female rats.
Pregnancy
Teratogenic Effects
Pregnancy Category B.
There was no fetotoxicity or teratogenicity in rats treated with up to 5 mg/kg/day of torsemide (on a
mg/kg basis, this is 15 times a human dose of 20 mg/day; on a mg/m2 basis, the animal dose is 10
times the human dose), or in rabbits, treated with 1.6 mg/kg/day (on a mg/kg basis, 5 times the human
dose of 20 mg/kg/day; on a mg/m2 basis, 1.7 times this dose). Fetal and maternal toxicity (decrease in
average body weight, increase in fetal resorption and delayed fetal ossification) occurred in rabbits and
rats given doses 4 (rabbits) and 5 (rats) times larger. Adequate and well-controlled studies have not
been carried out in pregnant women. Because animal reproduction studies are not always predictive of
human response, this drug should be used during pregnancy only if clearly needed.
Labor and Delivery
The effect of torsemide on labor and delivery is unknown.
Nursing Mothers
It is not known whether torsemide is excreted in human milk. Because many drugs are excreted in
human milk, caution should be exercised when torsemide is administered to a nursing woman.
Pediatric Use
Safety and effectiveness in pediatric patients have not been established.
Administration of another loop diuretic to severely premature infants with edema due to patent ductus
arteriosus and hyaline membrane disease has occasionally been associated with renal calcifications,
sometimes barely visible on X-ray but sometimes in staghorn form, filling the renal pelves. Some of
these calculi have been dissolved, and hypercalciuria has been reported to have decreased, when
chlorothiazide has been coadministered along with the loop diuretic. In other premature neonates with
hyaline membrane disease, another loop diuretic has been reported to increase the risk of persistent
patent ductus arteriosus, possibly through a prostaglandin-E-mediated process. The use of torsemide
in such patients has not been studied.
Geriatric Use
Of the total number of patients who received torsemide in United States clinical studies, 24% were 65
or older while about 4% were 75 or older. No specific age· related differences in effectiveness or safety
were observed between younger patients and elderly patients.

                     

                  
               
               
            
         