
               
               
               12	CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1	Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Vascular endothelial growth factor-A (VEGF-A) and placental growth factor (PlGF) are members of the VEGF family of angiogenic factors that can act as mitogenic, chemotactic, and vascular permeability factors for endothelial cells. VEGF acts via two receptor tyrosine kinases, VEGFR-1 and VEGFR-2, present on the surface of endothelial cells. PlGF binds only to VEGFR-1, which is also present on the surface of leucocytes. Activation of these receptors by VEGF-A can result in neovascularization and vascular permeability.
                        Aflibercept acts as a soluble decoy receptor that binds VEGF-A and PlGF, and thereby can inhibit the binding and activation of these cognate VEGF receptors.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2	Pharmacodynamics
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Neovascular (Wet) Age-Related Macular Degeneration (AMD)
                              
                              In the clinical studies anatomic measures of disease activity improved similarly in all treatment groups from baseline to week 52. Anatomic data were not used to influence treatment decisions [see Clinical Studies (14.1)
                                 ].
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Macular Edema Following Retinal Vein Occlusion (RVO)
                              
                              Reductions in mean retinal thickness were observed in COPERNICUS, GALILEO, and VIBRANT at week 24 compared to baseline. Anatomic data were not used to influence treatment decisions [see Clinical Studies (14.2), (14.3)
                                 ].
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Diabetic Macular Edema (DME)
                              
                              Reductions in mean retinal thickness were observed in VIVID and VISTA at weeks 52 and 100 compared to baseline. Anatomic data were not used to influence EYLEA treatment decisions [see Clinical Studies (14.4)
                                 ].
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3	Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        EYLEA is administered intravitreally to exert local effects in the eye. In patients with wet AMD, RVO, or DME, following intravitreal administration of EYLEA, a fraction of the administered dose is expected to bind with endogenous VEGF in the eye to form an inactive aflibercept: VEGF complex. Once absorbed into the systemic circulation, aflibercept presents in the plasma as free aflibercept (unbound to VEGF) and a more predominant stable inactive form with circulating endogenous VEGF (i.e., aflibercept: VEGF complex).
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Absorption/Distribution
                              
                              Following intravitreal administration of 2 mg per eye of EYLEA to patients with wet AMD, RVO, and DME, the mean Cmax of free aflibercept in the plasma was 0.02 mcg/mL (range: 0 to 0.054 mcg/mL), 0.05 mcg/mL (range: 0 to 0.081 mcg/mL), and 0.03 mcg/mL (range: 0 to 0.076 mcg/mL), respectively and was attained in 1 to 3 days. The free aflibercept plasma concentrations were undetectable two weeks post-dosing in all patients. Aflibercept did not accumulate in plasma when administered as repeated doses intravitreally every 4 weeks. It is estimated that after intravitreal administration of 2 mg to patients, the mean maximum plasma concentration of free aflibercept is more than 100 fold lower than the concentration of aflibercept required to half-maximally bind systemic VEGF.
                              The volume of distribution of free aflibercept following intravenous (I.V.) administration of aflibercept has been determined to be approximately 6L.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Metabolism/Elimination
                              
                              Aflibercept is a therapeutic protein and no drug metabolism studies have been conducted. Aflibercept is expected to undergo elimination through both target-mediated disposition via binding to free endogenous VEGF and metabolism via proteolysis. The terminal elimination half-life (t1/2) of free aflibercept in plasma was approximately 5 to 6 days after I.V. administration of doses of 2 to 4 mg/kg aflibercept.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Specific Populations
                              
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Renal Impairment
                                    
                                    Pharmacokinetic analysis of a subgroup of patients (n=492) in one wet AMD study, of which 43% had renal impairment (mild n=120, moderate n=74, and severe n=16), revealed no differences with respect to plasma concentrations of free aflibercept after intravitreal administration every 4 or 8 weeks. Similar results were seen in patients in a RVO study and in patients in a DME study. No dose adjustment based on renal impairment status is needed for either wet AMD, RVO, or DME patients.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Other
                                    
                                    No special dosage modification is required for any of the populations that have been studied (e.g., gender, elderly).
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         