
               
               
               
                  CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
                  

                  
Butalbital, Acetaminophen, and Caffeine Tablets USP is intended as a treatment 
for tension headache.

                  
It consists of a fixed combination of butalbital, acetaminophen, and caffeine. 
The role each component plays in the relief of the complex of symptoms known as 
tension headache is incompletely understood.

                  

                  
                  Pharmacokinetics
                  The behavior of the individual components is described below.
                  

                  
                  
                     Butalbital
                  
                  Butalbital is well absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract and 
is expected to distribute to most tissues in the body. Barbiturates in general 
may appear in breast milk and readily cross the placental barrier. They are 
bound to plasma and tissue proteins to a varying degree and binding increases 
directly as a function of lipid solubility.
                  Elimination of butalbital is primarily via the kidney (59% to 88% of the 
dose) as unchanged drug or metabolites. The plasma half-life is about 35 hours. 
Urinary excretion products include parent drug (about 3.6% of the dose), 
5-isobutyl-5-(2, 3-dihydroxypropyl) barbituric acid (about 24% of the dose), 
5-allyl-5(3-hydroxy-2-methyl-1-propyl) barbituric acid (about 4.8% of the dose), 
products with the barbituric acid ring hydrolyzed with excretion of urea (about 
14% of the dose), as well as unidentified materials. Of the material excreted in 
the urine, 32% is conjugated.
                  The in vitro plasma protein binding of butalbital 
is 45% over the concentration range of 0.5-20 mcg/mL. This falls within the 
range of plasma protein binding (20%-45%) reported with other barbiturates such 
as phenobarbital, pentobarbital, and secobarbital sodium. The plasma-to-blood 
concentration ratio was almost unity, indicating that there is no preferential 
distribution of butalbital into either plasma or blood cells.
                  See 
                        
                           OVERDOSAGE
                        
                      
for toxicity information.
                  
                  
                     Acetaminophen
                  
                  Acetaminophen is rapidly absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract 
and is distributed throughout most body tissues. The plasma half-life is 1.25 to 
3 hours, but may be increased by liver damage and following overdosage. 
Elimination of acetaminophen is principally by liver metabolism (conjugation) 
and subsequent renal excretion of metabolites. Approximately 85% of an oral dose 
appears in the urine within 24 hours of administration, most as the glucuronide 
conjugate, with small amounts of other conjugates and unchanged drug.
                  See 
                        
                           OVERDOSAGE
                        
                      
for toxicity information.
                  
                  
                     Caffeine
                  
                  Like most xanthines, caffeine is rapidly absorbed and distributed 
in all body tissues and fluids, including the CNS, fetal tissues, and breast 
milk.
                  Caffeine is cleared through metabolism and excretion in the urine. The plasma 
half-life is about 3 hours. Hepatic biotransformation prior to excretion results 
in about equal amounts of 1-methylxanthine and 1-methyluric acid. Of the 70% of 
the dose that is recovered in the urine, only 3% is unchanged drug.
                  See 
                        
                           OVERDOSAGE
                        
                      
for toxicity information.
               
               
            
         