
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS

               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              CNS Acting Drugs: Caution should be used when used in combination with other centrally acting drugs and alcohol. (7.2)

                           
                              Antihypertensive Agents: Enhanced antihypertensive effect. (7.2)

                           
                              Levodopa and Dopamine Agonists: May antagonize levodopa/dopamine agonists. (7.2)

                           
                              Diazepam: May potentiate orthostatic hypotension. (7.1, 7.2)

                           
                              Alcohol: May potentiate orthostatic hypotension. (7.1)

                           
                              Carbamazepine: Increased clearance of olanzapine. (7.1)

                           
                              Fluvoxamine: May increase olanzapine levels. (7.1)

                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 Potential for Other Drugs to Affect Olanzapine

                     
                        
                           Diazepam — The co-administration of diazepam with olanzapine potentiated the orthostatic hypotension observed with olanzapine [see Drug Interactions (7.2)].

                        
                           Inducers of CYP1A2 — Carbamazepine therapy (200 mg bid) causes an approximately 50% increase in the clearance of olanzapine. This increase is likely due to the fact that carbamazepine is a potent inducer of CYP1A2 activity. Higher daily doses of carbamazepine may cause an even greater increase in olanzapine clearance.

                        
                           Alcohol — Ethanol (45 mg/70 kg single dose) did not have an effect on olanzapine pharmacokinetics. The co-administration of alcohol (i.e., ethanol) with olanzapine potentiated the orthostatic hypotension observed with olanzapine [see Drug Interactions (7.2)].

                        
                           Inhibitors of CYP1A2 — Fluvoxamine, a CYP1A2 inhibitor, decreases the clearance of olanzapine. This results in a mean increase in olanzapine Cmax following fluvoxamine of 54% in female nonsmokers and 77% in male smokers. The mean increase in olanzapine AUC is 52% and 108%, respectively. Lower doses of olanzapine should be considered in patients receiving concomitant treatment with fluvoxamine.

                        
                           Inhibitors of CYP2D6 — Fluoxetine caused a small decrease in olanzapine clearance leading to a minimal change in olanzapine steady-state concentrations and, therefore dose modification is not routinely recommended.

                        
                           Warfarin — Warfarin (20 mg single dose) did not affect olanzapine pharmacokinetics [see Drug Interactions (7.2)].

                        
                           Inducers of CYP1A2 or Glucuronyl Transferase Enzymes — Omeprazole and rifampin may cause an increase in olanzapine clearance.

                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 Potential for Olanzapine to Affect Other Drugs

                     
                        
                           CNS Acting Drugs — Given the primary CNS effects of olanzapine, caution should be used when olanzapine is taken in combination with other centrally acting drugs and alcohol.

                        
                           Antihypertensive Agents — Olanzapine, because of its potential for inducing hypotension, may enhance the effects of certain antihypertensive agents.

                        
                           Levodopa and Dopamine Agonists — Olanzapine may antagonize the effects of levodopa and dopamine agonists.

                        
                           Lorazepam (IM) — Co-administration of lorazepam does not significantly affect the pharmacokinetics of olanzapine, unconjugated lorazepam, or total lorazepam. However, this co-administration of lorazepam with olanzapine potentiated the somnolence observed with either drug alone.

                        
                           Lithium — Multiple doses of olanzapine (10 mg for 8 days) did not influence the kinetics of lithium. Therefore, concomitant olanzapine administration does not require dosage adjustment of lithium.

                        
                           Valproate — Olanzapine (10 mg daily for 2 weeks) did not affect the steady-state plasma concentrations of valproate. Therefore, concomitant olanzapine administration does not require dosage adjustment of valproate.

                        
                           Effect of Olanzapine on Drug Metabolizing Enzymes — In vitro studies utilizing human liver microsomes suggest that olanzapine has little potential to inhibit CYP1A2, CYP2C9, CYP2C19, CYP2D6, and CYP3A. Thus, olanzapine is unlikely to cause clinically important drug interactions mediated by these enzymes.

                        
                           Imipramine — Single doses of olanzapine did not affect the pharmacokinetics of imipramine or its active metabolite desipramine.

                        
                           Warfarin — Single doses of olanzapine did not affect the pharmacokinetics of warfarin [see Drug Interactions (7.1)].

                        
                           Diazepam — Olanzapine did not influence the pharmacokinetics of diazepam or its active metabolite N-desmethyldiazepam. However, diazepam co-administered with olanzapine increased the orthostatic hypotension observed with either drug given alone [see Drug Interactions (7.1)].

                        
                           Alcohol — Multiple doses of olanzapine did not influence the kinetics of ethanol [see Drug Interactions (7.1)].

                        
                           Biperiden — Multiple doses of olanzapine did not influence the kinetics of biperiden.

                        
                           Theophylline — Multiple doses of olanzapine did not affect the pharmacokinetics of theophylline or its metabolites.

                     
                     
                  
               
            
         