
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     General
                     
                        Neurolite®, Kit for the Preparation of Technetium Tc99m Bicisate for Injection forms a stable, lipophilic complex which can cross the blood brain barrier.  Technetium Tc99m Bicisate crosses intact cell membranes and the intact blood brain barrier by passive diffusion.  Five percent of the injected dose remains in the blood at one hour.  The amount of Technetium Tc99m Bicisate in the brain is stable until about 6 hours.  After background clearance, images of the brain can be obtained from 10 minutes to 6 hours after injection. Optimal images occur 30-60 minutes after injection.  Technetium Tc99m Bicisate is cleared primarily by the kidneys.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        In a study in 16 normals  (13 men and 3 women, mean age of 31 ± 10 years; mean weight of 72 ± 11 kg), the pharmacokinetic profile in blood best fits a three compartment model with half-lives of 43 seconds, 49.5 minutes and 533 minutes.  The highest concentration of radioactivity measured in blood was found at 0.5 minutes after intravenous injection and was 13.9% of the injected dose.  Technetium Tc99m Bicisate and its major metabolites are not protein-bound.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Metabolism
                     
                        Technetium Tc99m Bicisate is metabolized by endogenous enzymes to the mono- and di-acids of Technetium Tc99m Bicisate that can be detected in blood and urine.  No studies have been performed to compare the concentration of Technetium Tc99m Bicisate or its metabolites in normal, ischemic and infarcted cells.
                        Technetium Tc99m Bicisate is excreted primarily through the kidneys.  Within two hours, 50% of the injected dose is excreted and by 24 hours, 74% is found in urine.  It is not known whether the parent drug molecule or its metabolites are dialyzable.  Fecal excretion accounts for 12.5% of the injected dose after 48 hours.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        Localization of the parent compound in the brain in part depends upon both perfusion of the region and uptake of Technetium Tc99m Bicisate by the cell.  Once in the brain cells, the parent compound is metabolized to polar, less diffusible compounds.  Studies in 21 normal volunteers show cellular uptake of 4.8-6.5% of the injected dose at five minutes after injection.  The degree of cell function or viability needed for uptake is not known.  The degree of cell function or viability needed for metabolism of the parent compound to the less diffusible compounds has not been determined. The likelihood that the metabolic pathway is damaged by ischemia is not known.  Whether or not and to what extent uptake correlates with viability or function is not known.
                        The pharmacodynamics of Neurolite have not been evaluated for differences associated with age, gender, weight and liver or renal impairment.  It is not known whether dosage adjustments for these factors are needed.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Clinical Trials
                     
                        Two clinical trials were performed in a total of 359 subjects (273 with stroke, 86 normal).  Of these 56% were men and 44% were women.  The mean age was 60.2 years (range 23 to 92 years).  Subjects were 87.2% Caucasian, 8.4% Black, 2.2% Hispanic, 1.7% Oriental and 0.6% other.
                        Eligible patients had a confirmed stroke.  Patients with other brain lesions were not evaluated. Subjects received Neurolite (mean dose range 10-30mCi) and underwent SPECT imaging and either CT or MRI scans within 0-30 days of the onset of signs and symptoms of stroke.  CT or MRI and the administration of Neurolite occurred at different and variable times after the onset of a stroke.  The effect of the timing on the accuracy of the images cannot be evaluated.  The Neurolite scan results were blindly compared to unblinded CT/MRI results, the short standardized neurologic examination (SSNE) and the final diagnosis (e.g., the overall combined clinical impression with CT/MRI and SSNE).
                        In these studies, at least one of three blinded readers made a diagnosis of stroke in 190 (85%) of the Neurolite SPECT studies and in 238 (88%) CT/MRI studies.  The Neurolite and CT/MRI  imaging results versus the SSNE and final diagnosis were comparable. Neurolite had 11 false positive and 34 false negatives.  CT/MRI had 0 false positive and 31 false negatives.  Both Neurolite and CT/MRI missed strokes (true positives) that were identified by the other modality.  The majority of the false negatives in either modality were within 15 days of the clinical stroke.
                        The trials were not designed to determine when Neurolite or CT/MRI studies could become positive in relationship to the time of the stroke.  The relevance of the Neurolite scan results to the prediction of neurologic function or brain cell viability is not known.  Also, not known is the ability of the Neurolite findings to distinguish between a stroke and pre-existing CNS lesions.  Neurolite should not be used for these purposes. (See Pharmacodynamics Section).
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         