
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY—Intrathecal
               
                  Iohexol is absorbed from cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) into the bloodstream and is eliminated by renal excretion. No significant metabolism, deiodination, or biotransformation occurs.
                  In five adult patients receiving 16 to 18 milliliters of iohexol (180 mgI/mL) by lumbar intrathecal injection, approximately 88 (73.1-98.2) percent of the injected dose was excreted in the urine within the first 24 hours after administration. The renal and body clearances were 99 (47-137) milliliters per minute and 109 (52-138) milliliters per minute. The mean maximal plasma concentration was 119 (72-177) micrograms of iohexol per milliliter and occurred after 3.8 (2-6) hours. The volume of distribution was 557 (350-849) milliliters per kilogram. In one patient with a large spinal cord tumor, excretion was delayed (67 percent of the dose appeared in the urine within the first 24 hours) with no difference in the total overall recovery in the urine after 48 hours. The delay in excretion appeared to be related to a decrease in the rate of transfer of iohexol from the cerebrospinal fluid to the blood (plasma maximal concentration was approximately 30 micrograms/mL).
                  The initial concentration and volume of the medium, in conjunction with appropriate patient manipulation and the volume of CSF into which the medium is placed, will determine the extent of the diagnostic contrast that can be achieved.
                  Following intrathecal injection in conventional radiography, OMNIPAQUE 180, OMNIPAQUE 240, and OMNIPAQUE 300 will continue to provide good diagnostic contrast for at least 30 minutes. Slow diffusion of iohexol takes place throughout the CSF with subsequent absorption into the bloodstream. Once in the systemic circulation, iohexol displays little tendency to bind to serum or plasma proteins. At approximately 1 hour following injection, contrast of diagnostic quality will no longer be available for conventional myelography. If computerized tomographic (CT) myelography is to follow, consideration should be given to a delay of several hours to allow the degree of contrast to decrease.
                  After administration into the lumbar subarachnoid space, computerized tomography shows the presence of contrast medium in the thoracic region in about 1 hour, in the cervical region in about 2 hours, and in the basal cisterns in 3 to 4 hours.
                  In patients with renal impairment, depending on the degree of impairment, prolonged plasma iohexol levels may be anticipated due to decreased renal elimination.
               
               
            
         