


12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY





12.1 Mechanism of Action
Nitroglycerin forms free radical nitric oxide (NO), which
                                    activates guanylate cyclase, resulting in an increase of
                                    guanosine 3’,5’-monophosphate (cyclic GMP)
                                    in smooth muscle and other tissues. This eventually leads to
                                    dephosphorylation of myosin light chains, which regulates the                       contractile state in smooth muscle and results in
                                    vasodilatation.







12.2 Pharmacodynamics
The principal pharmacological action of nitroglycerin is
                                    relaxation of vascular smooth muscle. Although venous effects
                                    predominate, nitroglycerin produces, in a dose-related manner,
                                    dilation of both arterial and venous beds. Dilation of the
                                    postcapillary vessels, including large veins, promotes
                                    peripheral pooling of blood, decreases venous return to the
                                    heart, and reduces left ventricular end-diastolic pressure
                                    (preload). Nitroglycerin also produces arteriolar relaxation,
                                    thereby reducing peripheral vascular resistance and arterial
                                    pressure (after load), and dilates large epicardial coronary
                                    arteries; however, the extent to which this latter effect
                                    contributes to the relief of exertional angina is unclear.Therapeutic doses of nitroglycerin may reduce systolic,
                                    diastolic and mean arterial blood pressure. Effective coronary
                                    perfusion pressure is usually maintained, but can be compromised
                                    if blood pressure falls excessively or increased heart rate
                                    decreases diastolic filling time.
Elevated central venous
                                    and pulmonary capillary wedge pressures, and pulmonary and
                                    systemic vascular resistance are also reduced by nitroglycerin
                                    therapy. Heart rate is usually slightly increased, presumably a
                                    reflex response to the fall in blood pressure. Cardiac index may
                                    be increased, decreased, or unchanged. Myocardial oxygen
                                    consumption or demand (as measured by the pressure-rate product,
                                    tension-time index, and stroke-work index) is decreased and a
                                    more favorable supply-demand ratio can be achieved. Patients
                                    with elevated left ventricular filling pressure and increased
                                    systemic vascular resistance in association with a depressed
                                    cardiac index are likely to experience an improvement in cardiac
                                    index. In contrast, when filling pressures and cardiac index are
                                    normal, cardiac index may be slightly reduced following
                                    nitroglycerin administration.
Elevated central venous
                                    and pulmonary capillary wedge pressures, and pulmonary and
                                    systemic vascular resistance are also reduced by nitroglycerin
                                    therapy. Heart rate is usually slightly increased, presumably a
                                    reflex response to the fall in blood pressure. Cardiac index may
                                    be increased, decreased, or unchanged. Myocardial oxygen
                                    consumption or demand (as measured by the pressure-rate product,
                                    tension-time index, and stroke-work index) is decreased and a
                                    more favorable supply-demand ratio can be achieved. Patients
                                    with elevated left ventricular filling pressure and increased
                                    systemic vascular resistance in association with a depressed
                                    cardiac index are likely to experience an improvement in cardiac
                                    index. In contrast, when filling pressures and cardiac index are
                                    normal, cardiac index may be slightly reduced following
                                    nitroglycerin administration.







12.3 Pharmacokinetics
Nitroglycerin is rapidly absorbed following lingual spray
                                    administration. In a pharmacokinetic study when a single 1200
                                    mcg dose (three activations of a 400 mcg dose) of NitroMist was
                                    administered to healthy volunteers (n=12), all subjects had
                                    detectable trinitroglycerin plasma levels (mean Cmax
                                    0.8 ± 0.7 ng/mL and tmax of 8 minutes, range
                                    4 to 15 minutes) beginning at 2 minutes post-dose and higher
                                    levels of the 1,2- (mean Cmax 3.7 ± 1 ng/mL
                                    and tmax 34 ± 21 minutes, range 15 to 90
                                    minutes) and 1,3-dinitroglycerin metabolites (mean
                                    Cmax 1 ± 0.3 ng/mL and mean tmax
                                    41 ± 20 minutes, range 20 to 90 minutes). max
                                    0.8 ± 0.7 ng/mL and tThe volume of distribution of nitroglycerin following
                                    intravenous administration is 3.3 L/kg. A liver reductase enzyme is of primary importance in the
                                    metabolism of nitroglycerin to glycerol di- and mononitrate
                                    metabolites and ultimately to glycerol and organic nitrate.
                                    Known sites of extrahepatic metabolism include red blood cells
                                    and vascular walls. In addition to nitroglycerin, 2 major
                                    metabolites, 1,2- and 1,3-dinitroglycerin are found in plasma.
                                    The mean elimination half-life of both 1,2- and
                                    1,3-dinitroglycerin is about 40 minutes. The 1,2- and
                                    1,3-dinitroglycerin metabolites have been reported to possess
                                    some pharmacological activity, whereas the glycerol mononitrate
                                    metabolites of nitroglycerin are essentially inactive. Higher
                                    plasma concentrations of the dinitro metabolites, with their
                                    nearly 8-fold longer elimination half-lives, may contribute
                                    significantly to the duration of pharmacologic effect.In the above referenced pharmacokinetic study the average
                                    initial half-lives (T½α) of
                                    nitroglycerin, and its 1,2- and 1,3-dinitroglycerin metabolites
                                    were estimated to be 3, 10, and 11 minutes, respectively. The
                                    half-life of disappearance of the nitroglycerin
                                        (T½β) (5 minutes) was
                                    significantly less than the half-life of appearance
                                        (T½α) of the 1,2- and
                                    1,3-dinitroglycerin metabolites suggesting the possibility of an
                                    additional compartment into which the nitroglycerin disappears
                                    from plasma prior to being metabolized into the dinitroglycerin
                                    metabolites. A second indication of this other compartment is
                                    that the appearance of nitroglycerin metabolites in plasma was
                                    delayed in some subjects, with zero plasma levels seen for
                                    4-6 minutes after dosing. In some subjects,
                                    nitroglycerin metabolites appeared only after nitroglycerin
                                        Cmax had been observed.½α) of
                                    nitroglycerin, and its 1,2- and 1,3-dinitroglycerin metabolites
                                    were estimated to be 3, 10, and 11 minutes, respectively. The
                                    half-life of disappearance of the nitroglycerin
                                        (T




