


7 DRUG INTERACTIONS



PDE5 inhibitors: Concomitant use contraindicated
                                            (4.1, 7.1)4.1, Antihypertensives: Possible additive hypotensive effects
                                            (7.2)7.2)Aspirin: increased nitroglycerin levels (7.3)7.3)Tissue-type plasminogen activator (t-PA): decreased
                                        thrombolytic effect (7.4)7.4)Heparin: anticoagulant effect of heparin may be reduced.
                                        Monitor APTT. (7.5)7.5)Ergotamine: increased bioavailability of ergotamine. Avoid
                                        concomitant use. (7.6)7.6)PDE5 inhibitors: Concomitant use contraindicated
                                            (4.1, 7.1)4.1, 






7.1 PDE5 inhibitors
Administration of NitroMist is contraindicated in
                                    patients who are using a selective inhibitor of cyclic guanosine
                                    monophosphate (cGMP)-specific phosphodiesterase type 5 (PDE5).      PDE5 inhibitors such as sildenafil, vardenafil, and tadalafil
                                    have been shown to potentiate the hypotensive effects of organic
                                    nitrates.The time course and dose dependence of this interaction
                                    have not been studied, and use within a few days of one another
                                    cannot be recommended. Appropriate supportive care for the
                                    severe hypotension has not been studied, but it seems reasonable
                                    to treat this as a nitrate overdose, with elevation of the
                                    extremities and with central volume expansion. The use of any
                                    form of nitroglycerin during the early days of acute myocardial
                                    infarction requires particular attention to hemodynamic
                                    monitoring and clinical status.







7.2 Antihypertensives
Patients receiving antihypertensive drugs,
                                    beta-adrenergic blockers, and nitrates should be observed for
                                    possible additive hypotensive effects. Marked orthostatic
                                    hypotension has been reported when calcium channel blockers and
                                    organic nitrates were used concomitantly.Labetolol blunts the reflex tachycardia produced by
                                    nitroglycerin without preventing its hypotensive effects. If
                                    labetolol is used with nitroglycerin in patients with angina
                                    pectoris, additional hypotensive effects may occur.







7.3 Aspirin
Coadministration of aspirin and nitroglycerin has been
                                    reported to result in increased nitroglycerin maximum
                                    concentrations by as much as 67% and AUC by 73%
                                    when administered as a single dose. The vasodilatory and
                                    hemodynamic effects of nitroglycerin may be enhanced by
                                    concomitant administration of aspirin.







7.4 Tissue-type Plasminogen Activator (t-PA)
Intravenous administration of nitroglycerin decreases the
                                    thrombolytic effect of tissue-type plasminogen activator (t-PA).
                                    Plasma levels of t-PA are reduced when coadministered with
                                    nitroglycerin. Therefore, caution should be observed in patients
                                    receiving nitroglycerin during t-PA therapy.







7.5 Heparin
Intravenous nitroglycerin reduces the anticoagulant
                                    effect of heparin. Activated partial thromboplastin times (APTT)
                                    should be monitored in patients receiving heparin and
                                    intravenous nitroglycerin. It is not known if this effect occurs
                                    following single nitroglycerin doses.







7.6 Ergotamine
Oral administration of nitroglycerin markedly decreases
                                    the first-pass metabolism of dihydroergotamine and subsequently
                                    increases its oral bioavailability. Ergotamine is known to
                                    precipitate angina pectoris. Therefore, patients receiving
                                    sublingual nitroglycerin should avoid ergotamine and related
                                    drugs or be monitored for symptoms of ergotism if this is not
                                    possible.




