
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        The mechanism of action of EPANOVA is not completely understood. Potential mechanisms of action include inhibition of acyl-CoA:1,2-diacylglycerol acyltransferase, increased mitochondrial and peroxisomal β-oxidation in the liver, decreased lipogenesis in the liver, and increased plasma lipoprotein lipase activity. EPANOVA may reduce the synthesis of triglycerides in the liver because EPA and DHA are poor substrates for the enzymes responsible for TG synthesis, and EPA and DHA inhibit esterification of other fatty acids.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        
                           Absorption:  After oral administration, EPANOVA is directly absorbed in the small intestine, subsequently entering the systemic circulation mainly via the thoracic duct lymphatic system. Following repeat dosing with EPANOVA 4 grams per day under low-fat meal conditions for approximately 2 weeks, maximum plasma concentrations are achieved between 5-8 hours after dosing for total EPA and between 5-9 hours after dosing for total DHA. Steady-state concentrations of EPA and DHA in plasma are achieved within 2 weeks of repeat daily dosing with EPANOVA.
                        Single-dose administration of EPANOVA with a high-fat meal resulted in an increase in overall exposure of total and free baseline-adjusted EPA by approximately 140% and 80%, respectively, compared to fasting conditions. There was no change in overall exposure of baseline-adjusted total DHA; however, there was a 40% increase in AUC for baseline-adjusted free DHA. Overall exposures of unadjusted total and free EPA increased by 80% and 50%, respectively, although there was no change in overall exposure for unadjusted total and free DHA.
                        EPANOVA was administered without regard to meals in all clinical trials. 
                        
                           Distribution: Following a single 4-gram dose of EPANOVA under fasted conditions, the vast majority of EPA and DHA in plasma is incorporated in phospholipids, triglycerides and cholesteryl esters, with the free unesterified fatty acid representing approximately 0.8% and 1.1% of the total measured amount for EPA and DHA, respectively.
                        
                           Metabolism and Excretion: EPA and DHA from EPANOVA are mainly oxidized in the liver similar to fatty acids derived from dietary sources. Following repeat dosing under low-fat meal conditions, the total apparent plasma clearance (CL/F) and half-life of baseline-adjusted EPA from EPANOVA at steady-state are 548 mL/hr and 37 hours, respectively. Under the same conditions, the CL/F and half-life of baseline-adjusted DHA are 518 mL/hr and approximately 46 hours, respectively.  EPANOVA does not undergo renal excretion.
                        
                           Specific Populations
                        
                        
                           Pediatric: Pharmacokinetics of EPANOVA in pediatric patients have not been studied [see Use in Specific Populations (8.4)].
                        
                           Renal or Hepatic Impairment: EPANOVA has not been studied in patients with renal or hepatic impairment.
                        
                           Drug-Drug Interactions
                        
                        
                           Simvastatin: In a 14-day study of 52 healthy adult subjects, daily co-administration of simvastatin 40 mg with EPANOVA 4 grams did not affect the extent (AUC) or rate (Cmax) of exposure to simvastatin or its major active metabolite, beta-hydroxy simvastatin, at steady state.  
                        
                           Warfarin: In a 14-day study of 52 healthy adult subjects, EPANOVA 4 grams/day at steady-state did not significantly change the single dose AUC or Cmax of R- and S- warfarin or the anti-coagulation pharmacodynamics of 25 mg warfarin.  
                        
                           In vitro studies of cytochrome P450 inhibition with EPANOVA indicated that EPANOVA administration at clinically relevant doses should not result in inhibition of CYP450 enzymes. In vitro, EPANOVA did not affect multidrug resistance associated protein (MRP) or breast cancer resistance protein (BCRP) transporters. 
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         