
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              •CNS depressants: Increased risk of additive CNS depression. Use with caution in reduced dosages. (7.1)
                           
                              •Anticholinergics: Additive risk of urinary retention and paralytic ileus. (7.3)
                           
                              •Antidepressants: May cause excessive sedation, acute hypotension and excessive anticholinergic effects. Use with caution in reduced dosages to persons receiving MAO inhibitors or tricyclic antidepressants. (7.4)
                           
                              •Metabolic enzymes: Concomitant use of cytochrome P-450 2D6 and 3A4 enzyme inducers or inhibitors may result in an altered response to codeine. Monitor analgesic activity and adverse drug reactions. (7.5)
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 CNS Depressants
                     
                        Concurrent use of other opioids, antihistamines, antipsychotics, antianxiety agents, or other CNS depressants (including sedatives, hypnotics, general anesthetics, antiemetics, phenothiazines, or other tranquilizers or alcohol) concomitantly with codeine sulfate tablets may result in additive CNS depression, respiratory depression, hypotension, profound sedation, or coma. Use codeine sulfate with caution and in reduced dosages in patients taking these agents. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 Mixed Agonist/Antagonist Opioid Analgesics
                     
                        Mixed agonist/antagonist analgesics (i.e., pentazocine, nalbuphine, and butorphanol) should NOT be administered to patients who have received or are receiving a course of therapy with a pure opioid agonist analgesic such as codeine sulfate. In these patients, mixed agonist/antagonist analgesics may reduce the analgesic effect and/or may precipitate withdrawal symptoms.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3 Anticholinergics
                     
                        Anticholinergics or other medications with anticholinergic activity when used concurrently with opioid analgesics including codeine sulfate, may result in increased risk of urinary retention and/or severe constipation, which may lead to paralytic ileus.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4 Antidepressants
                     
                        Use of MAO inhibitors or tricyclic antidepressants with codeine sulfate may increase the effect of either the antidepressant or codeine. MAOIs markedly potentiate the action of morphine sulfate, the major metabolite of codeine. Codeine should not be used in patients taking MAOIs or within 14 days of stopping such treatment.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.5 Metabolic Enzymes
                     
                        Patients taking cytochrome P-450 enzyme inducers or inhibitors may demonstrate an altered response to codeine, therefore analgesic activity should be monitored. Codeine sulfate is metabolized by the cytochrome P-450 3A4 and 2D6 isoenzymes 
                              [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)]
                           . The concurrent use of drugs that preferentially induce codeine N-demethylation (cytochrome P-450 3A4) may increase the plasma concentrations of codeine’s inactive metabolite norcodeine. Drugs that are strong inhibitors of codeine O-demethylation (cytochrome P-450 2D6) may decrease the plasma concentrations of codeine’s active metabolites, morphine and morphine-6-glucuronide. The contribution of these active metabolites to the overall analgesic effect of codeine is not fully understood, but should be considered. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.6 Drug-Laboratory Test Interaction
                     
                        Codeine sulfate tablets may cause an elevation of plasma amylase and lipase due to the potential of codeine to produce spasm of the sphincter of Oddi. Determination of these enzyme levels may be unreliable for some time after an opiate agonist has been given.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         