
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           Mixed agonist/antagonist and partial agonist opioid analgesics: Avoid use with OXYCODONE HCl EXTENDED-RELEASE TABLETS because they may reduce analgesic effect of OXYCODONE HCl EXTENDED-RELEASE TABLETS or precipitate withdrawal symptoms. (7.4)
                        
                        
                            
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 CNS Depressants
                     
                        The concomitant use of OXYCODONE HCl EXTENDED-RELEASE TABLETS and other CNS depressants including sedatives, hypnotics, tranquilizers, general anesthetics, phenothiazines, other opioids, and alcohol can increase the risk of respiratory depression, profound sedation, coma, or death.  Monitor patients receiving CNS depressants and OXYCODONE HCl EXTENDED-RELEASE TABLETS for signs of respiratory depression, sedation, and hypotension. 
                        When combined therapy with any of the above medications is considered, the dose of one or both agents should be reduced [see Dosage and Administration (2.2) and 
                           Warnings and Precautions (5.4)]. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 Muscle Relaxants
                     
                        Oxycodone may enhance the neuromuscular blocking action of true skeletal muscle relaxants and produce an increased degree of respiratory depression. Monitor patients receiving muscle relaxants and OXYCODONE HCl EXTENDED-RELEASE TABLETS for signs of respiratory depression that may be greater than otherwise expected.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3 Drugs Affecting
Cytochrome P450 Isoenzymes
                     
                        
                           
                              Inhibitors of CYP3A4 and 2D6
                           
                        
                        Because the CYP3A4 isoenzyme plays a major role in the metabolism of oxycodone, drugs that inhibit CYP3A4 activity may cause decreased clearance of oxycodone which could lead to an increase in oxycodone plasma concentrations and result in increased or prolonged opioid effects. These effects could me more pronounced with concomitant use of CYP2D6 and 3A4 inhibitors. If coadministration with OXYCODONE HCl EXTENDED-RELEASE TABLETS is necessary, monitor patients for respiratory depression and sedation at frequent intervals and consider dose adjustments until stable drug effects are achieved [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                        
                        
                           
                              Inducers of CYP3A4
                           
                        
                        CYP450 3A4 inducers may induce the metabolism of oxycodone and, therefore, may cause increased clearance of the drug which could lead to a decrease in oxycodone plasma concentrations, lack of efficacy or, possibly, development of an abstinence syndrome in a patient who had developed physical dependence to oxycodone. If co-administration with OXYCODONE HCl EXTENDED-RELEASE TABLETS is necessary, monitor for signs of opioid withdrawal and consider dose adjustments until stable drug effects are achieved. 
                        After stopping the treatment of a CYP3A4 inducer, as the effects of the inducer decline, the oxycodone plasma concentration will increase which could increase or prolong both the therapeutic and adverse effects, and may cause serious respiratory depression [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4 Mixed Agonist/Antagonist and Partial Agonist Opioid Analgesics
                     
                        Mixed agonist/antagonist (i.e., pentazocine, nalbuphine, and butorphanol) and partial agonist (buprenorphine) analgesics may reduce the analgesic effect of oxycodone or precipitate withdrawal symptoms. Avoid the use of mixed agonist/antagonist and partial agonist analgesics in patients receiving OXYCODONE HCl EXTENDED-RELEASE TABLETS.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.5 Diuretics
                     
                        Opioids can reduce the efficacy of diuretics by inducing the release of antidiuretic hormone. Opioids may also lead to acute retention of urine by causing spasm of the sphincter of the bladder, particularly in men with enlarged prostates.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.6 Anticholinergics
                     
                        Anticholinergics or other medications with anticholinergic activity when used concurrently with opioid analgesics may result in increased risk of urinary retention and/or severe constipation, which may lead to paralytic ileus. Monitor patients for signs of urinary retention or reduced gastric motility when OXYCODONE HCl EXTENDED-RELEASE TABLETS are used concurrently with anticholinergic drugs.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         