
                     
                     
                     Drug/Drug Interactions
                     
                        
                           
                              Metoprolol: 
                           Catecholamine-depleting drugs (e.g., reserpine) may have an additive effect when given with beta-blocking agents. Patients treated with metoprolol plus a catecholamine depletor should therefore be closely observed for evidence of hypotension or marked bradycardia, which may produce vertigo, syncope, or postural hypotension.
                        

                        Both digitalis glycosides and beta-blockers slow atrioventricular conduction and decrease heart rate. Concomitant use can increase the risk of bradycardia.

                           

                           Risk of Anaphylactic Reaction: While taking beta-blockers, patients with a history of severe anaphylactic reaction to a variety of allergens may be more reactive to repeated challenge, either accidental, diagnostic, or therapeutic. Such patients may be unresponsive to the usual doses of epinephrine used to treat allergic reaction.
                        
                           General Anesthetics
                           
                        
                        Some inhalation anesthetics may enhance the cardiodepressant effect of beta-blockers (see WARNINGS; Metoprolol; Major Surgery).
                        
                           CYP2D6 Inhibitors
                           
                        
                        Potent inhibitors of the CYP2D6 enzyme may increase the plasma concentration of metoprolol. Strong inhibition of CYP2D6 would mimic the pharmacokinetics of CYP2D6 poor metabolizer. Caution should therefore be exercised when administering potent CYP2D6 inhibitors with metoprolol. Known clinically significant potent inhibitors of CYP2D6 are antidepressants such as fluoxetine, paroxetine or bupropion, antipsychotics such as thioridazine, antiarrhythmics such as quinidine or propafenone, antiretrovirals such as ritonavir, antihistamines such as diphenhydramine, antimalarials such as hydroxychloroquine or quinidine, antifungals such as terbinafine and medications for stomach ulcers such as cimetidine.
                        
                           Clonidine
                           
                        
                        

                        If a patient is treated with clonidine and metoprolol concurrently, and clonidine treatment is to be discontinued, metoprolol should be stopped several days before clonidine is withdrawn. Rebound hypertension that can follow withdrawal of clonidine may be increased in patients receiving concurrent beta-blocker treatment.

                           

                           
                              Hydrochlorothiazide:
                            Hypokalemia can sensitize or exaggerate the response of the heart to the toxic effects of digitalis (e.g., increased ventricular irritability).
                        Hypokalemia may develop during concomitant use of steroids or ACTH.
                        Insulin requirements in diabetic patients may be increased, decreased, or unchanged.
                        Thiazides may decrease arterial responsiveness to norepinephrine, but not enough to preclude effectiveness of the pressor agent for therapeutic use.
                        Thiazides may increase the responsiveness to tubocurarine.
                        Lithium renal clearance is reduced by thiazides, increasing the risk of lithium toxicity.
                        There have been rare reports in the literature of hemolytic anemia occurring with the concomitant use of hydrochlorothiazide and methyldopa. 
                        Concurrent administration of some nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory agents may reduce the diuretic, natriuretic and antihypertensive effects of thiazide diuretics. 
                        

                        
                           Cholestyramine and colestipol resins:
                            Absorption of hydrochlorothiazide is impaired in the presence of anionic exchange resins. Single doses of either cholestyramine or colestipol resins bind the hydrochlorothiazide and reduce its absorption from the gastrointestinal tract by up to 85% and 43%, respectively.
                     
                     
                  
               