


CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY





Intravenous Administration:
In healthy adult volunteers, mean serum piperacillin
concentrations immediately after a two‑to three‑minute
intravenous injection of 2, 4, or 6 g were 305, 412, and 775 μg/mL,
respectively. Serum concentrations lack dose proportionality.




A 30-minute infusion of 6 g every 6 h
gave, on the fourth day, a mean peak serum concentration of 420 μg/mL.







Intramuscular Administration: 
PIPRACIL is rapidly absorbed after intramuscular
injection. In healthy volunteers, the mean peak serum concentration
occurs approximately 30 minutes after a single dose of 2 g and
is about 36 μg/mL. The oral administration of 1 g probenecid
before injection produces an increase in piperacillin peak serum level
of about 30%. The area under the curve (AUC) is increased by approximately
60%. 






Pharmacokinetics:
PIPRACIL is not absorbed when given orally. Peak
serum concentrations are attained approximately 30 minutes after intramuscular
injections and immediately after completion of intravenous injection
or infusion. The serum half-life in healthy volunteers ranges from
36 minutes to one hour and 12 minutes. The mean elimination half-life
of PIPRACIL in healthy adult volunteers is 54 minutes following
administration of 2 g and 63 minutes following 6 g. As with
other penicillins, PIPRACIL is eliminated primarily by glomerular
filtration and tubular secretion; it is excreted rapidly as unchanged
drug in high concentrations in the urine. Approximately 60% to 80%
of the administered dose is excreted in the urine in the first 24
hours. Piperacillin urine concentrations, determined by microbioassay,
are as high as 14,100 μg/mL following a 6-g intravenous
dose and 8,500 μg/mL following a 4-g intravenous dose.
These urine drug concentrations remain well above 1,000 μg/mL
throughout the dosing interval.






Distribution:
PIPRACIL binding to human serum proteins is 16%.
The drug is widely distributed in human tissues and body fluids, including
bone, prostate, and heart, and reaches high concentrations in bile.
After a 4-g bolus injection, maximum biliary concentrations average
3,205 μg/mL. It penetrates into the cerebrospinal fluid
in the presence of inflamed meninges.







Special Populations: 






Renal Insufficiency: The elimination half-life is increased twofold in mild to moderate
renal impairment and fivefold to sixfold in severe impairment. Because
PIPRACIL is excreted by the biliary route as well as by the renal
route, it can be used safely in appropriate dosage in patients with
severely restricted kidney function. (See DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION.)Renal Insufficiency: The elimination half-life is increased twofold in mild to moderate
renal impairment and fivefold to sixfold in severe impairment. Because
PIPRACIL is excreted by the biliary route as well as by the renal
route, it can be used safely in appropriate dosage in patients with
severely restricted kidney function. (See 








Pediatric Patients: After intravenous administration of 50 mg/kg (5-minute infusion)
in neonates, the mean plasma concentration of piperacillin extrapolated
to time zero was 141 μg/mL, and the apparent volume of
distribution averaged 101 mL/kg.Pediatric Patients: After intravenous administration of 50 mg/kg (5-minute infusion)
in neonates, the mean plasma concentration of piperacillin extrapolated
to time zero was 141 μg/mL, and the apparent volume of
distribution averaged 101 mL/kg.In premature
neonates, the mean elimination half-life has been reported to range
from 147 to 258 minutes following administration of
a single intravenous dose of 75 mg/kg, the half‑life decreasing
with increasing postnatal age. The changes in half-life appeared to
be caused by an immature renal system during the first weeks
of life. In one study in neonates, the mean elimination half-life
ranged from 127 to 217 minutes following a single intravenous dose
of 50 mg/kg. As in premature neonates, the half-life in neonates
decreased with increasing postnatal age. The mean total body clearance
in neonates has been reported to range from 32 to 41 mL/min/1.73 m2 after an intravenous dose of 50 mg/kg.2 after an intravenous dose of 50 mg/kg.Following administration of an intravenous dose of 50 mg/kg
in older pediatric patients (from 1 month up to 15 years
of age), the mean elimination half-life has been reported to range
from 31 to 37 minutes, and the mean total body clearance has
been reported to range from 124 to 160 mL/min/1.73 m2.2.As in adults, PIPRACIL elimination
tends to be prolonged in pediatric patients with renal impairment.
In one study in pediatric patients (age range, 3.3 to 14.3 years),
the mean elimination half-life in patients with decreased renal function
was approximately 60 minutes versus 37 minutes in patients with normal
renal function. The elimination half-life has been reported to range
from 3.5 to 14 hours in neonates with severe renal impairment.Pharmacokinetic data have indicated that among pediatric
patients below 12 years of age, those with cystic fibrosis have increased
bioavailability, lower serum concentrations, and increased total body
clearance of piperacillin compared to young, healthy pediatric volunteers
under 12 years of age.






