
               
               
               12  CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Sodium-glucose co-transporter 2 (SGLT2) is the predominant
transporter responsible for reabsorption of glucose from the glomerular
filtrate back into the circulation.  Empagliflozin is an inhibitor
of SGLT2.  By inhibiting SGLT2, empagliflozin reduces renal reabsorption
of filtered glucose and lowers the renal threshold for glucose, and
thereby increases urinary glucose excretion.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        
                           Urinary Glucose Excretion
                           
In patients
with type 2 diabetes, urinary glucose excretion increased immediately
following a dose of JARDIANCE and was maintained at the end of a 4-week
treatment period averaging at approximately 64 grams per day with
10 mg empagliflozin and 78 grams per day with 25 mg JARDIANCE once
daily [see Clinical Studies (14)].
                        
                        
                           Urinary Volume
                           
In a 5-day study, mean 24-hour
urine volume increase from baseline was 341 mL on Day 1 and 135 mL
on Day 5 of empagliflozin 25 mg once daily treatment.
                        
                           Cardiac Electrophysiology
                           
In a randomized, placebo-controlled, active-comparator,
crossover study, 30 healthy subjects were administered a single oral
dose of JARDIANCE 25 mg, JARDIANCE 200 mg (8 times the maximum dose),
moxifloxacin, and placebo.  No increase in QTc was observed with either
25 mg or 200 mg empagliflozin.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        
                           Absorption
                           
The pharmacokinetics
of empagliflozin has been characterized in healthy volunteers and
patients with type 2 diabetes and no clinically relevant differences
were noted between the two populations.  After oral administration,
peak plasma concentrations of empagliflozin were reached at 1.5 hours
post-dose.  Thereafter, plasma concentrations declined in a biphasic
manner with a rapid distribution phase and a relatively slow terminal
phase.  The steady state mean plasma AUC and Cmax were 1870 nmol·h/L and 259 nmol/L, respectively, with 10 mg empagliflozin
once daily treatment, and 4740 nmol·h/L and 687 nmol/L, respectively,
with 25 mg empagliflozin once daily treatment.  Systemic exposure
of empagliflozin increased in a dose-proportional manner in the therapeutic
dose range.  The single-dose and steady-state pharmacokinetic parameters
of empagliflozin were similar, suggesting linear pharmacokinetics
with respect to time.
                        Administration of 25 mg empagliflozin after intake of a high-fat
and high-calorie meal resulted in slightly lower exposure; AUC decreased
by approximately 16% and Cmax decreased by
approximately 37%, compared to fasted condition.  The observed effect
of food on empagliflozin pharmacokinetics was not considered clinically
relevant and empagliflozin may be administered with or without food.
                        
                           Distribution
                           
The apparent steady-state volume of distribution was
estimated to be 73.8 L based on a population pharmacokinetic analysis.
 Following administration of an oral [14C]-empagliflozin solution to healthy subjects, the red blood cell
partitioning was approximately 36.8% and plasma protein binding was
86.2%.
                        
                           Metabolism
                           
No major metabolites of empagliflozin were detected in
human plasma and the most abundant metabolites were three glucuronide
conjugates (2-O-, 3-O-, and 6-O-glucuronide).  Systemic exposure of
each metabolite was less than 10% of total drug-related material.
 In vitro studies suggested that the primary route
of metabolism of empagliflozin in humans is glucuronidation by the
uridine 5'-diphospho-glucuronosyltransferases UGT2B7, UGT1A3, UGT1A8,
and UGT1A9.
                        
                           Elimination
                           
The apparent terminal elimination
half-life of empagliflozin was estimated to be 12.4 h and apparent
oral clearance was 10.6 L/h based on the population pharmacokinetic
analysis.  Following once-daily dosing, up to 22% accumulation, with
respect to plasma AUC, was observed at steady-state, which was consistent
with empagliflozin half-life.  Following administration of an oral
[14C]-empagliflozin solution to healthy
subjects, approximately 95.6% of the drug-related radioactivity was
eliminated in feces (41.2%) or urine (54.4%).  The majority of drug-related
radioactivity recovered in feces was unchanged parent drug and approximately
half of drug-related radioactivity excreted in urine was unchanged
parent drug.
                        
                           Specific Populations
                           

                           Renal Impairment
                           
In patients with mild (eGFR: 60 to less than 90 mL/min/1.73
m2), moderate (eGFR: 30 to less than 60
mL/min/1.73 m2), and severe (eGFR: less
than 30 mL/min/1.73 m2) renal impairment
and subjects with kidney failure/end stage renal disease (ESRD) patients,
AUC of empagliflozin increased by approximately 18%, 20%, 66%, and
48%, respectively, compared to subjects with normal renal function.
 Peak plasma levels of empagliflozin were similar in subjects with
moderate renal impairment and kidney failure/ESRD compared to patients
with normal renal function.  Peak plasma levels of empagliflozin were
roughly 20% higher in subjects with mild and severe renal impairment
as compared to subjects with normal renal function.  Population pharmacokinetic
analysis showed that the apparent oral clearance of empagliflozin
decreased, with a decrease in eGFR leading to an increase in drug
exposure.  However, the fraction of empagliflozin that was excreted
unchanged in urine, and urinary glucose excretion, declined with decrease
in eGFR.
                        
                           Hepatic Impairment
                           
In subjects with mild,
moderate, and severe hepatic impairment according to the Child-Pugh
classification, AUC of empagliflozin increased by approximately 23%,
47%, and 75%, and Cmax increased by approximately
4%, 23%, and 48%, respectively, compared to subjects with normal hepatic
function.
                        
                           Effects of Age, Body Mass Index, Gender, and Race
                           
Based on the population PK analysis, age, body mass index (BMI),
gender and race (Asians versus primarily Whites) do not have a clinically
meaningful effect on pharmacokinetics of empagliflozin [see
Use in Specific Populations (8.5)].
                        
                           Pediatric
                           
Studies characterizing the pharmacokinetics of empagliflozin
in pediatric patients have not been performed.
                        
                           Drug Interactions
                           

                           
                              In vitro Assessment of Drug Interactions
                           

                           In vitro data suggest that the primary
route of metabolism of empagliflozin in humans is glucuronidation
by the uridine 5'-diphospho-glucuronosyltransferases UGT2B7, UGT1A3,
UGT1A8, and UGT1A9.  Empagliflozin does not inhibit, inactivate, or
induce CYP450 isoforms.  Empagliflozin also does not inhibit UGT1A1.
 Therefore, no effect of empagliflozin is anticipated on concomitantly
administered drugs that are substrates of the major CYP450 isoforms
or UGT1A1.  The effect of UGT induction (e.g., induction by rifampicin
or any other UGT enzyme inducer) on empagliflozin exposure has not
been evaluated.
                        Empagliflozin
is a substrate for P-glycoprotein (P-gp) and breast cancer resistance
protein (BCRP), but it does not inhibit these efflux transporters
at therapeutic doses. Based on in vitro studies,
empagliflozin is considered unlikely to cause interactions with drugs
that are P-gp substrates.  Empagliflozin is a substrate of the human
uptake transporters OAT3, OATP1B1, and OATP1B3, but not OAT1 and OCT2.
 Empagliflozin does not inhibit any of these human uptake transporters
at clinically relevant plasma concentrations and, therefore, no effect
of empagliflozin is anticipated on concomitantly administered drugs
that are substrates of these uptake transporters.
                        
                           
                              In vivo Assessment
of Drug Interactions
                           
No dose adjustment of
JARDIANCE is recommended when coadministered with commonly prescribed
medicinal products based on results of the described pharmacokinetic
studies.  Empagliflozin pharmacokinetics were similar with and without
coadministration of metformin, glimepiride, pioglitazone, sitagliptin,
linagliptin, warfarin, verapamil, ramipril, simvastatin, hydrochlorothiazide,
and torasemide in healthy volunteers (see Figure 1).  The observed
increases in overall exposure (AUC) of empagliflozin following coadministration
with gemfibrozil, rifampicin, or probenecid are not clinically relevant.
 In subjects with normal renal function, coadministration of empagliflozin
with probenecid resulted in a 30% decrease in the fraction of empagliflozin
excreted in urine without any effect on 24-hour urinary glucose excretion.
 The relevance of this observation to patients with renal impairment
is unknown.
                        
                           Figure
1 Effect of Various Medications on the Pharmacokinetics of Empagliflozin
as Displayed as 90% Confidence Interval of Geometric Mean AUC and
Cmax Ratios [reference lines indicate 100%
(80% - 125%)]
                        
                        
                        
                           aempagliflozin,
50 mg, once daily; bempagliflozin, 25 mg,
single dose; cempagliflozin, 25 mg, once
daily; dempagliflozin, 10 mg, single dose
                        Empagliflozin had no clinically
relevant effect on the pharmacokinetics of metformin, glimepiride,
pioglitazone, sitagliptin, linagliptin, warfarin, digoxin, ramipril,
simvastatin, hydrochlorothiazide, torasemide, and oral contraceptives
when coadministered in healthy volunteers (see Figure 2).
                        
                           Figure 2 Effect of Empagliflozin
on the Pharmacokinetics of Various Medications as Displayed as 90%
Confidence Interval of Geometric Mean AUC and Cmax Ratios [reference lines indicate 100% (80% - 125%)]
                        
                        
                        
                           aempagliflozin,
50 mg, once daily; bempagliflozin, 25 mg,
once daily; cempagliflozin, 25 mg, single
dose; dadministered as simvastatin; eadministered as warfarin racemic mixture; fadministered as Microgynon®; gadministered as ramipril
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           Figure 1
                           
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           Figure 2
                           
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         