
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              •Other adrenergic drugs may potentiate effect. Use with caution. (5.3, 7.1)
                           
                              •Xanthine derivatives, steroids, diuretics, or non-potassium sparing diuretics may potentiate hypokalemia or ECG changes. Use with caution. (5.7, 7.2, 7.3)
                           
                              •MAO inhibitors, tricyclic antidepressants and drugs that prolong QTc interval may potentiate effect on the cardiovascular system. Use with extreme caution. (7.4)
                           
                              •Beta-blockers may decrease effectiveness. Use with caution and only when medically necessary. (7.5)
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 Adrenergic Drugs
                     
                        If additional adrenergic drugs are to be administered by any route, they should be used with caution because the sympathetic effects of formoterol may be potentiated [see WARNINGS AND PRECAUTIONS (5.3, 5.5, 5.6, 5.7)].
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 Xanthine Derivatives, Steroids, or Diuretics
                     
                        Concomitant treatment with xanthine derivatives, steroids, or diuretics may potentiate any hypokalemic effect of adrenergic agonists [see WARNINGS AND PRECAUTIONS (5.7)].
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3 Non-potassium Sparing Diuretics
                     
                        The ECG changes and/or hypokalemia that may result from the administration of non-potassium sparing diuretics (such as loop or thiazide diuretics) can be acutely worsened by beta-agonists, especially when the recommended dose of the beta-agonist is exceeded. Although the clinical significance of these effects is not known, caution is advised in the co-administration of beta-agonists with non-potassium sparing diuretics.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4 MAO Inhibitors, Tricyclic Antidepressants, QTc Prolonging Drugs
                     
                        Formoterol, as with other beta2-agonists, should be administered with extreme caution to patients being treated with monoamine oxidase inhibitors, tricyclic antidepressants, or drugs known to prolong the QTc interval because the effect of adrenergic agonists on the cardiovascular system may be potentiated by these agents. Drugs that are known to prolong the QTc interval have an increased risk of ventricular arrhythmias.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.5 Beta-blockers
                     
                        Beta-adrenergic receptor antagonists (beta-blockers) and formoterol may inhibit the effect of each other when administered concurrently. Beta-blockers not only block the therapeutic effects of beta-agonists, but may produce severe bronchospasm in COPD patients. Therefore, patients with COPD should not normally be treated with beta-blockers. However, under certain circumstances, e.g., as prophylaxis after myocardial infarction, there may be no acceptable alternatives to the use of beta-blockers in patients with COPD. In this setting, cardioselective beta-blockers could be considered, although they should be administered with caution.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         