
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  Oxybutynin chloride exerts a direct antispasmodic effect on 
smooth muscle and inhibits the muscarinic action of acetylcholine on smooth 
muscle. Oxybutynin chloride exhibits only one-fifth of the anticholinergic 
activity of atropine on the rabbit detrusor muscle, but four to ten times the 
antispasmodic activity. No blocking effects occur at skeletal neuromuscular 
junctions or autonomic ganglia (antinicotinic effects).
                  Oxybutynin chloride relaxes bladder smooth muscle. In patients with 
conditions characterized by involuntary bladder contractions, cystometric 
studies have demonstrated that oxybutynin increases bladder (vesical) capacity, 
diminishes the frequency of uninhibited contractions of the detrusor muscle, and 
delays the initial desire to void. Oxybutynin thus decreases urgency and the 
frequency of both incontinent episodes and voluntary urination.
                  Antimuscarinic activity resides predominantly in the R-isomer. A metabolite, 
desethyloxybutynin, has pharmacological activity similar to that of oxybutynin 
in in vitro studies.
                  
                  Pharmacokinetics
                  AbsorptionFollowing the first dose of Oxybutynin Chloride Extended Release 
Tablets, oxybutynin plasma concentrations rise for 4 to 6 hours; thereafter 
steady concentrations are maintained for up to 24 hours, minimizing fluctuations 
between peak and trough concentrations associated with oxybutynin.
                  The relative bioavailabilities of R- and S-oxybutynin from Oxybutynin 
Chloride Extended Release Tablets are 156% and 187%, respectively, compared with 
oxybutynin. The mean pharmacokinetic parameters for R- and S-oxybutynin are 
summarized in Table 1. The plasma concentration-time profiles for R- and 
S-oxybutynin are similar in shape; Figure 1 shows the profile for 
R-oxybutynin.
                  


                  



                  
                  

                  Figure 1. Mean R-oxybutynin plasma concentrations following 
a single dose of Oxybutynin Chloride Extended Release Tablets 10 mg and 
oxybutynin 5 mg administered every 8 hours (n=23 for each treatment).
                  Steady state oxybutynin plasma concentrations are achieved by Day 3 of 
repeated Oxybutynin Chloride Extended Release Tablets dosing, with no observed 
drug accumulation or change in oxybutynin and desethyloxybutynin pharmacokinetic 
parameters.
                  Oxybutynin Chloride Extended Release Tablets steady state pharmacokinetics 
was studied in 19 children aged 5–15 years with detrusor overactivity associated 
with a neurological condition (e.g. spina bifida). The children were on 
Oxybutynin Chloride Extended Release Tablets total daily dose ranging from 5 to 
20 mg (0.10 to 0.77 mg/kg). Sparse sampling technique was used to obtain serum 
samples. When all available data are normalized to an equivalent of 5 mg per day 
Oxybutynin Chloride Extended Release Tablets, the mean pharmacokinetic 
parameters derived for R- and S-oxybutynin and R- and S-desethyloxybutynin are 
summarized in Table 2. The plasma-time concentration profiles for R- and 
S-oxybutynin are similar in shape; Figure 2 shows the profile for R-oxybutynin 
when all available data are normalized to an equivalent of 5 mg per day.
                  


                  



                  
                  

                  Figure 2. Mean steady state (±SD) R-oxybutynin plasma 
concentrations following administration of 5 to 20 mg Oxybutynin Chloride 
Extended Release Tablets once daily in children aged 5–15. Plot represents all 
available data normalized to an equivalent of Oxybutynin Chloride Extended 
Release Tablets 5 mg once daily.
                  
                  
                  

                  

                  Food Effects
                  The rate and extent of absorption and metabolism of oxybutynin 
are similar under fed and fasted conditions.
                  
                  DistributionPlasma concentrations of oxybutynin decline biexponentially 
following intravenous or oral administration. The volume of distribution is 193 
L after intravenous administration of 5 mg oxybutynin chloride.
                  
                  MetabolismOxybutynin is metabolized primarily by the cytochrome P450 enzyme 
systems, particularly CYP3A4 found mostly in the liver and gut wall. Its 
metabolic products include phenylcyclohexylglycolic acid, which is 
pharmacologically inactive, and desethyloxybutynin, which is pharmacologically 
active. Following Oxybutynin Chloride Extended Release Tablet administration, 
plasma concentrations of R- and S-desethyloxybutynin are 73% and 92%, 
respectively, of concentrations observed with oxybutynin.
                  
                  ExcretionOxybutynin is extensively metabolized by the liver, with less 
than 0.1% of the administered dose excreted unchanged in the urine. Also, less 
than 0.1% of the administered dose is excreted as the metabolite 
desethyloxybutynin.
                  
                  Dose ProportionalityPharmacokinetic parameters of oxybutynin and desethyloxybutynin 
(C max and AUC) following administration of 5–20 mg of 
Oxybutynin Chloride Extended Release Tablets are dose proportional.
                  
                  Special Populations
                  
                  GeriatricThe pharmacokinetics of Oxybutynin Chloride Extended Release 
Tablets were similar in all patients studied (up to 78 years of age).
                  
                  PediatricThe pharmacokinetics of Oxybutynin Chloride Extended Release 
Tablets were evaluated in 19 children aged 5–15 years with detrusor overactivity 
associated with a neurological condition (e.g., spina bifida). The 
pharmacokinetics of Oxybutynin Chloride Extended Release Tablets in these 
pediatric patients were consistent with those reported for adults (see     Tables 1 and     2 , and     Figures 1 and     2 above).
                  
                  GenderThere are no significant differences in the pharmacokinetics of 
oxybutynin in healthy male and female volunteers following administration of 
Oxybutynin Chloride Extended Release Tablets.
                  
                  RaceAvailable data suggest that there are no significant differences 
in the pharmacokinetics of oxybutynin based on race in healthy volunteers 
following administration of Oxybutynin Chloride Extended Release Tablets.
                  
                  Renal InsufficiencyThere is no experience with the use of Oxybutynin Chloride 
Extended Release Tablets in patients with renal insufficiency.
                  
                  Hepatic InsufficiencyThere is no experience with the use of Oxybutynin Chloride 
Extended Release Tablets in patients with hepatic insufficiency.
                  
                  Drug-Drug InteractionsSee 
                            PRECAUTIONS: Drug 
Interactions
                      .
                  

               
               
               
                  
                     image of Figure 1.  Mean R-oxybutynin graph
                     
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     image of Figure 2.  Mean steady state graph
                     
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         