
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           Concomitant administration of ONMEL Tablets with certain drugs metabolized by the cytochrome P450 3A4 isoenzyme system (CYP3A4) or transported by P-glycoprotein may result in increased plasma concentrations of those drugs, leading to potentially serious and/or life-threatening adverse events. (7.1)
                           Drug Interactions with the following drugs or classes of drugs may occur: Antiarrhythmics, Anticonvulsants, Anti-HIV Agents, Antimycobacterials, Antineoplastics, Antipsychotics, Benzodiazepines, Calcium Channel Blockers, Gastric Acid Suppressors/Neutralizers, Gastrointestinal Motility Agents, HMG CoA-Reductase Inhibitors, Macrolide Antibiotics, Oral Hypoglycemic Agents, Polyenes, Opiate Analgesics. Not all drug interactions are included in Highlights. See Full Prescribing Information for complete listing. (7)
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1	Effects of ONMEL on Other Drugs
                     
                        Itraconazole and its major metabolite, hydroxy-itraconazole, are strong inhibitors of the cytochrome P450 3A4 isoenzyme system (CYP3A4). Therefore, concomitant administration of ONMEL and certain drugs metabolized by the cytochrome CYP3A4 may result in increased plasma concentrations of those drugs due to decreased elimination, leading to potentially serious and/or life-threatening adverse events. Itraconazole is also an inhibitor of P-glycoprotein (P-gp) transporter and may result in increased plasma concentrations of drugs whose gastrointestinal absorption is regulated by P-gp. Whenever possible, plasma concentrations of these drugs should be monitored, and dosage adjustments made after concomitant ONMEL therapy is initiated. When appropriate, clinical monitoring for signs or symptoms of increased or prolonged pharmacologic effects is advised. Upon discontinuation, itraconazole plasma concentrations decline gradually (especially in patients with hepatic cirrhosis or in those receiving CYP3A4 inhibitors). This is particularly important when initiating therapy with drugs whose metabolism is affected by itraconazole.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2	Effects of Other Drugs on ONMEL
                     
                        Inducers of CYP3A4 may decrease the plasma concentrations of itraconazole. ONMEL may not be effective in patients concomitantly taking ONMEL and one of these drugs. Therefore, administration of these drugs with ONMEL is not recommended.
                        Inhibitors of CYP3A4 may increase the plasma concentrations of itraconazole. Patients who must take ONMEL concomitantly with one of these drugs should be monitored closely for signs or symptoms of increased or prolonged pharmacologic effects of ONMEL.
                        



                     



                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Antiarrhythmics
                              
                              The Class IA antiarrhythmic, quinidine and class III antiarrhythmic, dofetilide are known to prolong the QT interval. Co-administration of quinidine or dofetilide with itraconazole may increase plasma concentrations of quinidine or dofetilide, which could result in serious cardiovascular events. Therefore, concomitant administration of ONMEL and quinidine or dofetilide is contraindicated. [See Boxed Warning, Contraindications (4), and Warnings and Precautions (5).]
                              
                              The Class IA antiarrhythmic, disopyramide has the potential to increase the QT interval at high plasma concentrations. Caution is advised when ONMEL and disopyramide are administered concomitantly.
                              Concomitant administration of digoxin and itraconazole has led to increased plasma concentrations of digoxin via inhibition of P-glycoprotein.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Anticonvulsants
                              
                              Carbamazepine, phenobarbital, and phenytoin are all inducers of CYP3A4. Reduced plasma concentrations of itraconazole were reported when itraconazole was administered concomitantly with phenytoin. Although interactions with carbamazepine and phenobarbital have not been studied, concomitant administration of ONMEL and these drugs would be expected to result in decreased plasma concentrations of itraconazole. In addition, in vivo studies have demonstrated an increase in plasma carbamazepine concentrations in subjects concomitantly receiving ketoconazole. Although there are no data regarding the effect of itraconazole on carbamazepine metabolism, because of the similarities between ketoconazole and itraconazole, concomitant administration of ONMEL and carbamazepine may inhibit the metabolism of carbamazepine.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Anti-HIV Agents
                              
                              Non-nucleoside Reverse Transcriptase Inhibitors (NNRTI) such as nevirapine and efavirenz are inducers of CYP3A4. Human pharmacokinetic studies have shown that efavirenz, when concomitantly administered with itraconazole, greatly decreased serum concentrations of itraconazole and hydroxyl-itraconazole. Concomitant use of ONMEL and efavirenz is not recommended.
                              In vivo studies have shown that nevirapine induces the metabolism of ketoconazole, significantly reducing the bioavailability of ketoconazole. Studies involving nevirapine and itraconazole have not been conducted. However, because of the similarities between ketoconazole and itraconazole, concomitant administration of ONMEL and nevirapine is not recommended.
                              Concomitant administration of ONMEL and protease inhibitors metabolized by CYP3A4, such as indinavir, ritonavir, and saquinavir, may increase plasma concentrations of these protease inhibitors. In addition, concomitant administration of ONMEL and indinavir and ritonavir (but not saquinavir) may increase plasma concentrations of itraconazole. Caution is advised when ONMEL and protease inhibitors must be given concomitantly.
                              Concomitant administration of ONMEL and maraviroc has been reported to increase plasma concentration of maraviroc. The dose of maraviroc should be decreased to 150 mg twice daily when given in combination with itraconazole.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Antimycobacterials
                              
                              Drug interaction studies have demonstrated that plasma concentrations of azole antifungal agents and their metabolites, including itraconazole and hydroxyitraconazole, were significantly decreased when these agents were given concomitantly with rifabutin or rifampin. In vivo data suggest that rifabutin is metabolized in part by CYP3A4. ONMEL may inhibit the metabolism of rifabutin. Although no formal study data are available for isoniazid, similar effects should be anticipated. Therefore, the efficacy of ONMEL could be substantially reduced if given concomitantly with one of these agents and co-administration is not recommended.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Antineoplastics
                              
                              ONMEL may inhibit the metabolism of busulfan, docetaxel, and vinca alkaloids.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Antipsychotics
                              
                              Pimozide is known to prolong the QT interval and is partially metabolized by CYP3A4. Co-administration of pimozide with itraconazole could result in serious cardiovascular events. Therefore, concomitant administration of ONMEL and pimozide is contraindicated. [See Boxed Warning, Contraindications (4), and Warnings and Precautions (5).]
                              
                              Increases in plasma aripiprazole concentrations have been demonstrated in subjects concomitantly receiving ketoconazole, requiring a reduction of the aripiprazole dose. Because of the similarities between ketoconazole and itraconazole, a similar dose reduction for aripiprazole is recommended when patients concomitantly receive itraconazole and aripiprazole.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Benzodiazepines
                              
                              Concomitant administration of itraconazole and alprazolam, diazepam, oral midazolam, or triazolam could lead to increased plasma concentrations of these benzodiazepines. Increased plasma concentrations could potentiate and prolong hypnotic and sedative effects. Concomitant administration of ONMEL and oral midazolam or triazolam is contraindicated. [See Contraindications (4), and Warnings and Precautions (5).] If midazolam is administered parenterally, special precaution and patient monitoring is required since the sedative effect may be prolonged.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Calcium Channel Blockers
                              
                              Calcium channel blockers can have a negative inotropic effect which may be additive to those of itraconazole; itraconazole can inhibit the metabolism of calcium channel blockers such as dihydropyridines (e.g., nifedipine, nisoldipine, and felodipine) and verapamil. Therefore, caution should be used when co-administering itraconazole and calcium channel blockers due to an increased risk of CHF.
                              Concomitant administration of ONMEL and nisoldipine results in clinically significant increases in nisoldipine plasma concentrations, which cannot be managed by dosage reduction, therefore the concomitant administration of ONMEL and nisoldipine is contraindicated. A clinical study showed that felodipine exposure was increased by co-administration of itraconazole, resulting in approximately 6-fold increase in the AUC and 8-fold increase in the Cmax. The concomitant use of ONMEL and felodipine is contraindicated. [See Contraindications (4), Warnings and Precautions (5), Drug Interactions (7), and Clinical Pharmacology (12).]
                              
                              Edema has been reported in patients concomitantly receiving itraconazole and dihydropyridine calcium channel blockers. Appropriate dosage adjustment may be necessary.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Gastric Acid Suppressors/Neutralizers
                              
                              Reduced plasma concentrations of itraconazole were reported when administered concomitantly with H2-receptor antagonists. Studies have shown that absorption of itraconazole is impaired when gastric acid production is decreased. ONMEL should be administered with a cola beverage if the patient has achlorhydria or is taking H2-receptor antagonists or other gastric acid suppressors. It is advised that antacids be administered at least 1 hour before or 2 hours after administration of ONMEL. In a clinical study, when itraconazole capsules were administered with omeprazole (a proton pump inhibitor), the bioavailability of itraconazole was significantly reduced.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Gastrointestinal Motility Agents
                              
                              Co-administration of itraconazole with cisapride can elevate plasma cisapride concentrations, which could result in serious cardiovascular events. Therefore, concomitant administration of ONMEL with cisapride is contraindicated. [See Boxed Warning, Contraindications (4), and Warnings and Precautions (5).]
                              
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 3-Hydroxy-3-Methyl-Glutaryl CoA-Reductase Inhibitors
                              
                              Human pharmacokinetic data suggest that itraconazole inhibits the metabolism of atorvastatin, cerivastatin, lovastatin, and simvastatin, which may increase the risk of skeletal muscle toxicity, including rhabdomyolysis. Concomitant administration of ONMEL with 3-Hydroxy-3-Methyl-Glutaryl (HMG) CoA-Reductase inhibitors, such as lovastatin and simvastatin, is contraindicated. [See Contraindications (4), and Warnings and Precautions (5).]
                              
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Immunosuppressants
                              
                              Concomitant administration of ONMEL and cyclosporine or tacrolimus has led to increased plasma concentrations of these immunosuppressants. Similarly, concomitant administration of ONMEL  and sirolimus could increase plasma concentrations of sirolimus.
                              Monitoring of blood concentrations of cyclosporine, tacrolimus, or sirolimus are recommended when ONMEL are co-administered with these immunosuppressants and appropriate dosage adjustments should be made.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Macrolide Antibiotics
                              
                              Erythromycin and clarithromycin are known inhibitors of CYP3A4 (See Table 3) and may increase plasma concentrations of itraconazole.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Oral Hypoglycemic Agents
                              
                              Severe hypoglycemia has been reported in patients concomitantly receiving azole antifungal agents and oral hypoglycemic agents. A human pharmacokinetic study showed that co-administration with itraconazole and a single dose of repaglinide (on the third day of a regimen of 200 mg initial dose, twice-daily 100 mg itraconazole) resulted in a 1.4-fold higher repaglinide AUC. Blood glucose concentrations should be carefully monitored when ONMEL and oral hypoglycemic agents are co-administered.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Polyenes Antifungal Agents
                              
                              Prior treatment with itraconazole, like other azoles, may reduce or inhibit the activity of polyenes such as amphotericin B. However, the clinical significance of this drug effect has not been clearly defined.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Opiate Analgesics
                              
                              Levacetylmethadol (levomethadyl) and methadone are known to prolong the QT interval and are metabolized by CYP3A4. Co-administration of methadone or levacetylmethadol with itraconazole could result in serious cardiovascular events. Therefore, concomitant administration of ONMEL and methadone or levacetylmethadol are contraindicated.
                              Fentanyl plasma concentrations could be increased or prolonged by concomitant use of itraconazole and may cause potentially fatal respiratory depression.
                              In vitro data suggest that alfentanil is metabolized by CYP3A4. Administration with itraconazole may increase plasma concentrations of alfentanil.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Other
                              
                              
                                 Elevated concentrations of ergot alkaloids can cause ergotism, i.e., a risk for vasospasm potentially leading to cerebral ischemia and/or ischemia of the extremities. Concomitant administration of ergot alkaloids such as dihydroergotamine, ergometrine (ergonovine), ergotamine and methylergometrine (methylergonovine) with ONMEL is contraindicated.
                                 Halofantrine has the potential to prolong the QT interval at high plasma concentrations. Caution is advised when ONMEL and halofantrine are administered concomitantly.
                                 Human pharmacokinetic data suggest that concomitant administration of itraconazole and buspirone results in significant increases in plasma concentrations of buspirone.
                                 Itraconazole may inhibit the metabolism of certain glucocorticosteroids such as budesonide, dexamethasone, fluticasone and methylprednisolone.
                                 Itraconazole enhances the anticoagulant effect of coumarin-like drugs, such as warfarin.
                                 Cilostazol and eletriptan are CYP3A4 metabolized drugs that should be used with caution when co-administered with ONMEL.
                                 Co-administration of itraconazole with meloxicam decreased peak plasma concentrations and the exposure of meloxicam by 64% and 37%, respectively. Monitor patients for responses to meloxicam when itraconazole is concomitantly administered and dose adjustment should be considered if warranted.
                                 Co-administration of itraconazole with fexofenadine increased the peak plasma concentration and the total exposure of fexofenadine by approximately 3-fold and augmented its anti-histamine effects.
                                 Co-administration of itraconazole with loperamide increased peak plasma concentrations of loperamide by 3-fold and the total exposure by 3.9-fold. In addition, itraconazole is an inhibitor of P-glycoprotein and may inhibit the transport of loperamide out of the brain, leading to elevated concentrations of loperamide in the brain. Patients should be monitored for signs and symptoms of loperamide overdose, such as CNS depression, including drowsiness, dizziness and respiratory depression, and a dose or dosing frequency should be adjusted as necessary.
                              
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         