
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Itraconazole, an azole, is an antifungal agent [See Clinical Pharmacology (12) and Microbiology (12.4)
                           ].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        The oral bioavailability of itraconazole is increased when ONMEL is taken with a FDA standard high-fat meal. The pharmacokinetic parameters of itraconazole and hydroxy-itraconazole after administration of one ONMEL to 9 male and 9 female healthy subjects in fasting and in fed conditions are presented in the table below:
                        


                        


The steady-state pharmacokinetics of itraconazole and hydroxy-itraconazole were analyzed after oral dosing of 16 healthy volunteers with one ONMEL following a moderate-fat breakfast once daily for 14 days in an open-label study. Mean maximum plasma levels of itraconazole and hydroxy-itraconazole increased from Day 1 to Day 14 by approximately 6- and 4-fold, respectively. The respective pharmacokinetic parameters from this study are reflected in the table below:
                        


                        


In a 2-period, open-label, randomized, cross-over, pivotal bioequivalence study to assess the comparative bioavailability of the ONMEL and a marketed 100-mg itraconazole capsule, 28 male and 28 female healthy subjects were given as a single dose, 200 mg of itraconazole immediately after a moderate-fat breakfast (same caloric and fat contents as in the table above). Fifty-two subjects were included in the final analysis.
                        The Cmax of the ONMEL was comparable to that of the 2 itraconazole 100-mg capsules while AUCt and AUC∞ were about 15% higher with the ONMEL.
                        In another 2-period, open-label, randomized, cross-over, pivotal bioequivalence study, 28 male and 28 female healthy subjects were given one ONMEL or two 100-mg itraconazole capsules following the FDA standard high-fat breakfast. The Cmax and AUC∞ of the ONMEL were 20 and 30% lower, respectively, than those of two itraconazole 100-mg capsules. Overall, the inter-subject variability was high and coefficient of variances (CV) for AUCs in the above two studies were 44-66%.
                        Itraconazole is metabolized predominately by the cytochrome P450 3A4 isoenzyme system (CYP3A4), resulting in the formation of several metabolites. Hydroxyitraconazole, the major metabolite, has in vitro antifungal activity comparable to itraconazole. Results of a pharmacokinetics study suggest that itraconazole may undergo saturable metabolism with multiple dosing. Based on an oral dose, fecal excretion of the parent drug varies between 3-18% of the dose. Itraconazole is excreted mainly as inactive metabolites in the urine (35%) and feces (54%) within one week of an oral dose. No single excreted metabolite represents more than 5% of a dose. The plasma protein binding of itraconazole has been reported to be 99.8% and that of hydroxy-itraconazole is 99.5%. [See Contraindications (4).]
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.4 Microbiology
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                    Mechanism of Action
                                 
                              
                              Itraconazole inhibits the cytochrome P450-dependent synthesis of ergosterol, which is a vital component of fungal cell membranes.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                    Activity In Vitro
                                 
                              
                              Itraconazole exhibits in vitro activity against Trichophyton 
                                 rubrum and Trichophyton mentagrophytes.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                    Resistance
                                 
                              
                              Isolates from several fungal species with decreased susceptibility to itraconazole have been isolated from patients receiving prolonged therapy.
                              Several in vitro studies have reported that some fungal clinical isolates with reduced susceptibility to one azole antifungal agent may also be less susceptible to other azole derivatives. The finding of cross-resistance is dependent on a number of factors, including the species evaluated, its clinical history, the particular azole compounds compared, and the type of susceptibility test that is performed. The relevance of these in vitro susceptibility data to clinical outcome remains to be elucidated.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Special Populations
                              
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Renal Insufficiency
                                    
                                    Limited data are available on the use of oral itraconazole in patients with renal impairment. A pharmacokinetic study using a single 200-mg dose of itraconazole was conducted in three groups of patients with renal impairment (uremia: n=7; hemodialysis: n=7; and continuous ambulatory peritoneal dialysis: n=5). In uremic subjects with a mean creatinine clearance of 13 mL/min. × 1.73 m2, the exposure, based on AUC, was slightly reduced compared with normal population parameters. The study did not demonstrate any significant effect of hemodialysis or continuous ambulatory peritoneal dialysis on the pharmacokinetics of itraconazole (Tmax, Cmax, and AUC0-8). Plasma concentration-versus-time profiles showed wide intersubject variation in all three groups. Caution should be exercised when the drug is administered in this population. [See Warnings and Precautions (5) and Dosage and Administration (2).]
                                    
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Hepatic Insufficiency
                                    
                                    Itraconazole is predominantly metabolized in the liver. Patients with impaired hepatic function should be carefully monitored when taking itraconazole. A pharmacokinetic study using a single oral 100 mg dose of itraconazole was conducted in 6 healthy and 12 cirrhotic subjects. A statistically significant reduction in mean Cmax (47%) and a twofold increase in the elimination half-life (37 ± 17 hours vs. 16 ± 5 hours) of itraconazole were noted in cirrhotic subjects compared with healthy subjects. However, overall exposure to itraconazole, based on AUC, was similar in cirrhotic patients and in healthy subjects. The prolonged elimination half-life of itraconazole observed in the single oral dose clinical trial with itraconazole in cirrhotic patients should be considered when deciding to initiate therapy with other medications metabolized by CYP3A4. Data are not available in cirrhotic patients during long-term use of itraconazole. [See Boxed Warning, Contraindications (4), Warnings and Precautions (5), and Dosage and Administration (2).]
                                    
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         