
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Complete or Partial Reversal of Opioid Depression
                     
                        Naloxone hydrochloride prevents or reverses the effects of opioids including respiratory depression, sedation, and hypotension. Also, it can reverse the psychotomimetic and dysphoric effects of agonist-antagonist such as pentazocine.
                        Naloxone hydrochloride is an essentially pure opioid antagonist, i.e., it does not possess the "agonistic" or morphine-like properties characteristic of other opioid antagonists. When administered in usual doses and in the absence of opioids or agonistic effects of other opioid antagonists, it exhibits essentially no pharmacologic activity.
                        Naloxone hydrochloride has not been shown to produce tolerance or cause physical or psychological dependence. In the presence of physical dependence on opioids, naloxone hydrochloride will produce withdrawal symptoms. However, in the presence of opioid dependence, opiate withdrawal symptoms may appear within minutes of naloxone hydrochloride administration and subside in about 2 hours. The severity and duration of the withdrawal syndrome are related to the dose of naloxone hydrochloride and to the degree and type of opioid dependence.
                        While the mechanism of action of naloxone hydrochloride is not fully understood, in vitro evidence suggests that the naloxone hydrochloride antagonizes opioid effects by competing for the u, k and o opiate receptor sites in the CNS, with the greatest affinity for the
                               u
                            receptor.
                        When naloxone hydrochloride is administered intravenously (I.V.), the onset of action is generally apparent within two minutes. The onset of action is slightly less rapid when it is administered subcutaneously (S.C.) or intramuscularly (I.M.). The duration of action is dependent upon the dose and route of administration of naloxone hydrochloride. Intramuscular administration produces a more prolonged effect than intravenous administration. Since the duration of action of naloxone hydrochloride may be shorter than that of some opiates, the effect of the opiate may return as the effects of naloxone hydrochloride dissipates. The requirement for repeat doses of naloxone hydrochloride will also be dependent upon the amount, type and route of administration of the opioid being antagonized.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Adjunctive Use in Septic Shock
                     
                        Naloxone hydrochloride has been shown in some cases of septic shock to produce a rise in blood pressure that may last up to several hours; however, this pressor response has not been demonstrated to improve patient survival. In some studies, treatment with naloxone hydrochloride in the setting of septic shock has been associated with adverse effects, including agitation, nausea and vomiting, pulmonary edema, hypotension, cardiac arrhythmias, and seizures. The decision to use naloxone hydrochloride in septic shock should be exercised with caution, particularly in patients who may have underlying pain or have previously received opioid therapy and may have developed opioid tolerance.
                        Because of the limited number of patients who have been treated, optimal dosage and treatment regimens have not been established.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         