
                     
                     
                     Drug Interactions:
                     
                        
                           
                              Diuretics: 
                           Patients on diuretics, and especially those started recently, may occasionally experience an excessive reduction of blood pressure after initiation of perindopril erbumine tablets therapy. The possibility of hypotensive effects can be minimized by either discontinuing the diuretic or increasing the salt intake prior to initiation of treatment with perindopril. If diuretics cannot be interrupted, close medical supervision should be provided with the first dose of perindopril erbumine tablets, for at least two hours and until blood pressure has stabilized for another hour. (See 
                              WARNINGS
                            and 
                              DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION
                           .) 
                        The rate and extent of perindopril absorption and elimination are not affected by concomitant diuretics. The bioavailability of perindoprilat was reduced by diuretics, however, and this was associated with a decrease in plasma ACE inhibition.
                        
                           
                              Potassium Supplements and Potassium-Sparing Diuretics: 
                           Perindopril erbumine tablets may increase serum potassium because of its potential to decrease aldosterone production. Use of potassium-sparing diuretics (spironolactone, amiloride, triamterene and others), potassium supplements or other drugs capable of increasing serum potassium (indomethacin, heparin, cyclosporine and others) can increase the risk of hyperkalemia. Therefore, if concomitant use of such agents is indicated, they should be given with caution and the patient’s serum potassium should be monitored frequently. 
                        
                           
                              Lithium: 
                           Increased serum lithium and symptoms of lithium toxicity have been reported in patients receiving concomitant lithium and ACE inhibitor therapy. These drugs should be coadministered with caution and frequent monitoring of serum lithium concentration is recommended. Use of a diuretic may further increase the risk of lithium toxicity. 
                        
                           
                              Gold: 
                           Nitritoid reactions (symptoms include facial flushing, nausea, vomiting, and hypotension) have been reported rarely in patients on therapy with injectable gold (sodium aurothiomalate) and concomitant ACE Inhibitor therapy including perindropil erbumine tablets. 
                        
                           
                              Digoxin: 
                           A controlled pharmacokinetic study has shown no effect on plasma digoxin concentrations when co-administered with perindopril erbumine tablets, but an effect of digoxin on the plasma concentration of perindopril/perindoprilat has not been excluded. 
                        
                           
                              Gentamicin: 
                           Animal data have suggested the possibility of interaction between perindopril and gentamicin. However, this has not been investigated in human studies. Co-administration of both drugs should proceed with caution. 
                        
                           
                              Food Interaction: 
                           Oral administration of perindopril erbumine tablets with food does not significantly lower the rate or extent of perindopril absorption relative to the fasted state. However, the extent of biotransformation of perindopril to the active metabolite, perindoprilat, is reduced approximately 43%, resulting in a reduction in the plasma ACE inhibition curve of approximately 20%, probably clinically insignificant. In clinical trials, perindopril was generally administered in a non-fasting state.
                     
                     
                  
               