
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  
                  
                     
Central Nervous System
                  Oxycodone is a semisynthetic pure opioid agonist whose principal 
therapeutic action is analgesia. Other pharmacological effects of oxycodone 
include anxiolysis, euphoria and feelings of relaxation. These effects are 
mediated by receptors (notably µ and κ) in the central nervous system for 
endogenous opioid-like compounds such as endorphins and enkephalins. Oxycodone 
produces respiratory depression through direct activity at respiratory centers 
in the brain stem and depresses the cough reflex by direct effect on the center 
of the medulla.
                  Acetaminophen is a non-opiate, non-salicylate analgesic and antipyretic. The 
site and mechanism for the analgesic effect of acetaminophen has not been 
determined. The antipyretic effect of acetaminophen is accomplished through the 
inhibition of endogenous pyrogen action on the hypothalamic heat-regulating 
centers.
                  
                  
                  
                  
                     
Gastrointestinal Tract and Other Smooth Muscle
                  Oxycodone reduces motility by increasing smooth muscle tone in 
the stomach and duodenum. In the small intestine, digestion of food is delayed 
by decreases in propulsive contractions. Other opioid effects include 
contraction of biliary tract smooth muscle, spasm of the Sphincter of Oddi, 
increased ureteral and bladder sphincter tone, and a reduction in uterine 
tone.
                  
                  
                  
                  
                     
Cardiovascular System
                  Oxycodone may produce a release of histamine and may be 
associated with orthostatic hypotension, and other symptoms, such as pruritus, 
flushing, red eyes, and sweating.
                  
                  
                  
                  
                     
Pharmacokinetics
                  Absorption and Distribution
The mean absolute oral 
bioavailability of oxycodone in cancer patients was reported to be about 87%. 
Oxycodone has been shown to be 45% bound to human plasma proteins in vitro. The volume of distribution after intravenous 
administration is 211.9 ±186.6 L.
                  Absorption of acetaminophen is rapid and almost complete from the GI tract 
after oral administration. With overdosage, absorption is complete in 4 hours. 
Acetaminophen is relatively uniformly distributed throughout most body fluids. 
Binding of the drug to plasma proteins is variable; only 20% to 50% may be bound 
at the concentrations encountered during acute intoxication.
                  
                  
                  
                  
                     
Metabolism and Elimination
                  A high portion of oxycodone is N-dealkylated to noroxycodone 
during first-pass metabolism. Oxymorphone, is formed by the O-demethylation of 
oxycodone. The metabolism of oxycodone to oxymorphone is catalyzed by CYP2D6. 
Free and conjugated noroxycodone, free and conjugated oxycodone, and oxymorphone 
are excreted in human urine following a single oral dose of oxycodone. 
Approximately 8% to 14% of the dose is excreted as free oxycodone over 24 hours 
after administration. Following a single, oral dose of oxycodone, the mean ± SD 
elimination half-life is 3.51 ± 1.43 hours.
                  Acetaminophen is metabolized in the liver via cytochrome P450 microsomal 
enzyme. About 80-85% of the acetaminophen in the body is conjugated principally 
with glucuronic acid and to a lesser extent with sulfuric acid and cysteine. 
After hepatic conjugation, 90 to 100% of the drug is recovered in the urine with 
in the first day.
                  About 4% of acetaminophen is metabolized via cytochrome P450 oxidase to a 
toxic metabolite which is further detoxified by conjugation with glutathione, 
present in a fixed amount. It is believed that the toxic metabolite NAPQI (N 
acetyl-p-benzoquinoneimine, N-acetylimidoquinone) is responsible for liver 
necrosis. High doses of acetaminophen may deplete the glutathione stores so that 
inactivation of the toxic metabolite is decreased. At high doses, the capacity 
of metabolic pathways for conjugation with glucuronic acid and sulfuric acid may 
be exceeded, resulting in increased metabolism of acetaminophen by alternate 
pathways.
               
               
            
         