
               
               
               DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
                  

                  

                  Furosemide may increase the ototoxic potential of aminoglycoside 
antibiotics, especially in the presence of impaired renal function. Except in 
life-threatening situations, avoid this combination.
                  Furosemide tablets should not be used concomitantly with ethacrynic acid 
because of the possibility of ototoxicity. Patients receiving high doses of 
salicylates concomitantly with furosemide, as in rheumatic disease, may 
experience salicylate toxicity at lower doses because of competitive renal 
excretory sites.
                  Furosemide has a tendency to antagonize the skeletal muscle relaxing effect 
of tubocurarine and may potentiate the action of succinylcholine.
                  Lithium generally should not be given with diuretics because they reduce 
lithium’s renal clearance and add a high risk of lithium toxicity.
                  Furosemide may add to or potentiate the therapeutic effect of other 
antihypertensive drugs. Potentiation occurs with ganglionic or peripheral 
adrenergic blocking drugs.
                  Furosemide may decrease arterial responsiveness to norepinephrine. However, 
norepinephrine may still be used effectively.
                  Simultaneous administration of sucralfate and furosemide tablets may reduce 
the natriuretic and antihypertensive effects of furosemide. Patients receiving 
both drugs should be observed closely to determine if the desired diuretic 
and/or antihypertensive effect of furosemide is achieved. The intake of 
furosemide and sucralfate should be separated by at least two hours.
                  One study in six subjects demonstrated that the combination of furosemide and 
acetylsalicylic acid temporarily reduced creatinine clearance in patients with 
chronic renal insufficiency. There are case reports of patients who developed 
increased BUN, serum creatinine and serum potassium levels, and weight gain when 
furosemide tablets were used in conjunction with NSAIDs.
                  Literature reports indicate that co-administration of indomethacin may reduce 
the natriuretic and antihypertensive effects of furosemide in some patients by 
inhibiting prostaglandin synthesis. Indomethacin may also affect plasma renin 
levels, aldosterone excretion, and renin profile evaluation. Patients receiving 
both indomethacin and furosemide should be observed closely to determine if the 
desired diuretic and/or antihypertensive effect of furosemide is achieved.
                  
                  Carcinogenesis, Mutagenesis, Impairment of 
FertilityFurosemide was tested for carcinogenicity by oral administration 
in one strain of mice and one strain of rats. A small but significantly 
increased incidence of mammary gland carcinomas occurred in female mice at a 
dose 17.5 times the maximum human dose of 600 mg. There were marginal increases 
in uncommon tumors in male rats at a dose of 15 mg/kg (slightly greater than the 
maximum human dose) but not at 30 mg/kg.
                  Furosemide was devoid of mutagenic activity in various strains of Salmonella typhimurium when tested in the presence or 
absence of an in vitro metabolic activation system, 
and questionably positive for gene mutation in mouse lymphoma cells in the 
presence of rat liver S9 at the highest dose tested. Furosemide did not induce 
sister chromatid exchange in human cells in vitro, 
but other studies on chromosomal aberrations in human cells in vitro gave conflicting results. In Chinese hamster cells 
it induced chromosomal damage but was questionably positive for sister chromatid 
exchange. Studies on the induction by furosemide of chromosomal aberrations in 
mice were inconclusive. The urine of rats treated with this drug did not induce 
gene conversion in Saccharomyces cerevisiae.
                  
                  Furosemide produced no impairment of fertility in male or female rats at 100 
mg/kg/day (the maximum effective diuretic dose in the rat and 8 times the 
maximal human dose of 600 mg/day).
                  

               
               
            
         