
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS

               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              Cholestyramine: Use with EVISTA is not recommended. Reduces the absorption and enterohepatic cycling of raloxifene. (7.1, 12.3)

                           
                              Warfarin: Monitor prothrombin time when starting or stopping EVISTA. (7.2, 12.3)

                           
                              Highly Protein-Bound Drugs: Use with EVISTA with caution. Highly protein-bound drugs include diazepam, diazoxide, and lidocaine. EVISTA is more than 95% bound to plasma proteins. (7.3, 12.3)

                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1 Cholestyramine

                     
                        Concomitant administration of cholestyramine with EVISTA is not recommended. Although not specifically studied, it is anticipated that other anion exchange resins would have a similar effect. EVISTA should not be co-administered with other anion exchange resins [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].

                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 Warfarin

                     
                        If EVISTA is given concomitantly with warfarin or other warfarin derivatives, prothrombin time should be monitored more closely when starting or stopping therapy with EVISTA [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].

                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3 Other Highly Protein-Bound Drugs

                     
                        EVISTA should be used with caution with certain other highly protein-bound drugs such as diazepam, diazoxide, and lidocaine. Although not examined, EVISTA might affect the protein binding of other drugs. Raloxifene is more than 95% bound to plasma proteins [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].

                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4 Systemic Estrogens

                     
                        The safety of concomitant use of EVISTA with systemic estrogens has not been established and its use is not recommended.

                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.5 Other Concomitant Medications

                     
                        EVISTA can be concomitantly administered with ampicillin, amoxicillin, antacids, corticosteroids, and digoxin [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].

                        The concomitant use of EVISTA and lipid-lowering agents has not been studied.

                     
                     
                  
               
            
         