
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  Metronidazole is a synthetic antibacterial compound. Disposition of metronidazole in the body is similar for both oral and intravenous dosage forms, with an average elimination half-life in healthy humans of eight hours.
                  The major route of elimination of metronidazole and its metabolites is via the urine (60 to 80% of the dose), with fecal excretion accounting for 6 to 15% of the dose. The metabolites that appear in the urine result primarily from side-chain oxidation (1-[β-hydroxyethyl]-2-hydroxymethyl-5-nitroimidazole and 2-methyl-5-nitroimidazole-1-yl-acetic acid) and glucuronide conjugation, with unchanged metronidazole accounting for approximately 20% of the total. Renal clearance of metronidazole is approximately 10 mL/min/1.73 m2.
                  Metronidazole is the major component appearing in the plasma, with lesser quantities of the 2-hydroxymethyl metabolite also being present. Less than 20% of the circulating metronidazole is bound to plasma proteins. Both the parent compound and the metabolite possess in vitro bactericidal activity against most strains of anaerobic bacteria.
                  Metronidazole appears in cerebrospinal fluid, saliva, and human milk in concentrations similar to those found in plasma. Bactericidal concentrations of metronidazole have also been detected in pus from hepatic abscesses.
                  Plasma concentrations of metronidazole are proportional to the administered dose. An eight-hour intravenous infusion of 100 to 4,000 mg of metronidazole in normal subjects showed a linear relationship between dose and peak plasma concentration.
                  In patients treated with metronidazole injection using a dosage regimen of 15 mg/kg loading dose followed six hours later by 7.5 mg/kg every six hours, peak steady-state plasma concentrations of metronidazole averaged 25 mcg/mL with trough (minimum) concentrations averaging 18 mcg/mL.
                  Decreased renal function does not alter the single-dose pharmacokinetics of metronidazole. However, plasma clearance of metronidazole is decreased in patients with decreased liver function.
                  In one study newborn infants appeared to demonstrate diminished capacity to eliminate metronidazole. The elimination half-life, measured during the first three days of life, was inversely related to gestational age. In infants whose gestational ages were between 28 and 40 weeks, the corresponding elimination half-lives ranged from 109 to 22.5 hours.
               
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Microbiology
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Mechanism of Action
                           
                              Metronidazole, a nitroimidazole, exerts antibacterial effects in an anaerobic environment against most obligate anaerobes. Once metronidazole enters the organism by passive diffusion and activated in the cytoplasm of susceptible anaerobic bacteria, it is reduced; this process includes intra-cellular electron transport donors such as ferredoxin and transfer of an electron to the nitro group of the metronidazole leading to formation of a short-lived nitroso free radical. Because of this alteration of the metronidazole molecule, a concentration gradient is created and maintained which promotes the drug’s intracellular transport. The reduced form of metronidazole and free radicals may interact with DNA leading to inhibition of DNA synthesis, DNA degradation, and death of bacteria. The precise mechanism of action of metronidazole is unclear.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Drug Resistance
                           
                              A potential for development of resistance exists against metronidazole.
                              Resistance may be due to multiple mechanisms that include decreased uptake of the drug, altered reduction efficiency, overexpression of the efflux pumps, inactivation of the drug, and/or increased DNA damage repair.
                              Metronidazole does not possess any clinically relevant activity against facultative anaerobes or obligate aerobes.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Activity In Vitro and in Clinical Infections
                           
                              Against susceptible organisms, metronidazole is generally bactericidal at concentrations equal to or slightly higher than the minimal inhibitory concentrations. Metronidazole has been shown to be active against most isolates of the following bacteria both in vitro and clinical infections as described in the 
                                    INDICATIONS AND USAGE 
                                 section.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Gram
negative anaerobes:
                           
                              
                                 
                                    Bacteroides fragilis group (B. fragilis, B. distasonis, B. ovatus, B. thetaiotaomicron, B. vulgatus)
                                 
                                 
                                    Fusobacterium species
                              
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Gram
positive anaerobes:
                           
                              
                                 
                                    Clostridium species 
                                 
                                    Eubacterium species
                                 
                                    Peptococcus species
                                 
                                    Peptostreptococcus
                                 
                              
                              The following in vitro data are available, but their clinical significance is unknown: Metronidazole exhibits in vitro minimal inhibitory concentrations (MIC’s) of 8 mcg/mL or less against most (≥90%) isolates of the following bacteria; however, the safety and effectiveness of metronidazole in treating clinical infections due to these bacteria have not been established in adequate and well-controlled clinical trials:
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Gram negative anaerobes
                           
                              
                                 
                                    Bacteroides fragilis group (B. caccae, B. uniformis)
                                 
                                 
                                    Prevotella species (P. bivia, P. buccae, P. disiens)
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Susceptibility Tests:
                     
                        When available, the clinical microbiology laboratory should provide results of in vitro susceptibility test results for antimicrobial drug products used in resident hospitals to the physician as periodic reports that describe the susceptibility profile of nosocomial and community-acquired pathogens. These reports should aid the physician in selecting an antibacterial drug product for treatment.
                     
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           For Anaerobes
                           
                              Quantitative methods are used to determine antimicrobial inhibitory concentrations (MICs). These MICs provide estimates of the susceptibility of bacteria to antimicrobial compounds. For anaerobic bacteria, the susceptibility to metronidazole should be determined using a standardized method (broth and/or agar).1, 2
                              
                              The MIC values obtained should be interpreted according to the criteria provided in Table 1:
                              


                              


A report of Susceptible (S) indicates that the antimicrobial drug is likely to inhibit growth of the microorganism if the antimicrobial drug reaches the concentration usually achievable at the site of infection.
                              A report of Intermediate (I) implies that an infection due to the isolate may be appropriately treated in the body sites where the drugs are physiologically concentrated or when a high dosage of drug is used.
                              A report of Resistant (R) indicates that the antimicrobial is not likely to inhibit growth of the pathogen if the antimicrobial drug reaches the concentration usually achievable at the infection site; other therapy should be selected.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           Quality Control
                           
                              Standardized susceptibility test procedures require the use of laboratory controls to monitor and ensure the accuracy and precision of supplies and reagents used in the assay, and the techniques of the individuals performing the test.1, 2 Standard metronidazole powder should provide the MIC values shown in Table 2.
                              


