
                     
                     
                     Drug Interactions
                     
                        
                           Hypotension - Patients on Diuretic Therapy:  Patients on diuretics and especially those in whom diuretic therapy was recently instituted, may occasionally experience an excessive reduction of blood pressure after initiation of therapy with ZESTRIL.  The possibility of hypotensive effects with ZESTRIL can be minimized by either discontinuing the diuretic or increasing the salt intake prior to initiation of treatment with ZESTRIL.  If it is necessary to continue the diuretic, initiate therapy with ZESTRIL at a dose of 5 mg daily, and provide close medical supervision after the initial dose until blood pressure has stabilized (See WARNINGS, and DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION).  When a diuretic is added to the therapy of a patient receiving ZESTRIL, an additional antihypertensive effect is usually observed.  Studies with ACE inhibitors in combination with diuretics indicate that the dose of the ACE inhibitor can be reduced when it is given with a diuretic (See DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION).
                        
                           Antidiabetics: Epidemiological studies have suggested that concomitant administration of ACE inhibitors and antidiabetic medicines (insulins, oral hypoglycemic agents) may cause an increased blood-glucose-lowering effect with risk of hypoglycemia. This phenomenon appeared to be more likely to occur during the first weeks of combined treatment and in patients with renal impairment. In diabetic patients treated with oral antidiabetic agents or insulin, glycemic control should be closely monitored for hypoglycemia, especially during the first month of treatment with an ACE inhibitor.
                        
                           Non-Steroidal Anti-Inflammatory Agents including Selective Cyclooxygenase-2 Inhibitors (COX-2 Inhibitors): In patients who are elderly, volume-depleted (including those on diuretic therapy), or with compromised renal function, co-administration of NSAIDs, including selective COX-2 inhibitors, with ACE inhibitors, including lisinopril, may result in deterioration of renal function, including possible acute renal failure. These effects are usually reversible. Monitor renal function periodically in patients receiving lisinopril and NSAID therapy.
                        The antihypertensive effect of ACE inhibitors, including lisinopril, may be attenuated by NSAIDs.
                        
                           Other Agents:  ZESTRIL has been used concomitantly with nitrates and/or digoxin without evidence of clinically significant adverse interactions.  This included post myocardial infarction patients who were receiving intravenous or transdermal nitroglycerin.  No clinically important pharmacokinetic interactions occurred when ZESTRIL was used concomitantly with propranolol or hydrochlorothiazide.  The presence of food in the stomach does not alter the bioavailability of ZESTRIL.
                        
                           Agents Increasing Serum Potassium:  ZESTRIL attenuates potassium loss caused by thiazide-type diuretics.  Use of ZESTRIL with potassium-sparing diuretics (e.g., spironolactone, eplerenone, triamterene or amiloride), potassium supplements, or potassium-containing salt substitutes may lead to significant increases in serum potassium.  Therefore, if concomitant use of these agents is indicated because of demonstrated hypokalemia, they should be used with caution and with frequent monitoring of serum potassium.  Potassium-sparing agents should generally not be used in patients with heart failure who are receiving ZESTRIL.
                        
                           Lithium:  Lithium toxicity has been reported in patients receiving lithium concomitantly with drugs which cause elimination of sodium, including ACE inhibitors.  Lithium toxicity was usually reversible upon discontinuation of lithium and the ACE inhibitor.  It is recommended that serum lithium levels be monitored frequently if ZESTRIL is administered concomitantly with lithium.
                        
                           Gold: Nitritoid reactions (symptoms include facial flushing, nausea, vomiting and hypotension) have been reported rarely in patients on therapy with injectable gold (sodium aurothiomalate) and concomitant ACE inhibitor therapy including ZESTRIL.
                     
                     
                  
               