
               
               
               
                  12
                   
                  CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
               
                  
                     Figure 2:	Cangrelor PD Characteristics
                     
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     Figure 3: Inhibition (Mean) of 20 µM ADP-induced Platelet Aggregation (IPA) Measured by Light Transmission Aggregometry after Cangrelor 30 mcg/kg Bolus and 120-minute 4 mcg/kg Infusion with Transition to Other Oral P2Y12 Platelet Inhibitors.
                     
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        12.1
                        
		     
	Mechanism of Action
                     
                     
                        Cangrelor is a direct P2Y12 platelet receptor inhibitor that blocks ADP-induced platelet activation and aggregation. Cangrelor binds selectively and reversibly to the P2Y12 receptor to prevent further signaling and platelet activation.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        12.2
                        
		     
	Pharmacodynamics
                     
                     
                        Cangrelor inhibits activation and aggregation of platelets. After administration of a 30 mcg/kg IV bolus followed by a 4 mcg/kg/min IV infusion, platelet inhibition occurs within 2 minutes.
                        Figure 2 shows the effect on platelet activity, and its relation to cangrelor plasma concentration, of administering a 30 mcg/kg IV bolus, followed by a 1-hour 4 mcg/kg/min IV infusion, of cangrelor. The anti-platelet effect is maintained for the duration of the infusion. After discontinuation of the infusion, the anti-platelet effect decreases rapidly and platelet function returns to normal within 1 hour.
                        
                           Figure 
                           2
                           : 
                           Cangrelor
                            PD Characteristics
                        
                        
                           
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        12.3
                        
		     
	Pharmacokinetics
                     
                     
                        KENGREAL administered intravenously has linear pharmacokinetics in both healthy volunteers and patients. KENGREAL is rapidly distributed and metabolized, reaching Cmax within 2 minutes after administration of an intravenous bolus followed by infusion.
                        
                           Distribution
                        
                        In a study in healthy volunteers, KENGREAL administration at a dose of 30 mcg/kg bolus plus 4 mcg/kg/min showed a volume of distribution of 3.9 L. Plasma protein binding of KENGREAL is about 97-98%.
                        
                           Metabolism
                        
                        KENGREAL is deactivated rapidly in the circulation by dephosphorylation to its primary metabolite, a nucleoside, which has negligible anti-platelet activity. KENGREAL’s metabolism is independent of hepatic function and it does not interfere with other drugs metabolized by hepatic enzymes.
                        
                           Elimination
                        
                        Following IV administration of [3H] KENGREAL 58% of radioactivity was recovered in urine. The remaining 35% of radioactivity was in feces, presumably following biliary excretion. The average elimination half-life of KENGREAL is about 3-6 minutes.
                        
                           Specific Populations
                        
                        KENGREAL pharmacokinetics are not affected by sex, age, renal status or hepatic function. No dose adjustment is needed for these factors [see Use in Specific Populations (
                           
                              8
                           
                           )].
                        
                           Weight
                        
                        Although weight was a significant covariate for PK with higher clearance in heavier patients, the impact of weight on drug exposure is accounted by the use of weight-based dosing.
                        
                           Drug-Drug Interactions
                        
                        Co-administration of cangrelor with unfractionated heparin, aspirin, and nitroglycerin was formally studied in healthy subjects, with no evidence of an effect on the PK/PD of cangrelor.
                        In clinical trials cangrelor has been co-administered with bivalirudin, low molecular weight heparin, clopidogrel, prasugrel, and ticagrelor without clinically detectable interactions.
                        The expected antiplatelet effect of a 600 mg loading dose of clopidogrel or a 60 mg loading dose of prasugrel was blocked when clopidogrel or prasugrel was administered during a cangrelor infusion [see Drug Interactions (
                           
                              7.1
                           
                           )].
                        In contrast, the antiplatelet effect of a 180 mg ticagrelor loading dose was not altered significantly when ticagrelor was administered during cangrelor infusion [see Drug Interactions (
                           
                              7.1
                           
                           )].
                        
                           Figure 
                           3: 
                           Inhibition (Mean) of 20 µM ADP-induced Platelet Aggregation (IPA) Measured by Light Transmission 
                           Aggregometry
                            after 
                           Cangrelor
                            30 mcg/kg Bolus and 120-minute 4 mcg/kg Infusion with Transition to Other Oral P2Y
                           
                              12
                           
                            Platelet Inhibitors.
                        
                        
                           
                        
                        As shown in Figure 3, discontinuation of cangrelor infusion, followed by administration of the irreversible P2Y12 platelet inhibitors clopidogrel and prasugrel led to a 1-hour decrease in IPA followed by an increase in inhibition of platelet aggregation beginning at about one hour. This time course of platelet inhibition reflects the pharmacokinetics of cangrelor (offset) followed by the absorption and metabolism of clopidogrel and prasugrel to active metabolites (onset). Administration of ticagrelor, a reversible P2Y12 platelet inhibitor, during the cangrelor infusion led to minimal decrease in platelet inhibition for approximately 0.5 hours following discontinuation of the cangrelor infusion. Administering ticagrelor during cangrelor infusion does not attenuate the anti-platelet effect of ticagrelor.
                        In vitro studies suggest that neither cangrelor nor its major metabolites inhibit the activity of the hepatic CYP isoenzymes at therapeutic concentrations. Therefore, cangrelor administration is not expected to interfere with the hepatic metabolism of other concomitantly administered therapeutic agents.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         