
               
               
               12  CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Afatinib covalently binds to the kinase domains of EGFR (ErbB1),
HER2 (ErbB2), and HER4 (ErbB4) and irreversibly inhibits tyrosine
kinase autophosphorylation, resulting in downregulation of ErbB signaling.
                        Afatinib demonstrated inhibition of autophosphorylation
and in vitro proliferation of cell lines expressing
wild-type EGFR or those expressing selected EGFR exon 19 deletion
mutations or exon 21 L858R mutations, including some with a secondary
T790M mutation, at afatinib concentrations achieved, at least transiently,
in patients.  In addition, afatinib inhibited in vitro proliferation of cell lines overexpressing HER2.
                        Treatment with afatinib resulted in inhibition of tumor
growth in nude mice implanted with tumors either overexpressing wild
type EGFR or HER2 or in an EGFR L858R/T790M double mutant model.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        
                           Cardiac Electrophysiology
                           
The effect
of multiple doses of GILOTRIF (50 mg once daily) on the QTc interval
was evaluated in an open-label, single-arm study in patients with
relapsed or refractory solid tumors.  No large changes in the mean
QTc interval (i.e., >20 ms) were detected in the study.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        
                           Absorption and Distribution
                           
Following oral administration
of GILOTRIF tablets, time to peak afatinib plasma concentrations (Tmax) is 2 to 5 hours.  Maximum concentration (Cmax) and area under the concentration-time curve from
time zero to infinity (AUC0-∞) values increased
slightly more than dose proportional in the range of 20 to 50 mg.
The geometric mean relative bioavailability of 20 mg GILOTRIF tablets
was 92% as compared to an oral solution. In vitro binding of afatinib to human plasma proteins is approximately 95%.
                        A high-fat meal decreased Cmax by 50% and AUC0-∞ by 39% relative to the
fasted condition [see Dosage and Administration (2.2)].
                        
                           Metabolism and Elimination
                           
Covalent adducts to proteins are the major circulating metabolites
of afatinib and enzymatic metabolism of afatinib is minimal.
                        In humans, excretion of afatinib is primarily via the feces (85%) with 4% recovered in the urine following
a single oral dose of [14C]-labeled afatinib
solution.  The parent compound accounted for 88% of the recovered
dose.
                        The elimination half-life
of afatinib is 37 hours after repeat dosing in cancer patients.  Steady-state
plasma concentrations are achieved within 8 days of repeat dosing
of GILOTRIF resulting in an accumulation of 2.8-fold for AUC and 2.1-fold
for Cmax.
                        
                           Specific Populations
                           

                           Renal Impairment:  The median trough afatinib plasma concentrations in patients with
mild (CLcr 60-89 mL/min) and moderate (CLcr 30-59 mL/min) renal impairment
were 27% and 85% higher than those in patients with normal renal function
(CLcr ≥90 mL/min).  GILOTRIF has not been studied in patients with
severely impaired renal function (CLcr <30 mL/min) [see
Use in Specific Populations (8.7)].
                        
                           Hepatic Impairment:  Afatinib is eliminated mainly by biliary/fecal excretion. Mild
(Child Pugh A) or moderate (Child Pugh B) hepatic impairment had no
influence on the afatinib exposure following a single dose of GILOTRIF.
 Subjects with severe (Child Pugh C) hepatic dysfunction have not
been studied [see Use in Specific Populations (8.8)].
                        
                           Body Weight, Gender, Age, and Race:  Based on the population pharmacokinetic analysis, weight, gender,
age, and race do not have a clinically important effect on exposure
of afatinib.
                        
                           Drug Interactions
                           

                           Effect of P-gp Inhibitors and Inducers on Afatinib: The effect of ritonavir dosing time relative to a single oral dose
of GILOTRIF was evaluated in healthy subjects taking 40 mg of GILOTRIF
alone as compared to those after ritonavir (200 mg twice daily for
3 days) co-administration at 6 hours after GILOTRIF administration.
 The relative bioavailability for AUC0-∞ and
Cmax of afatinib was 119% and 104% when co-administered
with ritonavir, and 111% and 105% when ritonavir was administered
6 hours after taking GILOTRIF.  In another study, when ritonavir (200
mg twice daily for 3 days) was administered 1 hour before a 20 mg
single dose of GILOTRIF, exposure to afatinib increased by 48% for
AUC0-∞ and 39% for Cmax
                            [see Drug Interactions (7)].
                        
                        Pre-treatment with a potent
inducer of P-gp, rifampicin (600 mg once daily for 7 days) decreased
the plasma exposure to afatinib by 34% (AUC0-∞) and 22% (Cmax) [see Drug Interactions
(7)].
                        
                           P-glycoprotein (P-gp): Based on in vitro data, afatinib is a substrate and an inhibitor
of P-gp.
                        
                           Breast Cancer
Resistance Protein (BCRP):  Based on in vitro data, afatinib is a substrate and an inhibitor of the transporter
BCRP.
                        
                           Effect of CYP450
Enzyme Inducers and Inhibitors on Afatinib: In vitro data
indicated that drug-drug interactions with GILOTRIF due to inhibition
or induction of CYP450 enzymes by concomitant medications are unlikely.
The metabolites formed by CYP450-dependent reactions were approximately
9% of the total metabolic turnover in sandwich-cultured human hepatocytes.
In humans, enzyme-catalyzed metabolic reactions play a negligible
role for the metabolism of afatinib. Approximately 2% of the afatinib
dose was metabolized by FMO3; the CYP3A4-dependent N-demethylation
was not detected.
                        
                           Effect
of Afatinib on CYP450 Enzymes: Afatinib is not an inhibitor
or an inducer of CYP450 enzymes (CYP1A2, 2B6, 2C8, 2C9, 2C19, and
3A4) in cultured primary human hepatocytes.  Therefore, afatinib is
unlikely to affect the metabolism of other drugs that are substrates
of CYP450 enzymes.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         