
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Pegfilgrastim is a colony-stimulating factor that acts on hematopoietic cells by binding to specific cell surface receptors, thereby stimulating proliferation, differentiation, commitment, and end cell functional activation.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        The pharmacokinetics of pegfilgrastim were studied in 379 patients with cancer. The pharmacokinetics of pegfilgrastim were nonlinear and clearance decreased with increases in dose. Neutrophil receptor binding is an important component of the clearance of pegfilgrastim, and serum clearance is directly related to the number of neutrophils. In addition to numbers of neutrophils, body weight appeared to be a factor.  Patients with higher body weights experienced higher systemic exposure to pegfilgrastim after receiving a dose normalized for body weight. A large variability in the pharmacokinetics of pegfilgrastim was observed. The half‑life of Neulasta ranged from 15 to 80 hours after subcutaneous injection. In healthy volunteers, the pharmacokinetics of pegfilgrastim were comparable when delivered subcutaneously via a manual prefilled syringe versus via the On-body Injector for Neulasta.
                        No gender‑related differences were observed in the pharmacokinetics of pegfilgrastim, and no differences were observed in the pharmacokinetics of geriatric patients (≥ 65 years of age) compared with younger patients (< 65 years of age) [see 
                           Use in Specific Populations (8.5
                           )]. The pharmacokinetics of pegfilgrastim were studied in pediatric patients with sarcoma [see 
                           Use in Specific Populations (8.4)]. Renal dysfunction had no effect on the pharmacokinetics of pegfilgrastim. [see 
                           Use in Specific Populations (8.6)]. The pharmacokinetic profile in patients with hepatic insufficiency has not been assessed.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         