
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        KYBELLA is a cytolytic drug, which when injected into tissue physically destroys the cell membrane causing lysis. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        
                           Cardiac Electrophysiology
                        
                        At therapeutic doses, KYBELLA does not prolong the QTc interval.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        Endogenous deoxycholic acid plasma levels are highly variable within and between individuals; most of this natural bile component is sequestered in the enterohepatic circulation loop.  
                        
                           Absorption and Distribution
                        
                        Deoxycholic acid from KYBELLA is rapidly absorbed following subcutaneous injection.  After dosing with the maximum recommended single treatment dose with KYBELLA (100 mg), maximum plasma concentrations (mean Cmax) were observed with a median Tmax of 18 minutes after injection.  The mean (±SD) Cmax value was 1024 ± 304 ng/mL and was 3.2-fold higher than average Cmax values observed during a 24-hour baseline endogenous period in the absence of KYBELLA.  After maximum recommended single treatment dose (100 mg), mean (±SD) deoxycholic acid exposure (AUC0-24) was 7896 ± 2269 ng.hr/mL and was 1.6-fold higher over endogenous exposure.  Post-treatment deoxycholic acid plasma levels returned to the endogenous range within 24 hours.  No accumulation is expected with the proposed treatment frequency. 
                        Deoxycholic acid is extensively bound to proteins in plasma (98%).
                        
                           Metabolism and Excretion
                        
                        Endogenous deoxycholic acid is a product of cholesterol metabolism and is excreted intact in feces.  Deoxycholic acid is not metabolized to any significant extent under normal conditions. Deoxycholic acid from KYBELLA joins the endogenous bile acid pool in the enterohepatic circulation and is excreted along with the endogenous deoxycholic acid.
                        
                           In Vitro Assessment of Drug Interactions
                        
                        Results from in vitro studies indicate that deoxycholic acid does not inhibit or induce human cytochrome P450 (CYP) enzymes at clinically relevant concentrations.  Deoxycholic acid does not inhibit the following transporters: P-gp, BCRP, MRP4, MRP2, OATP1B1, OATP2B1, OATP1B3, OCT1, OCT2, OAT1, OAT3, NTCP, and ASBT. 
                        
                           Specific Populations
                        
                        
                           Hepatic Impairment
                        
                        KYBELLA has not been studied in subjects with hepatic impairment.  Considering the intermittent dose frequency, the small dose administered that represents approximately 3% of the total bile acid pool, and the highly variable endogenous deoxycholic acid levels, the pharmacokinetics of deoxycholic acid following KYBELLA injection is unlikely to be influenced by hepatic impairment.   
                        
                           Pharmacokinetic Effects of Gender 
                        
                        Deoxycholic acid pharmacokinetics were not influenced by gender. 
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         