
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Colony-stimulating factors are glycoproteins which act on hematopoietic cells by binding to specific cell surface receptors and stimulating proliferation‚ differentiation commitment‚ and some end-cell functional activation.
                        Endogenous G-CSF is a lineage-specific colony-stimulating factor that is produced by monocytes‚ fibroblasts, and endothelial cells. G-CSF regulates the production of neutrophils within the bone marrow and affects neutrophil progenitor proliferation‚ differentiation, and selected end-cell functions (including enhanced phagocytic ability‚ priming of the cellular metabolism associated with respiratory burst‚ antibody-dependent killing, and the increased expression of some cell surface antigens). G-CSF is not species-specific and has been shown to have minimal direct in vivo or in vitro effects on the production or activity of hematopoietic cell types other than the neutrophil lineage.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        In phase 1 studies involving 96 patients with various nonmyeloid malignancies‚ administration of filgrastim resulted in a dose-dependent increase in circulating neutrophil counts over the dose range of 1 to 70 mcg/kg/day. This increase in neutrophil counts was observed whether filgrastim was administered intravenous (1 to70 mcg/kg twice daily)‚ subcutaneous (1 to 3 mcg/kg once daily)‚ or by continuous subcutaneous infusion (3 to 11 mcg/kg/day). With discontinuation of filgrastim therapy‚ neutrophil counts returned to baseline in most cases within 4 days. Isolated neutrophils displayed normal phagocytic (measured by zymosan-stimulated chemoluminescence) and chemotactic (measured by migration under agarose using N-formyl-methionyl-leucyl­ phenylalanine [fMLP] as the chemotaxin) activity in vitro.
                        
                        The absolute monocyte count was reported to increase in a dose-dependent manner in most patients receiving filgrastim; however‚ the percentage of monocytes in the differential count remained within the normal range. Absolute counts of both eosinophils and basophils did not change and were within the normal range following administration of filgrastim. Increases in lymphocyte counts following filgrastim administration have been reported in some normal subjects and patients with cancer.
                        White blood cell (WBC) differentials obtained during clinical trials have demonstrated a shift towards earlier granulocyte progenitor cells (left shift)‚ including the appearance of promyelocytes and myeloblasts‚ usually during neutrophil recovery following the chemotherapy-induced nadir. In addition‚ Dohle bodies‚ increased granulocyte granulation‚ and hypersegmented neutrophils have been observed. Such changes were transient and were not associated with clinical sequelae, nor were they necessarily associated with infection.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        Filgrastim exhibits nonlinear pharmacokinetics. Clearance is dependent on filgrastim concentration and neutrophil count: G-CSF receptor-mediated clearance is saturated by high concentration of filgrastim and is diminished by neutropenia. In addition, filgrastim is cleared by the kidney.
                        Subcutaneous administration of 3.45 mcg/kg and 11.5 mcg/kg of filgrastim resulted in maximum serum concentrations of 4 and 49 ng/mL‚ respectively‚ within 2 to 8 hours. After intravenous administration, the volume of distribution averaged 150 mL/kg and the elimination half-life was approximately 3.5 hours in both normal subjects and subjects with cancer. Clearance rates of filgrastim were approximately 0.5 to 0.7 mL/minute/kg. Single parenteral doses or daily intravenous doses‚ over a 14-day period‚ resulted in comparable half-lives. The half-lives were similar for intravenous administration (231 minutes‚ following doses of 34.5 mcg/kg) and for subcutaneous administration (210 minutes‚ following filgrastim dosages of 3.45 mcg/kg). Continuous 24-hour intravenous infusions of 20 mcg/kg over an 11 to 20-day period produced steady-state serum concentrations of filgrastim with no evidence of drug accumulation over the time period investigated. The absolute bioavailability of filgrastim after subcutaneous administration is 60% to 70%.
                        
                           Specific Populations
                        
                        Pediatric Patients: The pharmacokinetics of filgrastim in pediatric patients after chemotherapy are similar to those in adult patients receiving the same weight-normalized doses, suggesting no age-related differences in the pharmacokinetics of filgrastim products [see Use in Specific Populations (8.4)].
                        Renal Impairment: In a study with healthy volunteers, subjects with moderate renal impairment, and subjects with end stage renal disease (n=4 per group), higher serum concentrations were observed in subjects with end-stage renal disease. However, dose adjustment in patients with renal impairment is not necessary.
                        Hepatic Impairment: Pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of filgrastim are similar between subjects with hepatic impairment and healthy subjects (n = 12/group). The study included 10 subjects with mild hepatic impairment (Child-Pugh Class A) and 2 subjects with moderate hepatic impairment (Child-Pugh Class B). Therefore, dose adjustment for ZARXIO in patients with hepatic impairment is not necessary.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         