
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  Cefaclor is well absorbed after oral administration to fasting 
subjects. Total absorption is the same whether the drug is given with or without 
food; however, when it is taken with food, the peak concentration achieved is 
50% to 75% of that observed when the drug is administered to fasting subjects 
and generally appears from three fourths to 1 hour later. It has been reported 
that following administration of 250 mg, 500 mg, and 1 g doses to fasting 
subjects, average peak serum levels of approximately 7, 13, and 23 mcg/mL 
respectively were obtained within 30 to 60 minutes. Approximately 60% to 85% of 
the drug is excreted unchanged in the urine within 8 hours, the greater portion 
being excreted within the first 2 hours. During this 8-hour period, peak urine 
concentrations following the 250 mg, 500 mg, and 1 g doses were approximately 
600, 900, and 1,900 mcg/mL respectively. The serum half-life in normal subjects 
is 0.6 to 0.9 hours. In patients with reduced renal function, the serum 
half-life of cefaclor is slightly prolonged. In those with complete absence of 
renal function, the plasma half-life of the intact molecule is 2.3 to 2.8 hours. 
Excretion pathways in patients with markedly impaired renal function have not 
been determined. Hemodialysis shortens the half-life by 25% to 30%.
                  
                  
                  Microbiology
                  
                     In vitro tests demonstrate that the 
bactericidal action of the cephalosporins results from inhibition of cell-wall 
synthesis. Cefaclor has been shown to be active against most strains of the 
following microorganisms, both in vitro and in 
clinical infections as described in the INDICATIONS AND USAGE section.
                  Aerobes, Gram-positive
                  Staphylococci, including coagulase-positive, coagulase-negative, and 
penicillinase-producing strains
                  
                     Streptococcus pneumoniae
                  
                  
                     Streptococcus pyogenes (group A β-hemolytic 
streptococci)
                  Aerobes, Gram-negative
                  
                     Escherichia coli
                  
                  
                     Haemophilus influenzae, excluding 
β-lactamase-negative, ampicillin-resistant strains
                  
                     Klebsiella spp.
                  
                     Proteus mirabilis
                  
                  The following in vitro data are available, but their clinical significance is unknown. 
                  
                  Cefaclor exhibits in vitro minimal inhibitory 
concentrations (MICs) of <
                      8 mcg/mL against most 
(>
                      90%) strains of the following microorganisms; 
however, the safety and effectiveness of cefaclor in treating clinical 
infections due to these microorganisms have not been established in adequate and 
well-controlled clinical trials.
                  Aerobes, Gram-negative
                  
                     Citrobacter diversus
                  
                  
                     Moraxella (Branhamella) catarrhalis
                  
                  
                     Neisseria gonorrhoeae
                  
                  Anaerobes, Gram-positive
                  
                     Bacteroides spp (excluding Bacteroides fragilis)
                  
                     Peptococcus
                  
                  
                     Peptostreptococcus
                  
                  
                     Propionibacterium acnes
                  
                  
                     Note: Pseudomonas spp., Acinetobacter calcoaceticus and most strains of enterococci 
(Enterococcus faecalis, group D streptococci), Enterobacter spp., indole-positive Proteus, and Serratia spp. are 
resistant to cefaclor. When tested by in vitro 
methods, staphylococci exhibit crossresistance between cefaclor and 
methicillin-type antibiotics.
                  
                  
                  Susceptibility Testing
                  
                     Dilution Techniques — Quantitative 
methods that are used to determine minimum inhibitory concentrations (MIC) 
provide reproducible estimates of the susceptibility of bacteria to 
antimicrobial compounds. One such standardized procedure that has been 
recommended for use with cefaclor powder uses a standardized dilution 
method1 (broth, agar, or microdilution). The MIC values 
obtained should be interpreted according to the following criteria:
                  


                  


*When testing H. influenzae spp. these 
interpretive standards are applicable only to broth microdilution method using 
Haemophilus Test Medium (HTM)1
                  
                  
                     Note: β-lactamase-negative, 
ampicillin-resistant strains of H. influenzae should 
be considered resistant to cefaclor despite apparent in 
vitro susceptibility to this agent.
                  A report of “Susceptible” indicates that the pathogen is likely to be 
inhibited by usually achievable concentrations of the antimicrobial compound in 
blood. A report of “Intermediate” indicates that the result should be considered 
equivocal, and, if the microorganism is not fully susceptible to alternative, 
clinically feasible drugs, the test should be repeated. This category implies 
possible clinical applicability in body sites where the drug is physiologically 
concentrated or in situations where high dosage of drug can be used. This 
category also provides a buffer zone that prevents small uncontrolled technical 
factors from causing major discrepancies in interpretation. A report of 
“Resistant” indicates that usually achievable concentrations of the 
antimicrobial compound in the blood are unlikely to be inhibitory and that other 
therapy should be selected.
                  Standardized susceptibility test procedures require the use of laboratory 
control microorganisms. Standard cefaclor powder should provide the following 
MIC values:
                  


                  


When testing H. influenzae*
                  
                  


                  


*Broth microdilution test performed using Haemophilus Test Medium (HTM)1
                  
                  
                     Diffusion Techniques— Quantitative methods that 
require measurement of zone diameters provide reproducible estimates of the 
susceptibility of bacteria to antimicrobial compounds. One such standardized 
procedure2 that has been recommended for use with disks 
to test the susceptibility of microorganisms to cefaclor uses the 30 mcg 
cefaclor disk. Interpretation involves correlation of the diameter obtained in 
the disk test with the MIC for cefaclor. Reports from the laboratory providing 
results of the standard single-disk susceptibility test with a 30 mcg cefaclor 
disk should be interpreted according to the following criteria:
                  When Testing Organisms Other Than Haemophilus spp. 
and Streptococci
                  


                  


When testing H. influenzae*
                  


                  


*Disk susceptibility test performed using Haemophilus Test Medium (HTM)2
                  
                  
                     Note: β-lactamase-negative, ampicillin-resistant 
strains of H. influenzae should be considered 
resistant to cefaclor despite apparent in vitro 
susceptibility to this agent.
                  Interpretation should be as stated above for results using dilution 
techniques.
                  As with standard dilution techniques, diffusion methods require the use of 
laboratory control microorganisms. The 30 mcg cefaclor disk should provide the 
following zone diameters in these laboratory test quality control strains:
                  


                  


When testing H. influenzae*
                  


                  


*Disk susceptibility test performed using Haemophilus Test Medium (HTM)2
                  
               
               
            
         