
               
               
               
                  12     CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1     Mechanism of Action
                     
                        JADENU (deferasirox) is an orally active chelator that is selective for iron (as Fe3+). It is a tridentate ligand that binds iron with high affinity in a 2:1 ratio. Although deferasirox has very low affinity for zinc and copper there are variable decreases in the serum concentration of these trace metals after the administration of deferasirox. The clinical significance of these decreases is uncertain.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2     Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        Pharmacodynamic effects tested in an iron balance metabolic study with the tablet for oral suspension formulation showed that deferasirox (10, 20, and 40 mg per kg per day) was able to induce a mean net iron excretion (0.119, 0.329, and 0.445 mg Fe/kg body weight per day, respectively) within the clinically relevant range (0.1 to 0.5 mg per kg per day). Iron excretion was predominantly fecal.
                        
                           Cardiac Electrophysiology
                        
                        The effect of 20 and 40 mg per kg per day of deferasirox (tablets for oral suspension) on the QT interval was evaluated in a single-dose, double-blind, randomized, placebo- and active-controlled (moxifloxacin 400 mg), parallel group study in 182 healthy male and female subjects age 18 to 65 years. No evidence of prolongation of the QTc interval was observed in this study.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3     Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        
                           Absorption
                        
                        Based on studies in patients with the tablet for oral suspension, deferasirox is absorbed following oral administration with median times to maximum plasma concentration (tmax) of about 1.5 to 4 hours. In healthy subjects, JADENU showed comparable tmax. The Cmax and AUC of deferasirox increase approximately linearly with dose after both single administration and under steady-state conditions. Exposure to deferasirox increased by an accumulation factor of 1.3 to 2.3 after multiple doses with the tablet for oral suspension formulation.
                        The absolute bioavailability (AUC) of deferasirox tablets for oral suspension is 70% compared to an intravenous dose. The bioavailability (AUC) of JADENU was 36% greater than with deferasirox tablets for oral suspension.  After strength-adjustment, JADENU (i.e., 360 mg strength) was equivalent to deferasirox tablets for oral suspension (i.e., 500 mg strength) with respect to the mean AUC under fasting conditions, however the mean Cmax was increased by 30%. The exposure-response analysis for safety indicated that 30% increase in JADENU Cmax is not clinically meaningful.
                        A food-effect study involving administration of JADENU to healthy subjects under fasting conditions and with a low-fat (fat content <7% of total calories) or high-fat (fat content >50% of total calories) meal indicated that the AUC and Cmax were slightly decreased after a low-fat meal (by 11% and 16%, respectively). After a high-fat meal, AUC and Cmax were increased by 18% and 29%, respectively. The increases in Cmax due to the change in formulation and due to the effect of a high-fat meal may be additive and therefore, it is recommended that JADENU should be taken on an empty stomach or with a light meal (contains less than 7% fat content and approximately 250 calories) [see Dosage and Administration (2.3)].
                        
                           Distribution
                        
                        Deferasirox is highly (~99%) protein bound almost exclusively to serum albumin. The percentage of deferasirox confined to the blood cells was 5% in humans. The volume of distribution at steady state (Vss) of deferasirox is 14.37 ± 2.69 L in adults.
                        
                           Metabolism
                        
                        Glucuronidation is the main metabolic pathway for deferasirox, with subsequent biliary excretion. Deconjugation of glucuronidates in the intestine and subsequent reabsorption (enterohepatic recycling) is likely to occur. Deferasirox is mainly glucuronidated by UGT1A1 and to a lesser extent UGT1A3. CYP450-catalyzed (oxidative) metabolism of deferasirox appears to be minor in humans (about 8%). Deconjugation of glucuronide metabolites in the intestine and subsequent reabsorption (enterohepatic recycling) was confirmed in a healthy subjects study in which the administration of cholestyramine 12 g twice daily (strongly binds to deferasirox and its conjugates) 4 and 10 hours after a single dose of deferasirox resulted in a 45% decrease in deferasirox exposure (AUC) by interfering with the enterohepatic recycling of deferasirox. 
                        
                           Excretion
                        
                        Deferasirox and metabolites are primarily (84% of the dose) excreted in the feces. Renal excretion of deferasirox and metabolites is minimal (8% of the administered dose). The mean elimination half-life (t1/2) ranged from 8 to 16 hours following oral administration.
                        
                           Drug Interactions
                        
                        
                           Midazolam: In healthy subjects, the concomitant administration of deferasirox tablets for oral suspension and midazolam (a CYP3A4 probe substrate) resulted in a decrease of midazolam peak concentration by 23% and exposure by 17%. In the clinical setting, this effect may be more pronounced. The study was not adequately designed to conclusively assess the potential induction of CYP3A4 by deferasirox [see Drug Interactions (7.2)].
                        
                           Repaglinide: In a healthy volunteer study, the concomitant administration of deferasirox tablets for oral suspension (30 mg per kg/day for 4 days) and the CYP2C8 probe substrate repaglinide (single dose of 0.5 mg) resulted in an increase in repaglinide systemic exposure (AUC) to 2.3-fold of control and an increase in Cmax of 62% [see Drug Interactions (7.3)].
                        
                           Theophylline: In a healthy volunteer study, the concomitant administration of deferasirox tablets for oral suspension (repeated dose of 30 mg per kg/day) and the CYP1A2 substrate theophylline (single dose of 120 mg) resulted in an approximate doubling of the theophylline AUC and elimination half-life. The single dose Cmax was not affected, but an increase in theophylline Cmax is expected to occur with chronic dosing [see Drug Interactions (7.4)].
                        
                           Rifampicin: In a healthy volunteer study, the concomitant administration of deferasirox tablets for oral suspension (single dose of 30 mg per kg) and the potent UDP-glucuronosyltransferase (UGT) inducer rifampicin (600 mg/day for 9 days) resulted in a decrease of deferasirox systemic exposure (AUC) by 44% [see Drug Interactions (7.5)].
                        
                           Cholestyramine: The concomitant use of deferasirox with bile acid sequestrants may result in a decrease in deferasirox efficacy. In healthy subjects, the administration of cholestyramine after a single dose of deferasirox tablets for oral suspension resulted in a 45% decrease in deferasirox exposure (AUC) [see Drug Interactions (7.6)].
                        
                           In vitro studies:
                        
                           Cytochrome P450 Enzymes: Deferasirox inhibits human CYP3A4, CYP2C8, CYP1A2, CYP2A6, CYP2D6, and CYP2C19 in vitro.
                           Transporter Systems: The addition of cyclosporin A (PgP/MRP1/MRP2 inhibitor) or verapamil (PgP/MRP1 inhibitor) did not influence ICL670 permeability in vitro.
                        
                        
                           Pharmacokinetics in Specific Populations
                        
                        
                           Pediatric: Following oral administration of single or multiple doses, systemic exposure of adolescents and children to deferasirox was less than in adult patients. In children <6 years of age, systemic exposure was about 50% lower than in adults.
                        
                           Geriatric: The pharmacokinetics of deferasirox have not been studied in elderly patients (65 years of age or older).
                        
                           Gender: Females have a moderately lower apparent clearance (by 17.5%) for deferasirox compared to males.
                        
                           Renal Impairment: Compared to patients with MDS and ClCr >60 mL/min, patients with MDS and ClCr 40 to 60 mL/min (n=34) had approximately 50% higher mean deferasirox trough plasma concentrations.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         