
               
               
               
                  7     DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           Avoid the use of JADENU with aluminum-containing antacid preparations due to the mechanism of action of JADENU. (7.1)
                           Deferasirox increases the exposure of the CYP2C8 substrate repaglinide. Consider repaglinide dose reduction and monitor blood glucose levels. (7.3)
                           Avoid the use of JADENU with CYP1A2 substrate theophylline as theophylline levels could be increased. (7.4)

                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1     Aluminum Containing Antacid Preparations
                     
                        The concomitant administration of JADENU and aluminum-containing antacid preparations has not been formally studied. Although deferasirox has a lower affinity for aluminum than for iron, avoid use of JADENU with aluminum-containing antacid preparations due to the mechanism of action of JADENU.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2     Agents Metabolized by CYP3A4
                     
                        Deferasirox may induce CYP3A4 resulting in a decrease in CYP3A4 substrate concentration when these drugs are coadministered. Closely monitor patients for signs of reduced effectiveness when deferasirox is administered with drugs metabolized by CYP3A4 (e.g., alfentanil, aprepitant, budesonide, buspirone, conivaptan, cyclosporine, darifenacin, darunavir, dasatinib, dihydroergotamine, dronedarone, eletriptan, eplerenone, ergotamine, everolimus, felodipine, fentanyl, hormonal contraceptive agents, indinavir, fluticasone, lopinavir, lovastatin, lurasidone, maraviroc, midazolam, nisoldipine, pimozide, quetiapine, quinidine, saquinavir, sildenafil, simvastatin, sirolimus, tacrolimus, tolvaptan, tipranavir, triazolam, ticagrelor, and vardenafil) [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3     Agents Metabolized by CYP2C8
                     
                        Deferasirox inhibits CYP2C8 resulting in an increase in CYP2C8 substrate (e.g., repaglinide and paclitaxel) concentration when these drugs are coadministered.  If JADENU and repaglinide are used concomitantly, consider decreasing the dose of repaglinide and perform careful monitoring of blood glucose levels. Closely monitor patients for signs of exposure related toxicity when JADENU is coadministered with other CYP2C8 substrates [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4     Agents Metabolized by CYP1A2
                     
                        Deferasirox inhibits CYP1A2 resulting in an increase in CYP1A2 substrate (e.g., alosetron, caffeine, duloxetine, melatonin, ramelteon, tacrine, theophylline, tizanidine) concentration when these drugs are coadministered. An increase in theophylline plasma concentrations could lead to clinically significant theophylline induced CNS or other adverse reactions.  Avoid the concomitant use of theophylline or other CYP1A2 substrates with a narrow therapeutic index (e.g., tizanidine) with JADENU.  Monitor theophylline concentrations and consider theophylline dose modification if you must coadminister theophylline with JADENU. Closely monitor patients for signs of exposure related toxicity when JADENU is coadministered with other drugs metabolized by CYP1A2 [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.5     Agents Inducing UDP-glucuronosyltransferase (UGT) Metabolism
                     
                        Deferasirox is a substrate of UGT1A1 and to a lesser extent UGT1A3.  The concomitant use of JADENU with potent UGT inducers (e.g., rifampicin, phenytoin, phenobarbital, ritonavir) may result in a decrease in JADENU efficacy due to a possible decrease in deferasirox concentration. Avoid the concomitant use of potent UGT inducers with JADENU.  Consider increasing the initial dose of JADENU if you must coadminister these agents together [see Dosage and Administration (2.5), Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.6     Bile Acid Sequestrants
                     
                        Avoid the concomitant use of bile acid sequestrants (e.g., cholestyramine, colesevelam, colestipol) with JADENU due to a possible decrease in deferasirox concentration.  If you must coadminister these agents together, consider increasing the initial dose of JADENU [see Dosage and Administration (2.5), Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)].
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         