
               
               
               7 DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           Alprazolam produces additive CNS depressant effects when co¬administered with other psychotropic medications, anticonvulsants, antihistaminics, alcohol and other drugs that produce CNS depression. (
                              
                                 7.1
                              
                              )
                           
                           The formulation requires an acidic environment to dissolve; therefore, drugs or diseases that cause dry mouth or raise stomach pH may slow disintegration or dissolution, resulting in decreased absorption. (
                              
                                 7.2
                              
                              )
                           
                           Drugs which inhibit the hydroxylation catalyzed by cytochrome P450 3A (CYP3A) metabolic pathway can decrease the clearance of alprazolam and increase the serum concentration. (
                              
                                 7.4
                              
                              )
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1Use with Other CNS Depressants
                     
                        If is coadministered with other psychotropic agents or anticonvulsant drugs, carefully consider the pharmacology of the agents to be employed, particularly with compounds which might potentiate the action of benzodiazepines. The benzodiazepines, including alprazolam, produce additive CNS depressant effects when co-administered with other psychotropic medications, anticonvulsants, antihistaminics, alcohol and other drugs which themselves produce CNS depression.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2 Drugs Effecting Salivary Flow and Stomach pH 
                     
                        Because alprazolam disintegrates in the presence of saliva, and the formulation requires an acidic environment to dissolve, concomitant drugs or diseases that cause dry mouth or raise stomach pH might slow disintegration or dissolution, resulting in slowed or decreased absorption.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.3 Use with Imipramine and Desipramine 
                     
                        The steady state plasma concentrations of imipramine and desipramine can increase by approximately 30% and 20%, respectively, when administered concomitantly with alprazolam in doses up to 4 mg per day. The clinical significance of these changes is unknown.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.4 Drugs that Inhibit Alprazolam Metabolism via Cytochrome P450 3A 
                     
                        The initial step in alprazolam metabolism is hydroxylation catalyzed by cytochrome P450 3A (CYP3A). Drugs which inhibit this metabolic pathway can have a profound effect on the clearance of alprazolam [see CONTRAINDICATIONS (4) and
                              Warnings and Precautions (5.7)].
                        
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.5 Drugs Demonstrated to be CYP3A Inhibitors of Possible Clinical Significance on the Basis of Clinical Studies Involving Alprazolam 
                     
                        Use caution during coadministration alprazolam and the following drugs:
                        Fluoxetine — Coadministration of fluoxetine with alprazolam increased the maximum plasma concentration of alprazolam by 46%, decreased clearance by 21%, increased half-life by 17%, and decreased measured psychomotor performance.
                        Propoxyphene — Coadministration of propoxyphene decreased the maximum plasma concentration of alprazolam by 6%, decreased clearance by 38%, and increased half-life by 58%.
                        Oral Contraceptives — Coadministration of oral contraceptives increased the maximum plasma concentration of alprazolam by 18%, decreased clearance by 22%, and increased half-life by 29%.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.6 Drugs and Other Substances Demonstrated to be CYP3A Inhibitors on the Basis of Clinical Studies Involving Benzodiazepines Metabolized Similarly to Alprazolam or on the Basis of In Vitro Studies with Alprazolam or Other Benzodiazepines  
                     
                        Use caution during the coadministration of alprazolam and the following:
                        Available data from clinical studies of benzodiazepines other than alprazolam suggest a possible drug interaction between alprazolam and the following: diltiazem, isoniazid, macrolide antibiotics such as erythromycin and clarithromycin, and grapefruit juice. Data from in vitro studies of alprazolam suggest a possible drug interaction between alprazolam and the following: sertraline and paroxetine. However, data from an in vivo drug interaction study involving a single dose of alprazolam 1 mg and steady state doses of sertraline (50 mg to 150 mg per day) did not reveal any clinically significant changes in the pharmacokinetics of alprazolam. Data from in vitro studies of benzodiazepines other than alprazolam suggest a possible drug interaction between benzodiazepines and the following: ergotamine, cyclosporine, amiodarone, nicardipine, and nifedipine. [see 
                              Warnings and Precautions (5.7
                              
                           
                           )]. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.7 Inducers of CYP3A 
                     
                        Carbamazepine can increase alprazolam metabolism and therefore can decrease plasma levels of alprazolam.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         