
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Risedronate has an affinity for hydroxyapatite crystals in bone and acts as an antiresorptive agent. At the cellular level, risedronate inhibits osteoclasts. The osteoclasts adhere normally to the bone surface, but show evidence of reduced active resorption (for example, lack of ruffled border). Histomorphometry in rats, dogs, and minipigs showed that risedronate treatment reduces bone turnover (activation frequency, that is, the rate at which bone remodeling sites are activated) and bone resorption at remodeling sites.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        Risedronate treatment decreases the elevated rate of bone turnover that is typically seen in postmenopausal osteoporosis. In clinical trials, administration of risedronate sodium immediate-release to postmenopausal women resulted in decreases in biochemical markers of bone turnover, including urinary deoxypyridinoline/creatinine and urinary collagen cross-linked N-telopeptide (markers of bone resorption) and serum bone-specific alkaline phosphatase (a marker of bone formation). At the 5 mg daily dose, decreases in deoxypyridinoline/creatinine were evident within 14 days of treatment. Changes in bone formation markers were observed later than changes in resorption markers, as expected, due to the coupled nature of bone resorption and bone formation; decreases in bone-specific alkaline phosphatase of about 20% were evident within 3 months of treatment. Bone turnover markers reached a nadir of about 40% below baseline values by the sixth month of treatment and remained stable with continued treatment for up to 3 years. Bone turnover is decreased as early as 14 days and maximally within about 6 months of treatment, with achievement of a new steady-state that more nearly approximates the rate of bone turnover seen in premenopausal women. In a 1 year study comparing risedronate sodium delayed-release tablet, 35 mg weekly taken immediately after breakfast versus risedronate sodium immediate-release 5 mg daily oral dosing regimens in postmenopausal women, mean decreases from baseline at 1 year in urinary collagen cross-linked N-telopeptide were 47% in the risedronate sodium delayed-release tablet, 35 mg once-a-week following breakfast group and 42% in the risedronate sodium immediate-release 5 mg daily group. In addition, serum bone-specific alkaline phosphatase at 1 year was reduced by 33% in the risedronate sodium delayed-release tablet, 35 mg once-a-week following breakfast group and 32% in the risedronate sodium immediate-release 5 mg daily group.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        
                           Absorption
                        
                        The mean absolute oral bioavailability of the 30 mg risedronate sodium immediate-release tablet taken 4 hours prior to a meal is 0.63% (90% confidence interval [CI]: 0.54% to 0.75%) and is similar to an oral solution. The time to peak concentration (Tmax) for risedronate sodium delayed-release tablet is approximately 3 hours when administered in the morning 4 hours prior to a meal. 
                        
                           
                              Food Effect
                           
                        
                        In a crossover pharmacokinetic study, the bioavailability of risedronate sodium delayed-release tablets, 35 mg decreased by approximately 30% when administered immediately after a high-fat breakfast compared to administration in the morning 4 hours before a meal. 
                        The bioavailability of the risedronate sodium delayed-release tablet, 35 mg administered after a high-fat breakfast was similar to risedronate sodium 35 mg immediate-release tablet dosed 4 hours before a meal in one study and was approximately 2 to 4 fold greater than the immediate-release 35 mg tablet administered 30 minutes prior to a high-fat breakfast.
                        In a separate study, risedronate sodium delayed-release tablets administered after dinner exhibited approximately 87% increase in risedronate exposure compared to administration following a breakfast. The safety and efficacy of dosing risedronate sodium delayed-release tablets after dinner has not been evaluated [see Dosage and Administration (2)]. 
                        
                           Distribution
                        
                        The mean steady-state volume of distribution for risedronate is 13.8 L/kg in humans. Human plasma protein binding of drug is about 24%. Preclinical studies in rats and dogs dosed intravenously with single doses of [14C] risedronate indicate that approximately 60% of the dose is distributed to bone. The remainder of the dose is excreted in the urine. After multiple oral dosing in rats, the uptake of risedronate in soft tissues was in the range of 0.001% to 0.01%. 
                        
                           Metabolism
                        
                        There is no evidence of systemic metabolism of risedronate.
                        
                           Excretion
                        
                        In young healthy subjects, approximately half of the absorbed dose of risedronate was excreted in urine within 24 hours, and 85% of an intravenous dose was recovered in the urine over 28 days. Based on simultaneous modeling of serum and urine data for the risedronate sodium immediate-release tablets, mean renal clearance was 105 mL/min (CV = 34%) and mean total clearance was 122 mL/min (CV = 19%), with the difference primarily reflecting nonrenal clearance or clearance due to adsorption to bone. The renal clearance is not concentration dependent, and there is a linear relationship between renal clearance and creatinine clearance. Unabsorbed drug is eliminated unchanged in feces. In osteopenic postmenopausal women, the terminal exponential half-life was 561 hours, mean renal clearance was 52 mL/min (CV = 25%), and mean total clearance was 73 mL/min (CV = 15%).
                        
                           Specific Populations
                        
                        
                           Pediatric: Risedronate sodium delayed-release tables are not indicated for use in pediatric patients [see Pediatric Use (8.4)].
                        
                           Geriatric: Effect of age on bioavailability of risedronate sodium delayed-release tablets has not been evaluated. Based on data from risedronate immediate-release tablet, bioavailability and disposition of risedronate are similar in elderly (greater than 60 years of age) and younger subjects. No dosage adjustment is necessary. 
                        
                           Race: Pharmacokinetic differences due to race have not been studied. The clinical trial of risedronate sodium delayed-release tablets was conducted mostly in Caucasians.
                        
                           Renal Impairment: Risedronate is excreted unchanged primarily via the kidney. As compared to persons with normal renal function, the renal clearance of risedronate was decreased by about 70% in patients with creatinine clearance of approximately 30 mL/min. Risedronate sodium delayed-release tablets are not recommended for use in patients with severe renal impairment (creatinine clearance less than 30 mL/min). No dosage adjustment is necessary in patients with a creatinine clearance greater than or equal to 30 mL/min. 
                        
                           Hepatic Impairment: No studies have been performed to assess risedronate’s safety or efficacy in patients with hepatic impairment. Risedronate is not metabolized in rat, dog, and human liver preparations. Insignificant amounts (less than 0.1% of intravenous dose) of drug are excreted in the bile in rats. Therefore, dosage adjustment is unlikely to be needed in patients with hepatic impairment.
                        
                           Drug Interactions: Risedronate is not metabolized and does not induce or inhibit hepatic microsomal drug-metabolizing enzymes (for example, Cytochrome P450). 
                        
                           Calcium supplement: A Phase 1 single-dose, cross-over study in 101 postmenopausal women evaluated the relative bioavailability of risedronate sodium delayed-release tablet, 35 mg taken after breakfast and following a 600 mg elemental calcium/400 international units vitamin D supplement, compared to risedronate sodium delayed-release tablets alone taken after breakfast without calcium or vitamin D supplementation. The addition of the calcium/vitamin D supplement following the meal resulted in an approximate 38% reduction in the amount of risedronate absorbed [see Drug Interactions (7)].
                        
                           Proton Pump Inhibitors: A Phase 1, 2-period, cross-over study in 60 healthy postmenopausal female subjects evaluated the relative bioavailability of a single dose risedronate sodium delayed-release tablet, 35 mg taken after breakfast following 6 days of esomeprazole magnesium delayed release 40 mg capsules. On Day 6, esomeprazole 40 mg capsule was administered with 240 mL water one hour before breakfast and risedronate sodium delayed-release tablet, 35 mg was administered with 240 mL water within 10 minutes after a standard breakfast. The Cmax and AUCinf of risedronate were increased by 60 percent and 22 percent, respectively, in presence of esomeprazole.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         