
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        The mechanism of action of ziprasidone, as with other drugs having efficacy in schizophrenia, is unknown. However, it has been proposed that this drug's efficacy in schizophrenia is mediated through a combination of dopamine type 2 (
         
 
  
         
 
  
                              D2) 
                           and serotonin type 2 (5HT
         
 
  
         
 
  2) antagonism. 
        

 
        

 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2 Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        Ziprasidone exhibited high 
         
 
  
         
 
  in vitro binding affinity for the dopamine D
         
 
  
         
 
  2 and D
         
 
  
         
 
  3, the serotonin 5HT
         
 
  
         
 
  2A, 5HT
         
 
  
         
 
  2C, 5HT
         
 
  
         
 
  1A, 5HT
         
 
  
         
 
  1D, and 
         
 
  
         
 
  
                              α
           
   
    
           
   
    1
                              
                           -adrenergic receptors (
         
 
  
         
 
  
                              K
           
   
    
           
   
    i
                              
                           s of 4.8, 7.2, 0.4, 1.3, 3.4, 2, and 10 nM, respectively), and moderate affinity for the histamine H
         
 
  
         
 
  1 receptor (
         
 
  
         
 
  
                              Ki
                           =47 nM). Ziprasidone functioned as an antagonist at the D
         
 
  
         
 
  2, 5HT
         
 
  
         
 
  2A, and 5HT
         
 
  
         
 
  1D receptors, and as an agonist at the 5HT
         
 
  
         
 
  1A receptor. Ziprasidone inhibited synaptic reuptake of serotonin and norepinephrine. No appreciable affinity was exhibited for other receptor/ binding sites tested, including the cholinergic muscarinic receptor (IC
         
 
  
         
 
  50 >1 μM). Antagonism at receptors other than dopamine and 5HT
         
 
  
         
 
  2 with similar receptor affinities may explain some of the other therapeutic and side effects of ziprasidone. Ziprasidone's antagonism of histamine H
         
 
  
         
 
  1 receptors may explain the somnolence observed with this drug. Ziprasidone's antagonism of 
         
 
  
         
 
  
                              α
           
   
    
           
   
    1
                              
                           -adrenergic receptors may explain the orthostatic hypotension observed with this drug.
        

 
        

 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        
                           Oral Pharmacokinetics
                        
                        Ziprasidone's activity is primarily due to the parent drug. The multiple-dose pharmacokinetics of ziprasidone are dose-proportional within the proposed clinical dose range, and ziprasidone accumulation is predictable with multiple dosing. Elimination of ziprasidone is mainly via hepatic metabolism with a mean terminal half-life of about 7 hours within the proposed clinical dose range. Steady-state concentrations are achieved within one to three days of dosing. The mean apparent systemic clearance is 7.5 mL/min/kg. Ziprasidone is unlikely to interfere with the metabolism of drugs metabolized by cytochrome P450 enzymes.
                        
                           
                              Absorption
                           
                        
                          Ziprasidone is well absorbed after oral administration, reaching peak plasma concentrations in 6 to 8 hours. The absolute bioavailability of a 20 mg dose under fed conditions is approximately 60%. The absorption of ziprasidone is increased up to two-fold in the presence of food.
                        
                           
                              Distribution
                           
                        
                          Ziprasidone has a mean apparent volume of distribution of 1.5 L/kg. It is greater than 99% bound to plasma proteins, binding primarily to albumin and α
         
 
  
         
 
  1-acid glycoprotein. The 
         
 
  
         
 
  in vitro plasma protein binding of ziprasidone was not altered by warfarin or propranolol, two highly protein-bound drugs, nor did ziprasidone alter the binding of these drugs in human plasma. Thus, the potential for drug interactions with ziprasidone due to displacement is minimal.
        

 
        

 
                        
                           
                              Metabolism and Elimination
                           
                        
                          Ziprasidone is extensively metabolized after oral administration with only a small amount excreted in the urine (<1%) or feces (<4%) as unchanged drug. Ziprasidone is primarily cleared via three metabolic routes to yield four major circulating metabolites, benzisothiazole (BITP) sulphoxide, BITP-sulphone, ziprasidone sulphoxide, and S-methyl-dihydroziprasidone. Approximately 20% of the dose is excreted in the urine, with approximately 66% being eliminated in the feces. Unchanged ziprasidone represents about 44% of total drug-related material in serum. 
         
 
  
         
 
  In vitro studies using human liver subcellular fractions indicate that S-methyl-dihydroziprasidone is generated in two steps. The data indicate that the reduction reaction is mediated by aldehyde oxidase and the subsequent methylation is mediated by thiol methyltransferase. 
         
 
  
         
 
  In vitro studies using human liver microsomes and recombinant enzymes indicate that CYP3A4 is the major CYP contributing to the oxidative metabolism of ziprasidone. CYP1A2 may contribute to a much lesser extent. Based on 
         
 
  
         
 
  in vivo abundance of excretory metabolites, less than one-third of ziprasidone metabolic clearance is mediated by cytochrome P450 catalyzed oxidation and approximately two-thirds via reduction by aldehyde oxidase. There are no known clinically relevant inhibitors or inducers of aldehyde oxidase.
        

 
        

 
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         