
                     
                     
                     Drug Interactions
                     
                        
                           Caution should be exercised when the following drugs are administered concomitantly with LODOSYN (Carbidopa) given with levodopa or carbidopa-levodopa combination products.
                        
                        Symptomatic postural hypotension has occurred when LODOSYN, given with levodopa or
                        carbidopa-levodopa combination products, was added to the treatment of a patient receiving antihypertensive drugs. Therefore, when therapy with LODOSYN, given with or without levodopa or carbidopa-levodopa combination products, is started, dosage adjustment of
                        the antihypertensive drug may be required.
                        For patients receiving monoamine oxidase inhibitors (Type A or B), see 
                              CONTRAINDICATIONS
                           . Concomitant therapy with selegiline and carbidopa-levodopa may be associated with severe orthostatic hypotension not attributable to carbidopa-levodopa alone (see 
                              CONTRAINDICATIONS
                           ).
                        There have been rare reports of adverse reactions, including hypertension and dyskinesia, resulting from the concomitant use of tricyclic antidepressants and carbidopa-levodopa preparations.
                        Dopamine D2 receptor antagonists (e.g., phenothiazines, butyrophenones, risperidone) and isoniazid may reduce the therapeutic effects of levodopa. In addition, the beneficial effects of levodopa in Parkinson's disease have been reported to be reversed by phenytoin and papaverine. Patients taking these drugs with LODOSYN and levodopa or carbidopa-levodopa combination products should be carefully observed for loss of therapeutic response.
                        LODOSYN and iron salts or multi vitamins containing iron salts should be co administered
                        with caution. Iron salts can form chelates with levodopa and carbidopa and
                        consequently reduce the bioavailability of carbidopa and levodopa.
                        Although metoclopramide may increase the bioavailability of levodopa by increasing gastric emptying, metoclopramide may also adversely affect disease control by its dopamine receptor antagonistic properties.
                     
                     
                  
               