
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  Mechanism of Action
                  ThE"t m~chanism 01 action of captopriJ has not yet been fully elucidated. lis-beneficial effects In hypertension and heart failure appear 10
                  result primarily from suppression of the reninwangiolensln-aJdosterone system. However, there is no consistent correlallon between
                  renin levels and response 10 Ihe drug. Renin, an enzyme synthesized by Ihe kidneys, is released into the circulation where it acts on a
                  plasma globulin $ub~trate to produce angiotensinl, a relatively inactive decapeptide. AngIotensin I is then converted by angiotensin
                  converting enzyme (ACE) to angiotensin II, a potent endogenous vasoconstrictor substance. Angiotensin II also stimulates aldosterone
                  secretion from the adrenal cortex, thereby contributing to sodiumand fluid retenllon. .
                  Caplopril prevents the conversion of angiotensin Ito angiotensin II by inhibition of ACE, a peplidyldipeplide carboxy hydrolase. Thls
                  inhibition has been demonstrated in both heallhyhuman subjects and in animals by showing that the elevation of blood pressure caused
                  by exogenously adminlstered angiotensin Iwas attenuated or abolished by captopril.lnanimal studies, captopril did notaltertha pressor
                  lasponses to anumber 01 other agents, Including angiotensin II andnorepinephrine, Indicating specificity 01 action.
                  ACE Is Identical to 'bradykinlnase", and captopril may also interfere with the degradation of tho vasodepressor peptide, bradykinin.
                  IncreasedconcenlraUons of bradykinin Of prQstaglandin E2 mayalsohave arole In the therapeutic e~ecl ofCaptopril.
                  Inhibition of ACE results In decreased plasma aogiolensln II and increased plasma renin activity (PRA), the laller resulting from loss of
                  negative feedback on rennin release caused by reduction in angiotensin II. The reducllon 01 angiotensin II leads to decreased
                  aldosterone secretion, and, asaresull, small increases In serum potassium may occur along with sodium and fluid loss.
                  The antihypertensive effects persist for a longer period of time than does demonstrable inhibition of circulating ACE. It is not known
                  whether the ACE present In vascular endothelium ls lnhlb~ed longer than the ACE In circulating blood.
               
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Pharmacodynamics
                     
                        After oral adminIstration of therapeutic doses 01 captopril, rapid absorption occurs with peak blood levels at about one hour. The
                        presence of food in the gastrointeslinaltract reduces absorption by about 30 to 40percen~ captopril therefore should be given one hour
                        before meals. Based on carbon-14 labeling, average minimal absorption Is approXimately 75.percenl.ln a 24-hour period, Over ~5
                        percentofthe absorbed doseis ellminaled In the urine; 40 to ?Opercent isunchanged drug; most01 the remainder Is the dIsulfidedimerof
                        caplopriland caplopril-oyslelne disulfide.
                        Approximately 25 to 30 percentof the circulating drug Is bound to plasma proteins. The apparentelimination half-life for total radioactivity
                        In blood is probably lass Ihan 3hours. An accurala delanninaUon 01 half-lila 01 unchanged caplopnlls nol, al presenl, posslbie, bul« Is
                        probably less than 2 hours. In patients with renal Impairment, however, retention of captopril occurs ·(sge .DOSAGE AND
                        ADMINISTRATION).
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        Administration of captoprll results in a reduction of peripheral arterial reslslance in hypertensive patients with either no change, or an
                        Increase, in cardiac o·ulpul. There Is an Increase irl renal blood now following administration of captopril and glomerular filtration rate Is
                        usually unchanged.
                        Reduclions of blood pressure are usually maximal 60. to 90 mInutes after oral administration of an individual dose of captopriJ. ,The
                        duration of effectIs dose related. The reduction in blood pressure maybe progressive, so to achieve maximal therapeutic effects, several
                        weeks of therapy may be required. The blood pressure lowering effects of caplopril and thlazldewlype cfiurellcs are addtllve.ln contrast,
                        captopril and bela-blockers have aless than addRive effecl
                        Blood pressure is kJwered to about the same extent in both standing and supine positions. Orthostatic effects and lachycardia are
                        infrequent but may occur in vo[umedepleled paUenls. Abrupt withdrawal of caplopril has not been associated wilh a rapid Increase In
                        blood pressure.
                        In patients with heart failure, significantly decreased peripheral (systemic vascular) resistance and blood pressure (after1oad), reduced
                        pUlmonary capillary wedge pressure (preload) and pUlmonary vascular resistance, increased cardiac output, and Increased exercise
                        tolerance time (En) have been demonstrated. These hemodynamic and clinical eUecls occur after the first dose and appear to persist
                        for the duration of therapy. Placebo controlled studies of 12 weeks duration in patients who did not respond adequately to diuretics and
                        digitalis show no tolerance to benefICial effects on En; open sludies, with exposure up to 16months in some cases, also Indicate Ihat
                        Enbenefit Is maintaIned. Clinical ImprovementhasbeenobseNed in some patienls where acutehemodynamic effects were minImal.
                        The Survival and Ventricular Enlargement (SAVE) study was a multicenter, randomized, double-blind. placebo-conlrolled trial
                        conducted In 2,231 pallents (age21·79 years) who survived the acute phase of amy~rdlal infarction and did not have active Ischemia.
                        PaUenls had left ventricular dysfunction (LVD), defined as a resting left ventricular ejecllon fraction ~%, but at the time of
                        randomization were not sUfriclently symplomallc to require ACE inhibitor therapy lor heart failure. About half 01 the palients had
                        symptoms 01 heart failure in the past Pavents were given alest dose of 6.25 mg oralcaploprillablets and were randomized within 3-16
                        days posllnfarctlon to receive either caplopriltablets or placebo in addition to conventional therapy. Captopril tablets ware inltiated at
                        6.25 mg or 12.5 mg l.I.d. and after two weeks titrated to atarget maintenance dose of 50 mg !.i.d. About 80% of pallenls were receiving
                        the target dose at the end of the study. Pallenls were followed fora minimum of two years and lorup to five years, vlith an average followupoI3.5years.
                        •
                        Baseline blood pressure was 113170 mm Hg and 112170 mm Hg lor Ihe placebo and captopril tablels groups, respectively. Blood
                        pressure iOCl"eased slighlly in botlltrealmenl groups during the studyand was somewhatlower in the caploprillablets group (119fl4 Vs.
                        125177mmHgat1yr). •
                        Therapy with captopril tablets improved 10rl9-lerm sUlVival and clinical outcomes compared to placebo. The risk reduction for all cause
                        mortality was 19%(P=O.02) and for cardiovascular dealh was 21% (P=0.014). Captopril trealed subjects had 22% (P=O.034) fewer firsl
                        hospitalizations for heart failure. Compared 10 placebo, 22% fewer patienls receiving captopril devekJped symptoms of overt heart
                        failure. There wasnoslgnmcant difference between groups1n total hospitalizations for all cause (2056 placebo; 2036captopriQ.
                        Captopril tablets were well tolerated in the presence of other therapies such as aspirin, beta blockers, nitrates, vasodilators, calcium
                        antagonists and diuretics.
                        In amulticenter, doUble-blind, placebo controlled trial, 409 patients, age 18-49 of either gender, with or without hypertension, with type I
                        uwenile type, onset before age 30)Insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus, retinopathy, proteinuria ~ 500 mg per day and serum creatinine
                        ";2.5 mg/dL, were randoml.ed to placebo or captoprillablels (25 mg t.I.d.) and followed forup to 4.6 years (median 3years). To achieve
                        blood pressure control, additional antihypertensive agents (diurelics, bela blockers, centrallyaclfng agents or vasodnators) were added
                        as needed for patients In both groups.
                        The captopnl tablets group had a 51% reduction In risk of doubling of serum creatinine (P