
                     
                     
                     Drug Interactions
                     
                        
                           Hypotension· Patienls on Diurelic Therapy:Palienfs on diuretics and especially lhose iowhom diuretic therapy was recently Instituted, as
                        
                        Patienls on Diurelic Therapy:Palienfs on diuretics and especially lhose iowhom diuretic therapy was recently Instituted, as
                        well as lhose 00 severe dietary salt restriction or dialysis, may occasionally experience aprecipitous reduction of blood pressure usually
                        within the first hour after receiving the lorua! dose of captopril.
                        The possibility of hypotensive effects with captopril can be minimized by either disconlilluing the diuretic or Increasing the salt Intake
                        approximately one week prior to initiation of trealment with caploprillablets USP or initiating therapy with small doses (6.25 or 12.5 mg).
                        Alternatively, provide medical supervision for alleasl onehouralter the initial dose. Ifhypolenslon occurs, the palient shoUld be placed In a
                        supine posi1lon and, II necessal)", receive an Inlravenous Infusion of normal saline. This transient hypotensive response Is nol a
                        contraindication 10furtherdoseswhich can be given without diffiCUltyonce the blood pressurehasincreased alter volume expansion.
                        
                           Agents Having Vasodilator Activity: Dala on Ute effect of concomllant use of other vasodilators In patienls receiving captopril for heart
                        
                        Dala on Ute effect of concomllant use of other vasodilators In patienls receiving captopril for heart
                        failure are nol available; therelore, nitroglycerin or other nitrates (as used for management of angina) or other drugs having vasodilator
                        activily should, If possible. be discontinued before slarllng caplopnl. II resumed dunng caplopnllsblellherapy, such agenls should ba
                        admlnlslered cautiously, and perhaps alJowerdosage.
                        
                           Agents Causing Renin Release: Captoprirs effect will be augmented by antihypertensive agents that cause renin release. For example,
                        
                        Captoprirs effect will be augmented by antihypertensive agents that cause renin release. For example,
                        diuretics (e,g., thiazides) mayactivale the renin-angiotensln·aldosterone syslem.
                        
                           Agents Affecting Sympathetic Activity: The sympathetic nelVous system may be especially Important I.n supporting blood pressure in
                        
                        The sympathetic nelVous system may be especially Important I.n supporting blood pressure in
                        paUenlS receMng captopnl alone or with dluretfcs_ Therefore, aganls affecUng sympathetic activity (e.g.; gangUonlc blocking agents or
                        adrenergic n.euron blocking agents) should be used with caution. Beta·adrenergic blocking drugs addsome further antihyp~rtensive effect
                        10caplopril, bul the overall response Isless than additive.
                        
                           Agents Increasing Sem'! Pota~i~m: ~ince.caplopri~ ?ec~eases aldosl~.ro~~ produclioo, elevatio~ of seru~ po.t~~slu~ may ~r.
                        
                        Pota~i~m: ~ince.caplopri~ ?ec~eases aldosl~.ro~~ produclioo, elevatio~ of seru~ po.t~~slu~ may ~r.
                        Potassium-sparing diuretics such as spironolactone, tnamterene, or amiloride, or potassium supplements should be giVen only lor
                        documented hypokalemia, and then with caution, since they may lead 10 a significant increase of serum polassium. Salt sUbstitutes
                        cont~.Inlng potassium sllould also be used with caulion.
                        
                           Inhibitors Of Endogenous Prostaglandin Synthesis: It has been reported that indomethacin may reduge the anlihypertensive effect of
                        
                        It has been reported that indomethacin may reduge the anlihypertensive effect of
                        captopril, especially in cases of low renIn hypertension. Other nonsteroidal anli-inflammatory agElnls'{e.g., aspirin) may·also have this
                        effect
                        
                           Ulhium: Increased serum lithium levels and symptoms of lithium toxicity have been reported in patients receiving concomUa.nt lithium and
                        
                        Increased serum lithium levels and symptoms of lithium toxicity have been reported in patients receiving concomUa.nt lithium and
                        ACE Inhibitor therapy. These drugs shook:! be coadmlnistered with caution and frequent monitoring of serum lithium levels Is
                        recommended. Ita di~retic Is alsq used, II may increase the risk oftllhium toxicity.
                        
                           Cardiac Glycosides: In asludy 01 young heallhy maJe subjects no evidence 01adlrecl phannacoklnetic captopril-digoxln interaction could
                        
                        In asludy 01 young heallhy maJe subjects no evidence 01adlrecl phannacoklnetic captopril-digoxln interaction could
                        befound.
                        
                           Loop Diuretics: Furosemide administered concurrently with caplopril does not aller the pharmacokinetiQS of caploprilln renally impaired
                        
                        Furosemide administered concurrently with caplopril does not aller the pharmacokinetiQS of caploprilln renally impaired
                        hypertensive patients.
                        
                           Allopurinol: In astudy of h¢.althy male volunteers no significant pharmacokinetic InteractiOn oIXured when captopril and allopurinol were
                        
                        In astudy of h¢.althy male volunteers no significant pharmacokinetic InteractiOn oIXured when captopril and allopurinol were
                        admlnlslered concom~anlly for6days.
                        
                           Gold: Nitritoid reactions (symptoms Include facialllushing, nausea, vomiting and hypotension) have been reported rarely in patients on
                        
                        Nitritoid reactions (symptoms Include facialllushing, nausea, vomiting and hypotension) have been reported rarely in patients on
                        therapywith injectable gold (sodium aurothiomaJate) and concomitantACEinhibitor therapy including captoprn.
                        Drug and!or LaboratoryTest Interaction
                        CaptoprUmaycauseafalse-positive urine test foracetone.
                     
                     
                  
               