
               
               
               DRUG INTERACTIONS
               Drug InteractionsMost (98%) of plasma doxazosin is protein bound. In vitro data in human plasma indicate that doxazosin has no effect on proteinbinding of digoxin, warfarin, phenytoin or indomethacin. There is no information on the effect of other highly plasma protein bounddrugs on doxazosin binding. Doxazosin has been administered without any evidence of an adverse drug interaction to patientsreceiving thiazide diuretics, beta-blocking agents, and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs. In a placebo-controlled trial in normalvolunteers, the administration of a single 1 mg dose of doxazosin on day 1 of a 4-day regimen of oral cimetidine (400 mg twice daily)resulted in a 10% increase in mean AUC of doxazosin (p = 0.006), and a slight but not statistically significant increase in mean Cmaxand mean half-life of doxazosin. The clinical significance of this increase in doxazosin AUC is unknown.In clinical trials, doxazosin tablets have been administered to patients on a variety of concomitant medications; while no formalinteraction studies have been conducted, no interactions were observed. Doxazosin tablets have been used with the followingdrugs or drug classes: 1) analgesic/anti-inflammatory (e.g., acetaminophen, aspirin, codeine and codeine combinations, ibuprofen,indomethacin); 2) antibiotics (e.g., erythromycin, trimethoprim and sulfamethoxazole, amoxicillin); 3) antihistamines (e.g.,chlorpheniramine); 4) cardiovascular agents (e.g., atenolol, hydrochlorothiazide, propranolol); 5) corticosteroids; 6) gastrointestinalagents (e.g., antacids); 7) hypoglycemics and endocrine drugs; 8) sedatives and tranquilizers (e.g., diazepam); 9) cold and fluremedies.Cardiac Toxicity in AnimalsAn increased incidence of myocardial necrosis or fibrosis was displayed by Sprague-Dawley rats after 6 months of dietaryadministration at concentrations calculated to provide 80 mg doxazosin/kg/day and after 12 months of dietary administration atconcentrations calculated to provide 40 mg doxazosin/kg/day (AUC exposure in rats 8 times the human AUC exposure with a 12 mg/day therapeutic dose). Myocardial fibrosis was observed in both rats and mice treated in the same manner with 40 mg doxazosin/kg/day for 18 months (exposure 8 times human AUC exposure in rats and somewhat equivalent to human Cmax exposure in mice). Nocardiotoxicity was observed at lower doses (up to 10 or 20 mg/kg/day, depending on the study) in either species. These lesions werenot observed after 12 months of oral dosing in dogs at maximum doses of 20 mg/kg/day [maximum plasma concentrations (Cmax)in dogs 14 times the Cmax exposure in humans receiving a 12 mg/day therapeutic dose] and in Wistar rats at doses of 100 mg/kg/day(Cmax exposures 15 times human Cmax exposure with a 12 mg/day therapeutic dose). There is no evidence that similar lesions occur inhumans.Carcinogenesis, Mutagenesis, Impairment of FertilityChronic dietary administration (up to 24 months) of doxazosin mesylate at maximally tolerated doses of 40 mg/kg/day in rats and120 mg/kg/day in mice revealed no evidence of carcinogenic potential. The highest doses evaluated in the rat and mouse studies areassociated with AUCs (a measure of systemic exposure) that are 8 times and 4 times, respectively, the human AUC at a dose of 16mg/day.Mutagenicity studies revealed no drug- or metabolite-related effects at either chromosomal or subchromosomal levels.Studies in rats showed reduced fertility in males treated with doxazosin at oral doses of 20 (but not 5 or 10) mg/kg/day, about 4 timesthe AUC exposures obtained with a 12 mg/day human dose. This effect was reversible within two weeks of drug withdrawal. Therehave been no reports of any effects of doxazosin on male fertility in humans.
               
            
         