
               
               
               DRUG INTERACTIONS
               
                  

                  

                  When given concurrently the following drugs may interact with 
thiazide diuretics.
                  
                  
                  
                  Alcohol, Barbiturates, or 
Narcotics
                  Potentiation of orthostatic hypotension may occur.
                  
                  
                  
                  Antidiabetic Drugs-(oral 
agents and insulin)Dosage adjustment of the antidiabetic drug may be required.
                  
                  
                  
                  Other Antihypertensive 
Drugs
                  Additive effect or potentiation.
                  
                  
                  
                  Cholestyramine and Colestipol 
Resins
                  Absorption of hydrochlorothiazide is impaired in the presence of 
anionic exchange resins. Single doses of either cholestyramine or colestipol 
resins bind the hydrochlorothiazide and reduce its absorption from the 
gastrointestinal tract by up to 85 and 43 percent, respectively.
                  
                  
                  
                  Corticosteroids, ACTH
                  Intensified electrolyte depletion, particularly 
hypokalemia.
                  
                  
                  
                  Pressor Amines (e.g., 
Norepinephrine)
                  Possible decreased response to pressor amines but not sufﬁcient 
to preclude their use.
                  
                  
                  
                  Skeletal Muscle Relaxants, 
Nondepolarizing (e.g., Turbocurarine)
                  Possible increased responsiveness to the muscle relaxant.
                  
                  
                  
                  Lithium
                  Generally should not be given with diuretics. Diuretic agents 
reduce the renal clearance of lithium and add a high risk of lithium toxicity. 
Refer to the package insert for lithium preparations before use of such 
preparations with hydrochlorothiazide.
                  
                  
                  
                  Nonsteroidal Anti-inflammatory 
Drugs
                  In some patients, the administration of a nonsteroidal 
anti-inﬂammatory agent can reduce the diuretic, natriuretic, and 
antihypertensive effects of loop, potassium-sparing and thiazide diuretics. 
Therefore, when hydrochlorothiazide and nonsteroidal anti-inﬂammatory agents are 
used concomitantly, the patient should be observed closely to determine if the 
desired effect of the diuretic is obtained.
                  
                  
                  Drug/Laboratory Test InteractionsThiazides should be discontinued before carrying out tests for 
parathyroid function (see 
                        PRECAUTIONS, 
General
                     ).
                  
                  
                  Carcinogenesis, Mutagenesis, Impairment of 
FertilityTwo-year feeding studies in mice and rats conducted under the 
auspices of the National Toxicology Program (NTP) uncovered no evidence of a 
carcinogenic potential of hydrochlorothiazide in female mice (at doses of up to 
approximately 600 mg/kg/day) or in male and female rats (at doses of up to 
approximately 100 mg/kg/day). The NTP, however, found equivocal evidence for 
hepatocarcinogenicity in male mice.
                  Hydrochlorothiazide was not genotoxic in vitro in 
the Ames mutagenicity assay of Salmonella typhimurium 
strains TA 98, TA 100, TA 1535, TA 1537, and TA 1538 and in the Chinese 
Hamster Ovary (CHO) test for chromosomal aberrations, or in 
vivo in assays using mouse germinal cell chromosomes, Chinese hamster 
bone marrow chromosomes, and the Drosophila 
sex-linked recessive lethal trait gene. Positive test results were only 
obtained in the in vitro CHO Sister Chromatid 
Exchange (clastogenicity) and in the Mouse Lymphoma Cell (mutagenicity) assays, 
using concentrations of hydrochlorothiazide from 43 to 1300 mcg/mL, and in the 
Aspergillus nidulans non-disjunction assay at an 
unspeciﬁed concentration.
                  Hydrochlorothiazide had no adverse effects on the fertility of mice and rats 
of either sex in studies wherein these species were exposed, via their diet, to 
doses of up to 100 and 4 mg/kg, respectively, prior to conception, and 
throughout gestation.
                  

               
               
            
         