
               
               
               12	CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1	Mechanism of Action 
                     
                        In vitro, preclinical, and clinical tests have demonstrated that GENOTROPIN lyophilized powder is therapeutically equivalent to human growth hormone of pituitary origin and achieves similar pharmacokinetic profiles in normal adults. In pediatric patients who have growth hormone deficiency (GHD), have Prader-Willi syndrome (PWS), were born small for gestational age (SGA), have Turner syndrome (TS), or have Idiopathic short stature (ISS), treatment with GENOTROPIN stimulates linear growth. In patients with GHD or PWS, treatment with GENOTROPIN also normalizes concentrations of IGF-I (Insulin-like Growth Factor-I/Somatomedin C). In adults with GHD, treatment with GENOTROPIN results in reduced fat mass, increased lean body mass, metabolic alterations that include beneficial changes in lipid metabolism, and normalization of IGF-I concentrations.
                        In addition, the following actions have been demonstrated for GENOTROPIN and/or somatropin.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2	Pharmacodynamics 
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Tissue Growth
                              
                              
                                 
                                    A.
                                    Skeletal Growth: GENOTROPIN stimulates skeletal growth in pediatric patients with GHD, PWS, SGA, TS, or ISS. The measurable increase in body length after administration of GENOTROPIN results from an effect on the epiphyseal plates of long bones. Concentrations of IGF-I, which may play a role in skeletal growth, are generally low in the serum of pediatric patients with GHD, PWS, or SGA, but tend to increase during treatment with GENOTROPIN. Elevations in mean serum alkaline phosphatase concentration are also seen.
                                 
                                    B.
                                    Cell Growth: It has been shown that there are fewer skeletal muscle cells in short-statured pediatric patients who lack endogenous growth hormone as compared with the normal pediatric population. Treatment with somatropin results in an increase in both the number and size of muscle cells.
                              
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Protein Metabolism
                              
                              Linear growth is facilitated in part by increased cellular protein synthesis. Nitrogen retention, as demonstrated by decreased urinary nitrogen excretion and serum urea nitrogen, follows the initiation of therapy with GENOTROPIN.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Carbohydrate Metabolism
                              
                              Pediatric patients with hypopituitarism sometimes experience fasting hypoglycemia that is improved by treatment with GENOTROPIN. Large doses of growth hormone may impair glucose tolerance.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Lipid Metabolism
                              
                              In GHD patients, administration of somatropin has resulted in lipid mobilization, reduction in body fat stores, and increased plasma fatty acids.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Mineral Metabolism
                              
                              Somatropin induces retention of sodium, potassium, and phosphorus. Serum concentrations of inorganic phosphate are increased in patients with GHD after therapy with GENOTROPIN. Serum calcium is not significantly altered by GENOTROPIN. Growth hormone could increase calciuria.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Body Composition
                              
                              Adult GHD patients treated with GENOTROPIN at the recommended adult dose (see DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION) demonstrate a decrease in fat mass and an increase in lean body mass. When these alterations are coupled with the increase in total body water, the overall effect of GENOTROPIN is to modify body composition, an effect that is maintained with continued treatment.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3	Pharmacokinetics
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Absorption
                              
                              Following a 0.03 mg/kg subcutaneous (SC) injection in the thigh of 1.3 mg/mL GENOTROPIN to adult GHD patients, approximately 80% of the dose was systemically available as compared with that available following intravenous dosing. Results were comparable in both male and female patients. Similar bioavailability has been observed in healthy adult male subjects.
                              In healthy adult males, following an SC injection in the thigh of 0.03 mg/kg, the extent of absorption (AUC) of a concentration of 5.3 mg/mL GENOTROPIN was 35% greater than that for 1.3 mg/mL GENOTROPIN. The mean (± standard deviation) peak (Cmax) serum levels were 23.0 (± 9.4) ng/mL and 17.4 (± 9.2) ng/mL, respectively.
                              In a similar study involving pediatric GHD patients, 5.3 mg/mL GENOTROPIN yielded a mean AUC that was 17% greater than that for 1.3 mg/mL GENOTROPIN. The mean Cmax levels were 21.0 ng/mL and 16.3 ng/mL, respectively.
                              Adult GHD patients received two single SC doses of 0.03 mg/kg of GENOTROPIN at a concentration of 1.3 mg/mL, with a one- to four-week washout period between injections. Mean Cmax levels were 12.4 ng/mL (first injection) and 12.2 ng/mL (second injection), achieved at approximately six hours after dosing.
                              There are no data on the bioequivalence between the 12 mg/mL formulation and either the 1.3 mg/mL or the 5.3 mg/mL formulations.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Distribution
                              
                              The mean volume of distribution of GENOTROPIN following administration to GHD adults was estimated to be 1.3 (± 0.8) L/kg.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Metabolism
                              
                              The metabolic fate of GENOTROPIN involves classical protein catabolism in both the liver and kidneys. In renal cells, at least a portion of the breakdown products are returned to the systemic circulation. The mean terminal half-life of intravenous GENOTROPIN in normal adults is 0.4 hours, whereas subcutaneously administered GENOTROPIN has a half-life of 3.0 hours in GHD adults. The observed difference is due to slow absorption from the subcutaneous injection site.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Excretion
                              
                              The mean clearance of subcutaneously administered GENOTROPIN in 16 GHD adult patients was 0.3 (± 0.11) L/hrs/kg.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 Special Populations
                              
                           
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Pediatric: The pharmacokinetics of GENOTROPIN are similar in GHD pediatric and adult patients.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Gender: No gender studies have been performed in pediatric patients; however, in GHD adults, the absolute bioavailability of GENOTROPIN was similar in males and females.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Race: No studies have been conducted with GENOTROPIN to assess pharmacokinetic differences among races.
                                 
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Renal or hepatic insufficiency: No studies have been conducted with GENOTROPIN in these patient populations.
                                    


