
               
               
               12     CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
					
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1     Mechanism of Action
                     
                     
                        Ceritinib is a kinase inhibitor. Targets of ceritinib inhibition identified in either biochemical or cellular assays at clinically relevant concentrations include ALK, insulin-like growth factor 1 receptor (IGF-1R), insulin receptor (InsR), and ROS1. Among these, ceritinib is most active against ALK. Ceritinib inhibited autophosphorylation of ALK, ALK-mediated phosphorylation of the downstream signaling protein STAT3, and proliferation of ALK-dependent cancer cells in in vitro and in vivo assays.
                        Ceritinib inhibited the in vitro proliferation of cell lines expressing EML4-ALK and NPM-ALK fusion proteins and demonstrated dose-dependent inhibition of EML4-ALK-positive NSCLC xenograft growth in mice and rats. Ceritinib exhibited dose-dependent anti-tumor activity in mice bearing EML4-ALK-positive NSCLC xenografts with demonstrated resistance to crizotinib, at concentrations within a clinically relevant range.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.2     Pharmacodynamics
                     
                     
                        
                           Cardiac Electrophysiology
                        
                        Serial ECGs were collected following a single dose and at steady-state to evaluate the effect of ceritinib on the QT interval in an open-label, dose-escalation, and expansion study. A total of 304 patients were treated with ZYKADIA doses ranging from 50 to 750 mg with 255 patients treated with ZYKADIA 750 mg. One of 304 patients (less than 1%) was found to have a QTc greater than 500 msec and 10 patients (3%) had an increase from baseline QTc greater than 60 msec. A central tendency analysis of the QTc data at average steady-state concentrations demonstrated that the upper bound of the 2-sided 90% CI for QTc was 16 msec at ZYKADIA 750 mg. A pharmacokinetic/pharmacodynamic analysis suggested concentration-dependent QTc interval prolongation [see Warnings and Precautions (5.4)]. 
                        Based on central review of ECG data, 2 of 304 patients (0.7%) had bradycardia defined as less than 50 beats per minute. Bradycardia was reported as an adverse drug reaction in 3% of patients in Study 1.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3     Pharmacokinetics
                     
                     
                        
                           Absorption
                        
                        After single oral administration of ZYKADIA in patients, peak plasma levels (Cmax) of ceritinib were achieved at approximately 4 to 6 hours, and area under the curve (AUC) and Cmax increased dose proportionally over 50 to 750 mg. The absolute bioavailability of ZYKADIA has not been determined.
                        Following ZYKADIA 750 mg once daily dosing, steady-state was reached by approximately 15 days with a geometric mean accumulation ratio of 6.2 after 3 weeks. Systemic exposure increased in a greater than dose proportional manner after repeat doses of 50 to 750 mg once daily.
                        Systemic exposure of ceritinib was increased when administered with a meal. A food effect study conducted in healthy subjects with a single 500 mg ceritinib dose showed that a high‐fat meal (containing approximately 1000 calories and 58 grams of fat) increased ceritinib AUC by 73% and Cmax by 41% and a low-fat meal (containing approximately 330 calories and 9 grams of fat) increased ceritinib AUC by 58% and Cmax by 43% as compared with the fasted state. A 600 mg or higher ZYKADIA dose taken with a meal is expected to result in systemic exposure exceeding that of a 750 mg ZYKADIA dose taken in the fasted state, and may increase adverse drug reactions.
                        
                           Distribution
                        
                        Ceritinib is 97% bound to human plasma proteins, independent of drug concentration. The apparent volume of distribution (Vd/F) is 4230 L following a single 750 mg ZYKADIA dose in patients. Ceritinib also has a slight preferential distribution to red blood cells, relative to plasma, with a mean in vitro blood-to-plasma ratio of 1.35. 
                        
                           Elimination
                        
                        Following a single 750 mg ZYKADIA dose, the geometric mean apparent plasma terminal half-life (t1/2) of ceritinib was 41 hours in patients. Ceritinib demonstrates nonlinear PK over time. The geometric mean apparent clearance (CL/F) of ceritinib was lower at steady-state (33.2 L/h) after 750 mg daily dosing than after a single 750 mg dose (88.5 L/h).
                        
                           Metabolism: In vitro studies demonstrated that CYP3A was the major enzyme involved in the metabolic clearance of ceritinib. Following oral administration of a single 750 mg radiolabeled ceritinib dose, ceritinib as the parent compound was the main circulating component (82%) in human plasma. 
                        
                           Excretion: Following oral administration of a single 750 mg radiolabeled ceritinib dose, 92.3% of the administered dose was recovered in the feces (with 68% as unchanged parent compound) while 1.3% of the administered dose was recovered in the urine. 
                        
                           Specific Populations 
                        
                        
                           Age, Gender, Race, and Body Weight: Age, gender, race, and body weight had no clinically important effect on the systemic exposure of ceritinib based on population pharmacokinetic analyses.
                        
                           Hepatic Impairment: As ceritinib is eliminated primarily via the liver, patients with hepatic impairment may have increased exposure. A pharmacokinetic trial in patients with hepatic impairment has not been conducted. Based on a population pharmacokinetic analysis of 48 patients with mild hepatic impairment (total bilirubin less than or equal to ULN and AST greater than ULN or total bilirubin greater than 1.0 to 1.5 times ULN and any AST) and 254 patients with normal hepatic function (total bilirubin less than or equal to ULN and AST less than or equal to ULN), ceritinib exposures were similar in patients with mild hepatic impairment and normal hepatic function. The pharmacokinetics of ceritinib has not been studied in patients with moderate to severe hepatic impairment [see Use in Specific Populations (8.6)]. 
                        
                           Renal Impairment: A pharmacokinetic trial in patients with renal impairment has not been conducted as ceritinib elimination via the kidney is low (1.3% of a single oral administered dose). Based on a population pharmacokinetic analysis of 97 patients with mild renal impairment (CLcr 60 to less than 90 mL/min), 22 patients with moderate renal impairment (CLcr 30 to less than 60 mL/min) and 183 patients with normal renal function (greater than or equal to 90 mL/min), ceritinib exposures were similar in patients with mild and moderate renal impairment and normal renal function, suggesting that no dose adjustment is necessary in patients with mild to moderate renal impairment. Patients with severe renal impairment (CLcr less than 30 mL/min) were not included in the clinical trial.
                        
                           Pediatrics: No trials have been conducted to evaluate the pharmacokinetics of ceritinib in pediatric patients.
                        
                           Drug Interactions
                        
                        
                           Effect of Strong CYP3A Inhibitors on Ceritinib: In vitro studies show that ceritinib is a substrate of CYP3A. Coadministration of a single 450 mg ZYKADIA dose with ketoconazole (a strong CYP3A inhibitor) 200 mg twice daily for 14 days increased ceritinib AUC (90% CI) by 2.9-fold (2.5, 3.3) and Cmax (90% CI) by 22% (7%, 39%) in 19 healthy subjects [see Drug Interactions (7.1)]. The steady-state AUC of ceritinib at reduced doses after coadministration with ketoconazole 200 mg twice daily for 14 days was predicted by simulations to be similar to the steady-state AUC of ceritinib alone [see Dosage and Administration (2.3)].
								
                        
                           Effect of Strong CYP3A Inducers on Ceritinib: Coadministration of a single 750 mg ZYKADIA dose with rifampin (a strong CYP3A inducer) 600 mg daily for 14 days decreased ceritinib AUC (90% CI) by 70% (61%, 77%) and Cmax (90% CI) by 44% (24%, 59%) in 19 healthy subjects [see Drug Interactions (7.1)]. 
								
                        
                           Effect of Ceritinib on CYP Substrates: Based on in vitro data, ceritinib may inhibit CYP3A and CYP2C9 at clinical concentrations [see Drug Interactions (7.2)]. Time-dependent inhibition of CYP3A was also observed.
                        
                           Effect of Transporters on Ceritinib Disposition: Ceritinib is a substrate of efflux transporter P-gp, but is not a substrate of Breast Cancer Resistance Protein (BCRP), Multidrug Resistance Protein (MRP2), Organic Cation Transporter (OCT1), Organic Anion Transporter (OAT2), or Organic Anion Transporting Polypeptide (OATP1B1) in vitro. Drugs that inhibit P-gp may increase ceritinib concentrations.
                        
                           Effect of Ceritinib on Transporters: Based on in vitro data, ceritinib does not inhibit apical efflux transporters, P-gp, BCRP, or MRP2, hepatic uptake transporters OATP1B1 and OATP1B3, renal organic anion uptake transporters OAT1 and OAT3, or organic cation uptake transporters OCT1 and OCT2 at clinical concentrations. 
                        
                           Effect of Gastric Acid Reducing Agents on Ceritinib: Gastric acid reducing agents (e.g., proton pump inhibitors, H2-receptor antagonists, antacids) may alter the solubility of ceritinib and reduce its bioavailability as ceritinib demonstrates pH-dependent solubility and becomes poorly soluble as pH increases in vitro. A dedicated study has not been conducted to evaluate the effect of gastric acid reducing agents on the bioavailability of ceritinib.
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         