
               
               
               7     DRUG INTERACTIONS
					
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           CYP3A Inhibitors and Inducers: Avoid concurrent use of ZYKADIA with strong CYP3A inhibitors or inducers. If concurrent use of a strong CYP3A inhibitor is unavoidable, reduce the dose of ZYKADIA.  (2.3, 7.1)
                           CYP3A and CYP2C9 Substrates: Avoid concurrent use of ZYKADIA with CYP3A or CYP2C9 substrates with narrow therapeutic indices. (7.2)
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.1     Effect of Other Drugs on Ceritinib
                     
                     
                        Ceritinib is primarily metabolized by CYP3A4 and is a substrate of the efflux transporter P-glycoprotein (P-gp).
                        
                           Strong CYP3A Inhibitors
                        
                        Ketoconazole (a strong CYP3A4/P-gp inhibitor) increased the systemic exposure of ceritinib  [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)]. Avoid concurrent use of strong CYP3A inhibitors during treatment with ZYKADIA. If concomitant use of strong CYP3A inhibitors including certain antivirals (e.g., ritonavir), macrolide antibiotics (e.g., telithromycin), antifungals (e.g., ketoconazole), and nefazodone is unavoidable, reduce the ZYKADIA dose by approximately one-third, rounded to the nearest multiple of the 150 mg dosage strength. After discontinuation of a strong CYP3A inhibitor, resume the ZYKADIA dose that was taken prior to initiating the strong CYP3A4 inhibitor.
                        Do not consume grapefruit and grapefruit juice as they may inhibit CYP3A. 
                        
                           Strong CYP3A Inducers
                        
                        Rifampin (a strong CYP3A4/P-gp inducer) decreased the systemic exposure of ceritinib [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)]. Avoid concurrent use of strong CYP3A inducers (e.g., carbamazepine, phenytoin, rifampin, and St. John’s Wort) during treatment with ZYKADIA. 
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     7.2     Effect of Ceritinib on Other Drugs 
                     
                     
                        Ceritinib may inhibit CYP3A and CYP2C9 at clinical concentrations [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3)]. Avoid concurrent use of CYP3A and CYP2C9 substrates known to have narrow therapeutic indices or substrates primarily metabolized by CYP3A and CYP2C9 during treatment with ZYKADIA. If use of these medications is unavoidable, consider dose reduction of CYP3A substrates with narrow therapeutic indices (e.g., alfentanil, cyclosporine, dihydroergotamine, ergotamine, fentanyl, pimozide, quinidine, sirolimus, tacrolimus) and CYP2C9 substrates with narrow therapeutic indices (e.g., phenytoin, warfarin).
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         