
               
               
               12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.1 Mechanism of Action
                     
                        Emergency contraceptive pills are not effective if a woman is already pregnant.  Plan B is believed to act as an emergency contraceptive principally by preventing ovulation or fertilization (by altering tubal transport of sperm and/or ova).  In addition, it may inhibit implantation (by altering the endometrium).  It is not effective once the process of implantation has begun.
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                     12.3 Pharmacokinetics
                     
                        
                           Absorption
                        
                        No specific investigation of the absolute bioavailability of Plan B in humans has been conducted.  However, literature indicates that levonorgestrel is rapidly and completely absorbed after oral administration (bioavailability about 100%) and is not subject to first pass metabolism.
                        After a single dose of Plan B (0.75 mg) administered to 16 women under fasting conditions, maximum serum concentrations of levonorgestrel were 14.1 + 7.7 ng/mL (mean + SD) at an average of 1.6 + 0.7 hours.
                        


                        


Effect of Food: The effect of food on the rate and the extent of levonorgestrel absorption following single oral administration of Plan B has not been evaluated. 
                        
                           Distribution
                        
                        The apparent volume of distribution of levonorgestrel is reported to be approximately 1.8 L/kg. It is about 97.5 to 99% protein-bound, principally to sex hormone binding globulin (SHBG) and, to a lesser extent, serum albumin.
                        
                           Metabolism
                        
                        Following absorption, levonorgestrel is conjugated at the 17β-OH position to form sulfate conjugates and, to a lesser extent, glucuronide conjugates in plasma.  Significant amounts of conjugated and unconjugated 3α, 5β-tetrahydrolevonorgestrel are also present in plasma, along with much smaller amounts of 3α, 5α-tetrahydrolevonorgestrel and 16βhydroxylevonorgestrel. Levonorgestrel and its phase I metabolites are excreted primarily as glucuronide conjugates.  Metabolic clearance rates may differ among individuals by several-fold, and this may account in part for the wide variation observed in levonorgestrel concentrations among users. 
                        
                           Excretion
                        
                        About 45% of levonorgestrel and its metabolites are excreted in the urine and about 32% are excreted in feces, mostly as glucuronide conjugates.
                        
                           Specific Populations 
                        
                        Pediatric: This product is not intended for use in the pediatric (pre-menarcheal) population, and pharmacokinetic data are not available for this population.
                        Geriatric: This product is not intended for use in postmenopausal women and pharmacokinetic data are not available for this population.
                        Race: No formal studies have evaluated the effect of race on pharmacokinetics of Plan B.  However, clinical trials demonstrated a higher pregnancy rate in Chinese women with both Plan B and the Yuzpe regimen (another form of emergency contraception).  The reason for this apparent increase in the pregnancy rate with emergency contraceptives in Chinese women is unknown [see USE IN SPECIFIC POPULATIONS 
                           (8.6)].
                        Hepatic Impairment: No formal studies were conducted to evaluate the effect of hepatic disease on the disposition of Plan B.  
                        Renal Impairment: No formal studies were conducted to evaluate the effect of renal disease on the disposition of Plan B.  
                        
                           Drug-Drug Interactions
                        
                        No formal drug-drug interaction studies were conducted with Plan B [see DRUG INTERACTIONS 
                           (7)].
                     
                     
                  
               
            
         