


 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY





 Pharmacology
The metabolism of aminolevulinic acid ( ALA) is the first step in the biochemical pathway resulting in heme synthesis. Aminolevulinic acid is not a photosensitizer, but rather a metabolic precursor of protoporphyrin IX (PpIX), which is a photosensitizer. The synthesis of  ALA is normally tightly controlled by feedback inhibition of the enzyme,  ALA synthetase, presumably by intracellular heme levels.  ALA, when provided to the cell, bypasses this control point and results in the accumulation of PpIX, which is converted into heme by ferrochelatase through the addition of iron to the PpIX nucleus.According to the presumed mechanism of action, photosensitization following application of LEVULAN KERASTICK Topical Solution occurs through the metabolic conversion of  ALA to PpIX, which accumulates in the skin to which LEVULAN Topical Solution has been applied. When exposed to light of appropriate wavelength and energy, the accumulated PpIX produces a photodynamic reaction, a cytotoxic process dependent upon the simultaneous presence of light and oxygen. The absorption of light results in an excited state of the porphyrin molecule, and subsequent spin transfer from PpIX to molecular oxygen generates singlet oxygen, which can further react to form superoxide and hydroxyl radicals. Photosensitization of actinic (solar) keratosis lesions using the LEVULAN KERASTICK, plus illumination with the BLU-U® Blue Light Photodynamic Therapy Illuminator (BLU-U), is the basis for LEVULAN photodynamic therapy (PDT).






 Pharmacokinetics
In a human pharmacokinetic study (N=6) using a 128 mg dose of sterile intravenous ALA HCl and oral ALA HCl (equivalent to 100 mg ALA) in which plasma ALA and PpIX were measured, the mean half-life of ALA was 0.70 ± 0.18 h after the oral dose and 0.83 ± 0.05 h after the intravenous dose. The oral bioavailability of  ALA was 50-60% with a mean Cmax of 4.65 ± 0.94 µg/mL. PpIX concentrations were low and were detectable only in 42% of the plasma samples. PpIX concentrations in plasma were quite low relative to  ALA plasma concentrations, and were below the level of detection (10 ng/mL) after 10 to 12 hours. ALA does not exhibit fluorescence, while PpIX has a high fluorescence yield. Time-dependent changes in surface fluorescence have been used to determine PpIX accumulation and clearance in actinic keratosis lesions and perilesional skin after application of LEVULAN KERASTICK Topical Solution in 12 patients. Peak fluorescence intensity was reached in 11 ± 1 h in actinic keratoses and 12 ± 1 h in perilesional skin. The mean clearance half-life of fluorescence for lesions was 30 ± 10 h and 28 ± 6 h for perilesional skin. The fluorescence in perilesional skin was similar to that in actinic keratoses. Therefore, LEVULAN KERASTICK Topical Solution should only be applied to the affected skin.




